Mr. Mahmoud: It is an honour for me to present
the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
(8/2009/270). The report before the Council provides
an account of the main advances over the past six
months and the challenges that lie ahead for the people
and the Government of Burundi. It also describes the
main activities of BINUB in support of the
Government's peace consolidation efforts, in
accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council. Moreover, it provides a summary of the
recommendations of the technical assessment mission
to Burundi, led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in March.

The period under review was marked by
significant progress achieved in the implementation of
the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement and in laying
the foundations for the preparations for the 2010
elections. A decisive step forward was taken in April as
the last rebel movement, the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL), formally disarmed and was registered
as a political party. The FNL's renunciation of armed
struggle is an important development that paves the
way for its participation in the democratic process in
Burundi.

Regarding the implementation of the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement, at a landmark
meeting of the Political Directorate in Pretoria on
8 April, chaired by the South African Facilitation, the
09-36337

Government and the FNL agreed on a road map for the
integration of the FNL into civil and military
institutions and for the demobilization of its
combatants, with special consideration afforded to
women in accordance with the letter and the spirit of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). I am sure that
a separate report on the activities of BINUB in
pursuance of the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) should be before the Council or should have
been distributed earlier - as we have customarily done
in connection with previous briefings.

Since mid-April, important advances have been
achieved in the implementation of that road map. A
total of 3,500 FNL elements have been integrated into
the military and police. Unserviceable FNL weapons
have been destroyed and the remaining serviceable
weapons have been handed over to the Government. As
of yesterday, 8 June, over 5,000 of the 11,000 adults
associated with the FNL combatants had been
registered, issued with return kits, paid the first
instalment of return assistance and transported to their
home communities. Between 20 and 22 May, another
batch of prisoners, this time 103 persons, was released,
based on an April ordinance from the Ministry of
Justice.

By 29 May, the South African Facilitation had
completed the verification process for the 5,000 FNL
combatants who will be demobilized within the next
few months as part of the World Bank-supported
national transitional demobilization and reintegration
programme. A total of 340 children, including six girls,
who had been separated from the FNL during April,
were reunited with their families between 13 and
20 May.

In early June, the Government issued several
decrees nominating around 24 FNL leaders to senior
civil service positions, including ambassadorial posts
and governorships. The remaining posts that are to be
allocated to FNL leaders require further consultation
within the Government. The FNL Chair was appointed
as director of the National Institute for Social Security.

The South African Facilitation ended its mission
on 31 May. One hundred elements from the African
Union Special Task Force VIP Protection Unit will,
however, remain in Burundi until 31 December to
continue protecting FNL leaders while training a newly
created joint FNL-Government protection police unit.
09-36337

The residual tasks of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process were handed
over to the Government of Burundi, while the African
Union, with the support of BINUB, took over the
responsibility for following the process.

With the withdrawal of the Facilitation, the
leaders of the Regional Initiative for Peace
recommended that a successor mechanism be
established to continue to monitor the peace process, to
contribute to an enabling environment for the period
leading up to the elections, and to provide early
warning to Regional Initiative leaders. This successor
mechanism, the Partnership for Peace in Burundi, was
launched on 27 May by the Facilitation. It is composed
of the Political Directorate, the Executive Secretariat
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and BINUB. BINUB will also serve as its
secretariat. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
special envoys for the Great Lakes region will act as a
support network for the Partnership. The Partnership
will be coordinated and chaired by South Africa. It is
envisaged that the Partnership for Peace will end in
December, subject to review by the Regional Initiative
leaders and, of course, the Government of Burundi.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
the political climate in Burundi saw some undeniable
improvements during the past six months. Most
notably, the Government established, after lengthy
internal but inclusive debate, the Independent National
Electoral Commission.

The 2010 elections have become a major focus
for Burundian political actors, particularly after the
establishment of the Electoral Commission. On
11 May, President Nkurunziza addressed a letter to the
Secretary-General requesting United Nations support
for the electoral process. On 25 May, the Electoral
Commission held its first official meeting with
representatives of the international community during
which it outlined its needs in terms of technical,
logistical and financial assistance. In response to the
request addressed to the United Nations, a needs
assessment mission will be dispatched to identify, in
close collaboration with the Electoral Commission,
areas for support.

In addition, the Government registered yesterday
the Mouvement pour la solidarite et la democratie of
Alexis Sinduhije after a rather lengthy waiting period.
3
This registration brings the number of registered
political parties in Burundi to 43.

Despite the previously mentioned improvement in
the political climate, concerns have continued to be
expressed about persistent disruption of the activities
of opposition political parties and, in some cases,
Violence against their members by the police and,
allegedly, by members of the national intelligence
services and local officials. This situation has created a
malaise among the political class and civil society
activists, and therefore everyone urged the Government
to ensure that pluralism and tolerance be guaranteed. In
his report, the Secretary-General also urges the
Government to treat all political parties equally under
Burundian law and to ensure the respect for the right to
freedom of expression and assembly enshrined in the
Constitution and international human rights instruments
ratified by Burundi.

The Secretary-General has also noted in his
report that much remains to be done for Burundians to
enjoy the full exercise of their human rights. The
Secretary-General has also urged the Government to
move quickly to establish an effective and credible
Independent National Human Rights Commission in
compliance with international standards, as well as
other relevant institutions aimed at consolidating
national reconciliation and the rule of law.

Despite delays, preparations have advanced for
the holding of national consultations on the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms. In
particular, I would like to mention the holding on 22
and 23 May of a pilot exercise in two localities in
Bujumbura to test the questionnaires to be used in the
national consultations process scheduled to begin on
15 June. As the report of the Secretary-General
mentions, these national consultations have as their
aim to seek the views of Burundians on how they think
it best to establish the twin mechanisms for
reconciliation, namely, a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and a Special Tribunal attached to the
justice system in Burundi.

In the current context, the two most immediate
challenges are the conclusion of the demobilization and
reintegration process and the sustainable socio-economic
reintegration of former combatants, including those from
the last rebel movement, the FNL, and other segments of
the population most affected by the conflict.
It is urgent that the international community do
everything possible to ensure progress in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process and provide the necessary resources for its
timely completion. BINUB is supporting national
efforts to develop a strategy that will complement the
DDR process by focusing on the sustainable socio-
economic reintegration not only of demobilized FNL
combatants, but also of other former combatants and
demobilized soldiers. This strategy will be consistent
with the goals and objectives of the security sector
reform and will go a long way towards stabilizing the
situation ahead of the 2010 elections.

While the security challenges are the most
immediate ones, Burundi also faces other important
challenges, including a difficult socio-economic
situation, weaknesses of the justice system and within
the police force, continuing human rights violations
and impunity. In this regard, the Government is urged
to put an end to these violations, to see to it that justice
is done and to keep the public informed. In this
connection, I welcome the statement of the Minister of
Public Security at his press conference yesterday
regarding the actions taken by the Government to address
some of these Violations, including the follow-up to the
assassination of the Vice-President of the Observatoire de
la lutte contre la corruption et les malversations
economiques, a non-govemmental organization dealing
with the fight against corruption. I commend him for
coming forward publicly and informing us of what the
Government is doing in these areas.

Working in an integrated approach with the
United Nations system in the country, BINUB has
continued to support the Government and the people of
Burundi in addressing these challenges. The projects
funded by the Peacebuilding Fund have brought hope
by contributing to certain reforms and by engaging the
population from the grass roots up in peace consolidation
efforts. Various capacity-building initiatives in the areas
of administrative and political governance, justice and
human rights, the fight against impunity, security sector
reform and the empowerment of women and civil society
have begun to show some tangible results. The ongoing
national dialogue processes will help restore a measure of
social trust after decades of mistrust.

I should also like to commend the role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, in particular the Chair of the
Burundi country-specific configuration, Ambassador
Liden, for maintaining constructive dialogue with the
Government and its national partners. The Chair's
frequent visits have been a source of encouragement for
all of us.

Despite the progress achieved, the situation in
Burundi that I have just outlined remains fragile, and
the processes of consolidating peace and security are
still incomplete. Robust and sustained efforts by
national and international stakeholders are needed to
ensure that progress cannot be easily reversed,
particularly as the country prepares for the upcoming
electoral process. An immediate priority is to help the
Government of Burundi to address the precarious
socio-economic situation and some budgetary problems.

As can be seen from the "Observations" section
of the report, the Secretary-General has endorsed the
recommendation of the recent technical assessment
mission to Burundi that BINUB's mandate remain
unchanged through the end of 2009, with a primary
focus on political support, the facilitation of dialogue
and strategic support for peacebuilding, as well as on
tasks related to completing the peace process and, now
that a request has been made, also on electoral
assistance. As to the nature of the United Nations
presence beyond 2009, the Secretary-General intends
to consult with the Government of Burundi and to
submit recommendations in his next report to the
Security Council.

The remaining part of 2009 will be a crucial
period to safeguard what has been achieved and to
draw lessons for future peacebuilding endeavours.

