Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also thank
Special Adviser Thiaw, Ambassador Jinga, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and Mr. Ghanem
and Mr. Rioux for sharing their valuable perspectives
with the Security Council this afternoon.

We fully recognize the immense security challenges
that the countries of the Sahel are facing, including the
security situation in Mali and its implications for the
region, as well as organized crime and terrorism. We
commend regional initiatives to address the situation,
including through the G5 Sahel joint force and the
Multinational Joint Task Force. Let me underline in
this regard the importance of Mali moving forward on
implementing the Peace Agreement and for the Council
to actively support these efforts. I am therefore glad to
announce that the first listing of spoilers of the Peace
Agreement was adopted just over an hour ago in the
Sanctions Committee.

But this is not only about narrowly defined security
concerns. The countries in the Sahel face many
interconnected challenges, including inequalities,
poverty, lack of basic services, weak institutions,
gender-based violence, climate change and increasing
conflict between farmers and herders. A comprehensive
approach is needed to address this broad set ofchallenges
and the root causes of conflict. We therefore welcome
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, as
well as the adoption of a United Nations Support Plan,
as a vital step to deliver on this strategy. It offers an
opportunity to now gather partners and operationalize,
as well as coordinate, across frameworks that are
already in place.

We commend the Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS), and Special Adviser Thiaw
for their leadership and continued commitment to this
important effort. Given the important role of regional,
local and national actors, we further welcome steps taken
by the African Union (AU) to revise its own strategy
for the region, and, in this regard, we also reiterate our
strong support for the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). It is important that regional
efforts, as well as efforts of other important partners,
are well coordinated within the framework of the new
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

Despite the immense challenges, we agree with
the Special Adviser that it is important to focus on the
strong potential and the many opportunities that the

region offers. This was also evident during the recent
visit by our Special Envoy for the Sahel, together with
Special Adviser Thiaw, to the Liptako-Gourma region.
For example, young people are energetic, dynamic and
an asset for the promotion of development. Efforts
should therefore be made to build and capitalize on
these and other opportunities.

Accordingly, we welcome the Support Plan's focus
on climate-smart agriculture and renewable energy,
as well as on inclusive growth and empowerment of
women and young people. It is also very important to
strengthen the social contract between States and people
of the Sahel countries, which includes improving trust
in security actors, investing in the provision of basic
social services and fully respecting human rights.

In July, our Foreign Minister took part in the joint
AU-United Nations mission to the region, with a focus
on women, peace and security, followed by a briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8306). The debate organized
on climate-related security risks that same month (see S/PV.8307) also placed a particular emphasis on the
challenges in the Sahel.

Throughout our Council tenure, we have advocated
a comprehensive, regional approach to the Sahel and
the Lake Chad basin regions, encompassing security,
development and full respect for human rights. We
are also contributing on the ground, in line with the
priorities of the integrated strategy. In June, we
increased our support for climate- and security-related
efforts in the Sahel, with approximately €40 million,
for the period from 2018 to 2021, in addition to already
existing bilateral and humanitarian support, as well
as support provided through the European Union.
Within the strategy, Sweden's substantive multi-year,
unearmarked contributions to the Central Emergency
Response Fund of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme and United Nations Fund for Population
Activities are creating flexibility and sustainability in
this support.

Sustainable peace is best pursued in broad
partnership, including with Governments, regional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil society and the private sector. It is crucial that
all efforts undertaken by partners seek to align with
the integrated strategy and to enhance inclusive local,
national and regional ownership. Efforts should also
encompass all segments of society, including removing
obstacles to women's inclusion. Continued political
dialogue with Governments on long-term sustainable
development models is also crucial.

Having the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
participate in this meeting is, in our view, very useful.
The PBC, with its convening power, plays a pivotal
role in a coordinated and coherent approach to the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy and its Support Plan for the Sahel, as
recognized by the Council through presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/3, on UNOWAS. We hope that
that practice can be further built upon.

Finally, going forward, we would welcome regular
written updates by the Special Adviser or UNOWAS
on the implementation process of the United Nations
Support Plan. Updates on project timelines, proposed
trust funds and coordination efforts would be
important to include in such reporting. The successful
implementation of the Sahel Strategy would be an
important step towards stabilizing a rather volatile
region. The Strategy and the Support Plan must have
continued, strong, unified, international and United
Nations support, including from the Council.

