Sir Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would also like to join other colleagues in
warmly welcoming Baroness Ashton, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, to the Security Council
today.

Baroness Ashton's first appearance before the
Council reflects the significant changes in the external
personality of the European Union, which she has just
described. The European Union created Baroness
Ashton's role through the Lisbon Treaty in order to
improve the coherence, focus and delivery of the
European Union's external relations. In short, the
Lisbon Treaty will help the European Union become a
more effective international partner for the United
Nations and for other regional organizations.

The European Union emerged from the shadow of
conflict in the twentieth century. That experience has

helped to make the European Union a force for
stability and prosperity in its neighbourhood - from
the Balkans and the Caucuses to the Middle East and
North Africa. As a result of both history and
geography, the European Union retains a deep interest
in, and commitment to, Africa in particular. The
European Union is now sharing its experience and
improving coordination with other regional
organizations, including the African Union.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter sets
out a clear framework for cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations. The European Union is a
natural partner for the United Nations. They share
many objectives: maintaining international peace and
security, tackling poverty and delivering humanitarian
assistance, and addressing global threats and
challenges, such as terrorism, nuclear proliferation and
climate change.

As Baroness Ashton has said, the European
Union and its member States match their political
commitment with resources, providing almost 40 per
cent of the United Nations budget. The European
Union is the world's largest donor, providing almost
two thirds of all development assistance. The European
Union makes a major contribution to peace and
security around the world. It has launched more than
20 missions, bringing European policemen, judges,
peacekeepers and aid workers to three separate
continents. Over 3,000 military and over 4,000 civilian
personnel are currently deployed through the European
Union in crisis management operations ranging from
the Balkans to Africa and the Middle East. Right now,
the European Union is working with the United
Nations in eight major crisis theatres. In 2009, the EU
and its member States provided over €400 million in
funding for stabilization activities and crisis
management missions.

A sign of the close cooperation that exists
between the European Union and the United Nations is
that today, as we meet here in the Council, Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy is in Brussels, meeting
with the EU's Political and Security Committee. Let
me give four examples of that close cooperation.

First, the United Nations and the EU have worked
together to bring peace and security to the Balkans
since the conflicts of the 19905. In Kosovo, the EU is
taking on the lead role in supporting the development
of rule of law and governance standards. The EU

continues to work to help all countries of the Western
Balkans to realize their aspirations to join the European
Union and to finally break from the divisions of the
past.

Secondly, the EU is working alongside the United
Nations and others to help in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to help that country make progress on
the complex issues of police and army reform. Such
efforts will be crucial, especially as the United Nations
seeks to focus its efforts towards peacebuilding.

Thirdly, the United Nations and the EU and other
regional organizations are partners in Afghanistan. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has
the primary responsibility for coordinating
international civilian support. In that role, Staffan de
Mistura works closely with Vygaudas Usackas, head of
the EU delegation, and Mark Sedwill, NATO's senior
civilian representative. In January, participants at the
London Conference encouraged them to work closely
together, and we are pleased that that is now a reality.

Lastly, sanctions are an area where close
cooperation between the EU and the United Nations is
vital. As the world's biggest economy and home to
some of the most open and trade-oriented countries in
the world, the European Union is central to
maintaining effective sanctions regimes.

The Security Council's primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security requires
us to set the strategic direction for cooperation with
regional bodies. Those relationships will be of vital
importance in the years ahead. There is more that we
can do together, particularly in areas such as preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding.

We look forward to a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and the EU, built on
shared values and with a strong commitment to action
in support of those values.

