Mr. Ali (Bangladesh): I congratulate your
country, Sir, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of November. I
especially thank the President of Portugal for presiding
over this important meeting this morning. I also
express the appreciation of my delegation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, High Commissioner for Human
Rights Navanethem Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs Catherine Bragg and Director
for International Law and Cooperation at the
International Committee of the Red Cross Philip
Spoerri for their excellent presentations on this topic.

The protection of civilians is a basic principle of
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their 1977 additional Protocols contain specific rules to
protect civilians. In situations that are not covered by
those treaties, in particular internal disturbances,
civilians are protected by the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations to
protect civilians in armed conflict. Resolution 1894
(2009), resolutions relating to children and armed
conflict and to women and peace and security, the
mandating of peacekeeping missions to protect
civilians, the creation of the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians and the adoption of aides-
memoire on the protection of civilians have been
important steps forward. However, more needs to be
done in the implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and to fill protection gaps.

Of the current seven United Nations
peacekeeping operations with a protection mandate -
in Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Haiti, Lebanon, Liberia, South Sudan and
Darfur - five have developed comprehensive
strategies on the protection of civilians. Those five are
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
However, in spite of those positive developments,
challenges in the field continue. Last year, UNAMID
and MONUSCO continued to experience difficulties in
implementing their protection mandates. It remains to
be seen whether the new policy documents developed
in New York have a tangible impact on how
peacekeeping operations are conducted at the field
level. In that regard, the establishment of the new
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which
includes a protection-of-civilians mandate, will be an
important test case for United Nations peacekeeping.
We feel that adequate capacity will be the most
important element for the effective protection of
civilians.

We have observed two noticeable initiatives by
the Council since it held its last debate on this topic in
May (see S/PV.6531). First, resolution 1998 (2011),
adopted in July, expanded the listing criteria in the
Secretary-General's reports on children and armed
conflict to include parties to conflict who attack or
threaten schools and hospitals. Secondly, during its
annual debate on women and peace and security last
month (see S/PV.6642), the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20) on women's
participation in conflict prevention, management and
resolution, in which it reiterated its condemnation of
all violations of applicable international law committed
against women and girls in situations of armed conflict.
As I commend those developments, may I add that the
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State's ability to protect its citizens. I
take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the all-
female formed police unit from Bangladesh working in
the peacekeeping Mission in Haiti.

My delegation would like to highlight a few
issues to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The first relates to prevention and the building
of a culture of peace. Prevention is at the heart of
protection. The preventive capacity of the Organization
must be enhanced. At the same time, Member States
need to take steps to inculcate the values of peace,
tolerance and harmony that contribute to long-term
prevention.

Secondly, the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be enhanced. Given
that Bangladesh is one of the largest troop-contributing
countries, my delegation feels that the main challenge
to the implementation of protection mandates is the
lack of adequate resources.
Thirdly, we also believe that there needs to be a
closer dialogue between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, as they can provide valuable
information about the situation on the ground.

Fourthly, compliance with international legal
obligations by parties to conflicts must be enhanced
and accountability mechanisms should be strengthened.
F ifthly, international efforts, including those involving
the use of force, should be a last resort, respecting the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, since the country concerned has primary
responsibility for protecting its civilian citizens.

Finally, my delegation urges all parties to
conflicts to comply strictly with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law in order to
ensure protection of the lives and property of civilians
and their unimpeded access to humanitarian aid. We
call on parties to conflicts to strengthen the protection
of civilians through heightened awareness at all levels,
particularly through the training, orders and
instructions given to armed forces.

