Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom's
continued support for and commitment to the work of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. They are leading the fight
against impunity, holding perpetrators to account and
achieving justice for victims. That is work that is sadly
in great demand across the world today - in Syria, in
Iraq and in so many other places.

We are pleased that the ICTY's work remains on
track as it heads towards closure in 2017. While we
regret that the Prosecutor v. Goran Hadeic' trial could
not be completed, it is undeniable that progress has
been made. The Prosecutor v. Mieo Stanisie and Stojan
Zupljanin appeal has concluded, substantial steps have
been taken towards completion of the Prosecutor v.
Ratko Mladic' trial, and the Prosecutor v. Jadranko
Prlie et al. appeal continues to progress. Transition to
the Mechanism also continues on schedule.

We are grateful for the efficiency and downsizing
measures that have taken place in order to achieve
this, and we were happy to support the amendment to
the ICTY statute enabling the appointment of ad hoc
Appeals Chamberjudges, which is a necessary practical
step on the Council's side to enable the Tribunal to
complete its work. We recognize the difficulties caused
by staff attrition, and we appreciate the efforts made
to counteract that. We hope that staff will remain in
their roles until the end of the mandate to complete the
Tribunal's work.

Cooperation with the ICTY by all States remains
as important as ever. We welcome the continued
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the authorities of the States in the
region. However, we are concerned that the political
environment is having a negative impact on regional
judicial cooperation, and we echo the Prosecutor's call
for urgent steps to be taken to mitigate and reverse the
situation. We are particularly concerned that the arrest
warrants for the three individuals in the contempt cases
have still not been executed. We urge Serbia to meet its
obligation to cooperate and surrender those individuals
to the Tribunals. Lack of agreement at the regional level
to extradite war crimes suspects also severely hinders
efforts to bring prosecutions for war crimes. This
hampers reconciliation and could undermine the legacy
of the ICTY.

Turning to the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) , we are pleased that
the ICTY has already implemented the recommendation
on developing a code ofprofessional conduct forjudges.
We believe all international tribunal judges should be
subject to such codes. We also welcome the ICTYjudges'
indication of their willingness to accept a disciplinary
mechanism and that they consider this desirable. We
agree, but we think it is too late in the Tribunal's life
to implement all the OIOS recommendations. That
risks diverting resources from completing the core
functions, which must be the focus. Finally, on the
ICTY, we welcome plans for legacy work, and we will
be supporting the ICTY legacy dialogue.

Turning to the Mechanism, we are pleased with
its work in the past six months, including on ensuring
a smooth transition for the ICTY to the Mechanism.
Judicial work is proceeding efficiently, including on
the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic and Franko Simatovie
retrials and the appeals in the cases of Prosecutor V.
Radovan Karadzie and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Seselj
transferred from the ICTY. We are concerned by the
situation of Judge Akay, noting that the Secretary-
General has asserted immunity, but Turkey has
disagreed with that position. We also note that there
are ongoing legal proceedings before the Mechanism.
We hope that an appropriate resolution can be found as
quickly as possible.

It is important that all those indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda be
apprehended and face trial before the Mechanism. We
are grateful to the Prosecutor for his ongoing efforts
to locate and arrest fugitives, and we call on all States
to cooperate to that end. Equally, as in the former
Yugoslavia, national prosecutions are essentially for
ensuring justice for all Victims of crimes committed
in Rwanda. We thank the Prosecutor for his ongoing
work in that respect and encourage cooperation from
all relevant States.

We welcome the reduction in numbers of released
and acquitted persons residing in Arusha, as well as
the more efficient approach to the upkeep of those who
remain there and ongoing efforts regarding relocation.
We hope to hear positive developments in that regard in
due course.

Finally, we welcome the opening of the new
premises of the Mechanism's Arusha branch. The
Mechanism has a Vital role to play in the international
criminal justice system. I would therefore like to
close by re-emphasizing our continued support as it
carries out the residual functions of the Yugoslavia and
Rwanda tribunals.
