Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, and
Germany for having convened this open debate and for
your great efforts and work to underscore and promote
the importance of this topic. I also wish to welcome the
President of Nauru, His Excellency Mr. Marcus
Stephen, and to express our solidarity with him and his
concerns.

The statements made by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Achim Steiner, Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme, were
very illuminating and important, and underscored the
scale of the issues we must address when it comes to
climate change.

Climate change as a global phenomenon affecting
present and future generations is undoubtedly one of
the greatest challenges in the history of humankind. Its
impact today has consequences for almost all activities
around the world, from life itself, desertification and
rising sea level to the food supply, migration and the
destruction of biodiversity. It is clear that action must
be taken through the appropriate bodies and contexts,
among which the reduction of man-made gas emissions
is crucial. There are no excuses for the leading
producers of man-made gas emissions failing to
assume their responsibility before the world. There is
also a need to provide for the transmission and transfer
of clean new technologies and for access to markets on
equal terms, as well as to protect biodiversity. These
are concepts related to the debate on the right to
development, which is a legitimate aspiration that
cannot be renounced.

The increase in temperature, the severe variations
in historical patterns of rainfall, the increase in the
intensity and frequency of extreme weather events,
such as hurricanes and typhoons, are forcing serious
discussion in the appropriate forums on the measures
to be taken to adapt our societies to climate change.

Against that backdrop, Colombia believes that
there are immediate challenges that must be considered
in the Security Council. While the responses needed to
minimize the effects of climate change are not within
the mandate of the Council, we believe that this organ
does have a responsibility to play a role in cases and
conflict situations on its agenda when those are
exacerbated by the effects of climate change, with a
View to providing humanitarian protection measures,
which we believe should not extend to other issues.
Moreover, the Security Council should help to address
this problem in a context of trust among countries,
based on respect for the mandates of the respective
bodies of the international system.

Several decades ago, we aspired to an integrated
vision of progress, which we called sustainable
development. That goal has proved elusive because our
societies and economies are based on short-term,
sector-specific and immediate approaches. The
problems resulting from climate change must, in our
View, be addressed in a comprehensive way,
encompassing all the spheres and structures of human
activity and the need to adopt new behaviours. It is a
challenge for which most countries, which have only
barely made progress on various fronts of
development, are not prepared.

How should we prioritize resources and efforts?
How should we address the problems of disappearing
coastlines, overflowing rivers, melting glaciers,
expanding deserts and successive freezes and
droughts? No single country, group of countries or
specific body has the answers. Just as curbing and
reducing greenhouse gas emissions will require
coordinated action at the global level, responding to
the impacts of climate change will also require
concerted international action.

Colombia has just suffered two atypical cold
spells, unprecedented in our history, whose destruction
experts estimate at 10 times that wrought by Hurricane
Katrina. We had to mobilize extra resources and turn to
international assistance to mitigate the damage and
destruction and ensure the well-being of the population
affected. The integrity of natural ecosystems we
depend on was seriously affected.

The problem is therefore not only a matter for
future generations; it is a reality facing us today. The
survival of millions of people depends on action based
on international solidarity to reduce gas emissions, to
ensure access to food, to positively respond to
migration forced by climate impacts, disease and pest
vectors, infrastructure investment, the disappearance of
thousands of species, ocean acidification and the
inequitable distribution of fresh water worldwide,
among many other serious situations.

Colombia clearly has the political will to work
together to safeguard our planet. We believe that
collective commitment is needed to achieve sustainable
development in peace and prosperity.

