Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing.

The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East issue and is fundamental to peace in the
region. The recent developments in Palestine and Israel
are deeply troubling. The prospects for a two-State
solution remain elusive, since the resumption of the
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks faces difficulties and the
settlement activities and the demolition of Palestinian
properties continue unabated.

The situation in the Gaza Strip remains fragile,
marred by the ongoing casualties among Palestinian
civilians. As a result of the violent clashes, the risk of
the conflict escalating can hardly be ignored. Given
the current dire situation, the international community
needs to step up its efforts to promote a political solution
to the Palestinian question. The Security Council in
particular should take the lead and set an example.

First, the international community should
uphold the two-State solution, which represents the
right direction to resolve the Palestinian issue. The
international community should increase its political
and diplomatic efforts on the basis of the United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road
map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. It is imperative to effectively
implement the Security Council resolutions, cease all
settlement activities, stop the demolition of Palestinian
properties, including Bedouin villages, immediately
lift the blockade on the Gaza Strip and take steps to
prevent violence against civilians.

Secondly, the international community should
remain united in a concerted effort to promote the early
resumption of the peace talks between Palestine and
Israel. All the parties concerned should narrow their
differences, fully engage in dialogue and consultation
and avoid any unilateral action that may exacerbate
the situation so as to create the necessary environment
for the resumption of dialogue. The international
community should work together to find a viable way
forward to overcome the current stalemate. Those that
have considerable influence on the Middle East in
particular should play a constructive role in that regard.

Thirdly, sensitive issues, such as the status of
Jerusalem, should be properly addressed. The issue
of the status of Jerusalem is complex and delicate. All
parties should prioritize peace and calm in the region
and act with caution to avoid triggering new regional
disputes. All parties should respect the historical
plurality, uphold fairness and justice, implement
international consensus, strive for peaceful coexistence
and act upon the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the international consensus so as to reach a
negotiated settlement that accommodates the interests
of all the parties.

The international community should not forget
the more than 5 million Palestinian refugees. For more
than six decades, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has
played an important role in alleviating the suffering
of the Palestinian people and in promoting regional
peace and stability. The Agency currently faces many
challenges, including a lack of funding. We appreciate
the increased contributions of the relevant parties to the
Agency and call on all the parties to provide additional
and steady support to the Agency and to the countries
hosting Palestinian refugees in order to alleviate
the pressure on refugee relief efforts. For the past
30 years and more, China has made annual financial
contributions to the Agency. This year, in the light
of the urgent needs of the Agency, we have increased
our contribution accordingly. China will continue to
provide the best possible support to the Agency for the
discharge of its mandate.

China firmly supports the Palestinian people
in establishing a fully sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We support the greater
integration of Palestine into the community of nations.
China will continue to play a constructive role in
promoting the Middle East peace process in line with
the four-point proposal set out by Chinese President Xi
Jinping to resolve the Palestinian question.

