Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to tell you how
satisfied I am to see you guiding our work with your
well-known effectiveness and skill. I would also like to
thank you for your kind words about last month's
Spanish presidency.

We would like to voice our approval for the fact
that we are meeting today at the request of Tunisia, on
behalf of the League of Arab States, to study a
situation that is extremely serious and that has to be
handled with the utmost seriousness by this body,
which is responsible for international peace and
security. In a communique issued on 1 October, the
Spanish Government has already expressed its deep
concern about events that have been taking place in the
past few days in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.
Those events have further worsened what was already
a critical situation in the Arab-Israeli conflict.

There have been far too many deaths, and there
are going to be still more in this region. We regret all
these deaths, caused by one party and by the other, but
we must recognize the fact that the greatest number of
victims - dead and injured - have fallen on the
Palestinian side. The high number of Palestinians
killed and wounded, including many civilians, among
them children, show that Israel's armed response has
been and continues to be disproportionate. We cannot
believe that all of them, nor even a majority of them,
are terrorists. Therefore, the Security Council must
urge Israel to cease and desist from punitive actions, in
particular armed action not in conformity with
international law.

Clearly, we recognize Israel's right to protect
itself and to protect its citizens when confronted with
acts of terrorism, but we must bear in mind the fact that
any State's right to self-defence must be exercised
within respect for international norms, in particular the
norms of humanitarian law. We understand Israel's
security concerns, but we cannot but condemn the
methods it is using, with acts of force that have
excessive and indiscriminate effects.

We note with concern that Israeli military
activities in Gaza, which are causing so much pain and
suffering, seem to be taking place in response to a
premeditated plan to facilitate the announced
evacuation of Gaza, and also to smoothe out the
difficulties in the withdrawal and the following days. If
this were indeed the case, we would be faced with a
policy that we consider to be erroneous, the results of
which will not be the ones hoped for. Violence always
breeds more violence.

We must also voice our sense of frustration with
and our rejection of the acts of violence committed by
Palestinian elements who think - on the basis of
equally ambiguous and erroneous criteria - that the
recourse to force could benefit their interests. Nothing
could be further from the truth. On the contrary, the
violence practised by certain Palestinian sectors
contributes to derailing attempts to revive the peace
process, and it can only demoralize those who are
making efforts to achieve peace and to provide a future
to the peoples of the region. It provokes a generalized
rejection among the international community.

We are convinced that there is no armed solution
to this conflict. Therefore the parties - both the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority - must
honour their commitments as set out in the road map,
as the Security Council has repeatedly called upon
them to do. The road map is the only mechanism we
have, along with the Quartet, that can help move
forward the peace process, which once again appears
seriously compromised. We all must work together to
put an end to the spiral of violence that has engulfed
the region and to open an avenue for peace. The
Security Council must also shoulder its
responsibilities.

On the basis of those principles and perspectives,
we will review the draft resolution submitted by the
Algerian delegation on behalf of the Arab Group.

