Mr. ngowe (Botswana): We join those who spoke
before us in conveying our heartfelt condolences to the
Government and the people of the United States following
the tragedy in Oklahoma at the hands of terrorists.

The delegation of Botswana wishes to thank the
Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) for their
report (S/1995/302), which we read with keen interest. It is
gratifying to note that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) have
continued to honour their commitment to seal the
international border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and areas of Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serb forces.

There have been no discoveries of weapons or
ammunition crossing the border since the Mission began its
work back in 1994, although sizeable amounts of other
contraband have been confiscated. This is an indication that
some contraband, including weapons, must have crossed the
border unnoticed. If it could be determined with absolute
certainty that there had been no weapons or ammunition
transshipments across the border, this would indeed be a
most gratifying piece of information, because the primary
purpose of the border closure was to prevent war materials
from reaching the Serb forces in Bosnia.

It is common knowledge, however, that it is not an
easy task to seal a border between two countries totally,
even at the best of times. There is no denying that weapons
and ammunition must be reaching Bosnian Serbs through
the porous border. We will never know, of course, the
extent to which transshipments of weapons have been
carried out. It is, however, impossible to doubt that
weapons are reaching the territory of Bosnia under the
control of Serb forces undetected: the unexplained and
seemingly inexplicable cross-border helicopter movements,
the large vehicle tracks along the border and the lack of
protection for the Mission staff, who have on occasion
been forced to flee under fire, all suggest that the border
is not sealed at all times and that arms supplies must be
reaching the Bosnian Serb forces.

My delegation supports the extension of the partial
suspension because any decision to the contrary would
mean an end to what has been achieved so far to stop the
transshipment of military contraband. In the meantime,
the international community should continue to make a
determined effort to pressure Belgrade to isolate the
Bosnian Serb forces completely until they realize that
acceptance of the Contact Group plan is their only hope
for a solution to the conflict. There is no doubt that the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia can play
a crucial role in this endeavour if they so wish, and it is
our earnest hope that President Milosevic will do
everything possible to make the border closure more
effective.

Just as the border closure between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and
areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the control of
Bosnian Serb forces is a critical factor in the efforts to
bring the war in Bosnia to an end, so is the general arms
embargo. It is shocking to learn that weapons of war are
being shipped into this cauldron of conflict by some
Members of the United Nations, in violation of Security
Council resolution 713 (1991). It is most disheartening
that those who have the capacity to stop this flow of arms
have decided to watch passively as Security Council
resolutions are flouted with total abandon. We cannot
expect to make any headway at the negotiating table
when the parties to that violent, deep-rooted and complex
conflict are being armed to the teeth. Fuelling the fires of
war in the former Yugoslavia with new arms is simply
bad business. It puts the lives of the Blue Helmets on the
ground at risk, and we do not believe that this is in
anybody's interest.

The crisis in the former Yugoslavia threatens to
create a perception of the Security Council as an
ineffective machine good for the production of resolutions
and nothing more. It accounted for 23 Council resolutions
in 1992, 25 in 1993, 12 in 1994 and 5 in the first four
months of 1995 alone. By the time the gavel falls for the
adjournment of this meeting, the Council will have added
yet another resolution to this already long list. Countless
presidential statements have also been issued, yet there is
not the slightest sign that there will be a settlement soon.

 

The flip side of this record number of resolutions is,
of course, the fact that the Council has been able to muster
an unprecedented degree of agreement on how to bring this
conflict to an end. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said
about the resolve to implement these Council decisions.
Perhaps it is time the Security Council thought of changing
its approach to the search for a solution to the conflict in
the former Yugoslavia: there may just be a way out of the
dark clouds of war hanging over the former Yugoslavia
other than the one we have charted so far.

