Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama): Allow me to begin by thanking the Government of Viet Nam for convening today's timely debate, which seeks to reaffirm the inestimable value and commitment of the international community to upholding the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. We also welcome the important briefings made by the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson, which underscored the crucial issues of today's debate. As a founding Member of the United Nations, Panama has promoted the purposes and principles of the Charter and upheld multilateralism as a mechanism par excellence for effectively addressing issues on the international agenda and as the ideal framework for cooperation in promoting a more just and equitable peaceful order for all. At a particularly sensitive time in today's world, where collective efforts for peace are imminent, it is important to renew the commitment that the international community made seven decades ago to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, by creating the conditions in which it could maintain justice and respect for obligations under treaties and other sources of international law. Renewed commitment is essential to ensuring a climate of coexistence, trust and tolerance for all. We must urgently reflect on a world of that kind - one based on respect for fundamental human rights and the promotion of values that foster humankind's progress, with a global order of justice and freedom that values human beings, following the pain and suffering inflicted by two world wars. The challenges and tensions on the global agenda are increasingly complex. The growing threats posed by conflicts, inequality, the scourge of terrorism, extremism, xenophobia, hate speech and humanitarian crises aggravated by the devastating effects of climate change challenge every day the effectiveness of this Organization and, above all, of the Security Council, which bears the greatest responsibility for preserving peace. As we have pointed out before, the effectiveness of the United Nations requires determination and political will to face those challenges. We cannot continue to issue documents and declarations while the cost of the inability to take collective action is measured in human lives lost the world over. The United Nations is called upon to be an advocate for the collective good and a builder of peace, and to do so it needs to move from words to concrete action. As a country that favours constructive dialogue, Panama is aware that the Organization will be only as capable and relevant to the people as the States that are here are willing to be. We need to return to the essence that gave life to our Organization. We need to genuinely empower ourselves with a strong and renewed culture of peace that preserves the vision of the original signatories of the United Nations Charter. The defence of the principles and values that emanate from it must be the commitment that unites us, as well as our legacy to future generations who, today as never before, are demanding it because they deserve to be safeguarded from the scourge of war. Throughout its history, Panama has been part of, and witness to, the resolution of conflicts between countries in our region. Panama is a State party to treaties that call for disarmament with a view to building a world free of nuclear weapons. We have full confidence in the work of the International Court of Justice to develop its methods for the peaceful settlement of international disputes. With this vision and in a particularly significant year where we are preparing to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Panama reaffirms its determined and unwavering commitment to the consolidation of a strengthened multilateral system based on the purposes and principles that gave life to the United Nations, whose core was, is and must continue to be the preservation of international peace and security.
