Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of the draft resolution (S/2017/1060)
that was just put to the vote.

The question of Palestinian is at the core of the
Middle East issue. It is a fundamental part of the
Middle East peace process, within which the issue of
Jerusalem is particularly complicated and sensitive and
is key to finding a solution to the Palestinian issue. For
many years, a series of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), have included
provisions regarding the status of Jerusalem.

The draft resolution submitted by Egypt is a
continuation of the content and spirit of past Security
Council resolutions. We urge the Security Council
and the international community to remain united in
a common effort to ensure a prompt de-escalation of
tension regarding the situation of Jerusalem in order to
maintain regional peace and security in the Middle East
and to preserve the overall Middle East peace process.

China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support thejust cause
of the Palestinian people for restoring their legitimate
national rights. We support the establishment of a fully
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, based on
its 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
That position of China will not change.

China will continue to be guided in general
by the four-point proposal put forward by Chinese
President Xi Jinping this past July for the promotion of
the settlement of the question of Palestine by advancing
a political settlement based on the two-State solution
and by promoting peace, stability and development in
the Middle East.

We urge the international community to respect the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the land-for-peace
principle and the Arab Peace Initiative, to strengthen
efforts for the resumption of peace negotiations and
to find a solution to the key issues, including the final
status of Jerusalem, through dialogue and negotiation
in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian issue at an early date.

