Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley for their
very comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
congratulate the Netherlands, treasurer of the Group of
Friends on Food and Nutrition Security, for initiating
a series of discussions on conflict and hunger. We
need to continue this debate and raise the interlinked
issues of conflict and hunger in various relevant
international forums.

I would like to quote a South African proverb:
"Abundance does not spread; famine does". Indeed,
we are observing a worrying trend: after declining for
more than two decades, hunger is on the rise again.
Moreover, estimates predict a further deterioration
in food security, which is threatening the realization
of Sustainable Development Goal 2, namely, to end
hunger by 2030.

Africa and the Middle East are especially affected
by famine. In particular, we notice that the deteriorating
situation in such countries as South Sudan, Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Nigeria, specifically its north-eastern region,
Mali, Syria and Iraq. Hunger, undernutrition and food
insecurity are to a large degree the result of conflict.
They are on the rise and are closely interlinked with
famine and food crises. Conflict and hunger reinforce
each other. The vast majority of malnourished people
worldwide live in countries affected by conflict. Ten
of the 13 major food crises in the world were driven by
conflict. More than half of the population in conflict-
affected countries live in rural areas, where livelihoods
depend largely on agriculture and land and livestock
are two key agricultural assets.

Hunger and undernutrition are significantly worse
where conflicts are prolonged. On the other hand, food
insecurity itself can trigger violence and instability,
particularly in conflicts marked by inequality and fragile
institutions. The link between conflict and hunger
is complex and therefore requires a comprehensive
response and a collaborative approach. In keeping with
the Council's presidential statement issued in August
2017 (S/PRST/2017/14), Poland is strongly committed
to working with the Secretary-General to pursue all
possible avenues to ending conflict, including through
addressing its the root causes in an inclusive and
sustainable manner. We are convinced that in order for
the Security Council to ensure early action, we need an
early-warning information system on food insecurity
and hunger and on any escalation ofdeepening conflicts.

This largely depends on access. Our main goal
should be to protect civilians in armed conflict and
ensure that their basic needs are met. This is of the
utmost importance in discussing the deterioration of
the situation in, for example, Syria. Access to adequate
food, or the right to food, is a core human rights and
binding on all States. We should promote its better
implementation; in this regard, we cannot stress
enough the importance of respect for international
humanitarian law.

Another issue is the accountability of States or
parties to armed conflict, as well as individuals, that
violate international humanitarian law by using food
insecurity and starvation as a method of warfare
or through attacks on food-producing factories or
destroying crop fields. Such violations must be
investigated and the perpetrators held to account.

In conclusion, I should like once again to thank the
Netherlands for having convened this meeting and to
reiterate Poland's commitment to continuing to work to
reduce conflict and hunger worldwide.

