Mr. Zebari (Iraq): Saturday was a historic day
for Iraq. We Iraqis have waited so long for our
nightmare to be over, and now Saddam Hussein has
finally gone, along with the fear, the genocide and the
terror that he inflicted, and he is never coming back.
Instead, he must now answer to the Iraqi people for his
crimes against humanity. At last Iraqis can begin the
long-overdue healing process of seeking unity, peace
and national reconciliation without the shadow of evil
hanging over them.

On behalf of the Iraqi people, I would like to
thank the Coalition for its part in delivering this mass
murderer into the hands of the people he brutalized for
so long so that justice can finally be done. But while
the celebrations continue, we must persevere in efforts
to empower our people to take charge of their own
destiny as soon as possible and let Saddam's capture
mark the beginning of a new era in Iraq's history.

In accordance with paragraph 7 of Security
Council resolution 1511 (2003), which invited the
Governing Council to set forth a timetable for drafting
a new constitution and holding democratic elections,
we would like to present to the Security Council the
timetable set out in the Agreement on Political Process.
This agreement was signed on 15 November by the
Iraqi Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional
Authority in Baghdad, and it lays down the following
principal stages and conditions.

The Iraqi Governing Council, in consultation with
the Coalition Provisional Authority, will draft a
Fundamental Law which sets out the timetable leading
to elections, the mandate of a sovereign Iraqi
transitional administration and the principles to be
followed prior to drawing up a permanent constitution.
The key elements include provisions for human rights
and guarantees of freedoms, a federal structure for Iraq,
civilian control of Iraqi armed forces, judicial
independence and a timetable for drafting and ratifying
Iraq's new constitution and holding direct elections.
Approval of the Fundamental Law is to be completed
by 28 February 2004.

Bilateral agreements with the Coalition on
security and on the status of Coalition forces in Iraq
will be completed by the end of March 2004.

Election of members of a transitional national
assembly will be conducted through a process of
regional caucuses in Iraq's 18 provinces organized by a
national committee of selected Iraqis. Nominations to
the caucuses will be solicited from political parties,
local councils, professional, academic and civic
associations and tribal and religious groups. Each
governorate selection caucus will elect representatives
to the new transitional assembly by 31 May 2004.

The transitional assembly will then elect an
executive and appoint ministers, who will form the
transitional administration by 30 June 2004, when it
will assume full sovereign powers; the Coalition
Provisional Authority and the Governing Council will
subsequently dissolve.

According to the timetable detailed in the
Fundamental Law, a constitutional convention to draw
up a permanent constitution for Iraq will be directly
elected by the Iraqi people by 15 March 2005. A final
draft will be presented and a popular referendum will
be held to ratify the constitution.
Elections for a new Iraqi Government, based on
the new constitution, will be held by 31 December
2005, at which point the Fundamental Law will expire.

This plan clearly spells out the steps we must take
to rightfully restore full sovereignty to Iraq, in the
interim through a transitional administration, and
ultimately embodied in a new, historic constitution for
our country. The Governing Council unanimously
agreed upon this timetable at its inception. We consider
it to be unambiguous, comprehensive and achievable,
and we remain wholly committed to its
implementation. However, we stress that progress will
continue to depend on the security situation in Iraq;
until we see significant improvements, the road ahead
is not going to be easy. The capture of Saddam Hussein
will deal a huge blow to his misguided former loyalists,
but we need to empower Iraqis to take charge of their
own security. This timetable gives a clear deadline for
the transfer of this responsibility to Iraqis, but this
must run in parallel with the political process towards a
sovereign Iraqi Government.

Iraq is a country traumatized by a legacy of
decades of unimaginable human suffering, gross
violations of human rights and the effects of systematic
policies designed to rip our country apart along ethnic
or religious lines. What you see today is an
unprecedented effort among leaders and political,
religious, ethnic and sectarian groups to unite against
the tyranny of the past and work together to build a
democratic future for our people. This momentum
demands international encouragement and recognition
so that the Iraqi people can move forward with
confidence and hope. Iraq must not live any longer in
the past but look forward to the future, and the United
Nations is the key forum for collective international
action to help us achieve our goals of restructuring and
democratizing our country.

The Iraqi people have always welcomed the vital
role of the United Nations in Iraq and appreciated its
humanitarian services and commitment to programmes,
which have been a lifeline to so many Iraqis throughout
the prolonged Iraq crisis. I would like to pay tribute to
the late Sergio Vieira de Mello, who was an exemplary
role model of how effective the United Nations can be
in Iraq. Those of us who had the honour to work with
him can tell you of his efforts in furthering the political
process, particularly in establishing the Governing
Council, and we feel a deep sense of loss at his tragic
and untimely death.

His contribution underscores the need to see an
expanded United Nations role in Iraq on many levels:
humanitarian relief, capacity and nation building,
promoting sustainable development and advancing the
electoral and political process. We thus urge the
appointment of a special representative in Iraq. Your
help and expertise cannot be effectively delivered from
Cyprus or Amman. We understand the devastating
losses the United Nations suffered on 19 August, but as
the United Nations has offered reassurance by its
presence in so many dangerous and difficult situations,
we are ready and willing to help provide whatever
security is required to see it return to Iraq.

We welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General of the acting Special Representative, Mr. Ross
Mountain, and we look forward to meeting him in
Baghdad to discuss the United Nations role and
operations in Iraq.

We call upon the Members of the United Nations
to look beyond their differences over the decision to go
to war in Iraq and come together to forge an
international consensus. Settling scores with the United
States-led coalition should not be at the cost of helping
to bring stability to the Iraqi people. This squabbling
over political differences takes a backseat to their daily
struggle for security, jobs, basic freedoms and all the
rights the United Nations is chartered to uphold.

For our part, we in the new Iraq are reaching out
to our neighbours and engaging the international
community, but we insist on playing a full part in any
initiatives that concern the future of our country.
Without Iraqi participation in discussions that have
Iraqi interests at stake, such as the recently formed
United Nations contact group, decisions taken cannot
be held as valid. Iraq is our country and our opinion
must not be excluded. As Iraqis, we strongly disagree
with those views that question the legitimacy of the
present Iraqi authorities and I would like to remind you
that the Governing Council is the most representative
and democratic governing body in the region. For this
reason, members of the United Nations Security
Council should be reaching out and engaging us to
encourage this nascent democracy in a region well
known for its authoritarian rule.

With the greatest respect, the situation in Iraq is
much more complicated than that of Afghanistan or
Somalia. Its geographic and strategic position means
that developments in Iraq impact security and stability
across the region of the Middle East. Members of the
United Nations have an international responsibility to
increase cooperation and overcome their differences to
help us in the fight against terrorism. Iraq increasingly
provides a magnet to terrorists and all those who want
to bring their war against the United States to our
country.

However, this is not just a problem for the
coalition. Just as the scourge of terrorism is a global
phenomenon, the security situation in Iraq cannot be
viewed in isolation. The consequences of allowing the
terrorists to win in Iraq will spill over our borders and
no country will be safe. The timetable presented to you
today represents the calendar for a future democratic
and stable Iraq in the heart of the Middle East, and we
all have Iraq's national interests at heart and share the
responsibility to make it work.

One year ago, this Security Council was divided
between those who wanted to appease Saddam Hussein
and those who wanted to hold him accountable. The
United Nations as an organization failed to help rescue
the Iraqi people from a murderous tyranny that lasted
over 35 years and today we are unearthing thousands of
victims in horrifying testament to that failure. The
United Nations must not fail the Iraqi people again.

After eight months of liberation, Iraqis are slowly
beginning to get back on their feet with the help of
their allied friends, and they are eagerly awaiting the
help of the international community, led by the United
Nations. And so we ask you today: please put aside
your differences, pull together and work with us and all
those who have contributed and sacrificed so much, to
realize our shared objectives of a sovereign, united and
democratic Iraq.

