Mr. Lowcock: As the Council is aware, I was
in Damascus three weeks ago for talks with the
Government. We had constructive discussions on
a range of issues. Across much of the country, the
situation is now calmer than it was when I last visited
in January.

However, humanitarian needs remain substantial
and the Government expressed concern to me about
the underfunding of the United Nations humanitarian
response plan this year. I said that, in my judgment,
addressing that would require improvement in needs
assessment and access for humanitarian agencies,
including my own Office, to assure both current and
potential donors that help is genuinely targeted, in a
neutral and impartial way, at the people in greatest need
and, indeed, that such help reaches those same people.

Since the visit, of course, we have been totally
focused on the danger that the looming Idlib catastrophe
may totally upend our humanitarian agenda. As Mr. De
Mistura has said, we welcome yesterday's news from
Sochi. I want to be clear with the Council about what
was at stake.

From the Secretary-General down, we have
consistently expressed alarm over the risks of a full-
scale military offensive in north-west Syria. It was
no exaggeration, merely a statement of fact, that such
an onslaught would likely have presaged the worst
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century.
Surveys of affected people undertaken last month
showed that well over 2 million people could have
been displaced in the event of a full-scale military
operation. It would have meant further untold suffering
of vulnerable and terrified people from overcrowded
sites in which basic services have been stretched to
breaking point for months. There simply is no way for
humanitarian agencies to protect and meet the needs
of millions of extremely vulnerable people, including,
as Mr. De Mistura reminded us, 1 million children, in
the midst of a massive military onslaught. We therefore
welcome yesterday's agreement because, if sustained
and implemented in full respect of international
humanitarian law, it may avert the catastrophe we have
been warning against.

To succeed, demilitarization requires the
agreement of all parties. Short of such agreement, it is
foreseeable that force would be used to demilitarize,
and thus civilians would be exposed to the very harm
we are trying to avoid. Whether from within or outside
the proposed demilitarized area, should civilians deem
it necessary to leave, they must be allowed to seek
refuge elsewhere. In case of displacement, all possible
measures must be taken so that affected civilians
are received under satisfactory conditions of shelter,
hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, and that members
of the same family are not separated.

It is also important that any screening to
distinguish civilians from fighters be undertaken in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
clear standard operating procedures, while ensuring
humane treatment and accounting for those who have
been screened. Special protection and assistance
measures should be in place for civilians, in particular
women and children, who have been associated with,
or are family members of, fighters. Regardless of
location - whether within or outside the demilitarized
zone - international humanitarian law obligations
continue to apply. Warring parties cannot deliberately
or carelessly disregard the distinction between civilians
and combatants, or between civilian infrastructure and
military objectives.

The United Nations, along with other humanitarian
organizations, continues to implement a major
humanitarian assistance programme from across the
border in Turkey, as mandated by Council resolutions.
On average, we are reaching 2 million people each
month in north-west Syria. This week alone, food for
more than 260,000 people is being sent across the border,

as are non-food items and tents for more than 60,000
people - most of it through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
into Idlib. Aid is also being prepositioned to ensure that
those in need can continue to receive support in the
face of further military escalation. Food rations for one
week for more than 350,000 people and non-food items
for 400,000 people have already been prepositioned in
Idlib. Supplies have also been prepositioned in Homs,
Aleppo and Latakia governorates, including food
assistance for up to 1 million people and shelter kits and
non-food items for up to 300,000 people. Hardly any
of that would have been possible had the Council not
renewed the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) when
it adopted resolution 2393 (2017), in December 2017.
The resolution made a real difference, and millions of
people depend on the activities it mandates.

The humanitarian situation in other parts of the
country remains difficult. At Rukban, on the Syria-
Jordan border, the United Nations, in cooperation with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, remains ready to provide
humanitarian assistance through an inter-agency
convoy. What we need is official approval from the
Government of Syria for the convoy to proceed and
for the teams to accompany the convoy to deliver
life-saving supplies and carry out needs assessment and
distribution monitoring. We also need deconfliction
and guarantees of safe passage from the Government
of Syria, the Russian Federation, international coalition
forces and the Government of Jordan. And we need
written guarantees of safe passage by all non-State
armed groups controlling the camp and present along
the route.

Further to the north, some 153,000 people are
now estimated to have returned to Raqqa city since
October 2017, although conditions remain unconducive
for returns because of high levels of destruction and
explosive hazard contamination. Efforts have been
made to scale up the mine action response since earlier
this year, including mine risk education activities and
training. Humanitarian mine action organizations have
also been carrying out mine removal operations in
Raqqa city since June, focusing on key infrastructure,
with a coordination mechanism available to include
sites prioritized by the humanitarian community.
However, much more needs to be done before the city is
safe and conducive for returns.

In Deir ez-Zor, attention appears to have turned
now to the last remaining enclave of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Syria, along the east bank of the

Euphrates river in the southern parts of the governorate.
That includes the towns ofHajin, Al-Soussa, Al-Sha'afa
and Al-Baghouz. There are significant concerns for the
safety and security of civilians living in those areas,
with more than 20,000 people estimated to be displaced
and reports of leaflets being dropped to warn civilians
to leave before the start of the offensive. I call on
parties once again to avoid civilian loss by respecting
their international humanitarian law obligations of
distinction, proportionality and precaution, and to
allow civilians who wish to leave to move safely to
other areas.
In the south-west of the country, most of the up
to 325,000 people estimated to have been displaced
in the area since late June are now reported to have
returned to their areas of origin. But thousands still
remained displaced and high levels of humanitarian
need persist, including among returnees. The United
Nations has continued to provide humanitarian aid in
the area, with the agreement of the Government and
in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
other humanitarian organizations, with efforts ongoing
to ensure more sustained access across the area. That
is urgently needed to address gaps issuing from the
suspension of cross-border activities from Jordan in
late June.

Let me finish with a final word on Idlib. What
do we think the 3 million civilians, including those
1 million children, confined to Idlib make ofyesterday's
agreement? Well, they have a simple question: Is this
merely a stay of execution or is it the beginning of a
reprieve, the first tiny glint of light at the very end of
the darkest tunnel?

