Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Judge
Meron, Judge Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and
Prosecutor Jallow for their comprehensive reports to
the Security Council.

Pakistan commends and supports the important
work of the two Tribunals to deliver justice and end
impunity. The prevention of mass atrocities and genocide
is a legal and moral responsibility of the international
community. The provision ofjustice to victims of such
crimes is important, not only for accountability but also
for closure and healing. During their proceedings, the
Tribunals have developed a comprehensive corpus of
precedents in international criminal law. We welcome
their contribution.

There has been progress in the completion
strategies of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) during the period covered
by the latest reports of the Presidents and Prosectors
of the two Tribunals (see S/2013/663 and S/2013/678, respectively). In the past six months, the Tribunals have
continued to engage in trial and appeal proceedings,
the drafting ofjudgements and the referral of cases to
domestic jurisdictions. It is a matter of satisfaction that
the ICTR has completed the substantive cases at the
trial level for all 93 of the accused who were indicted by
the Tribunal. The ICTY has also concluded proceedings
against 136 out of the 161 individuals it indicted.

The transition from the ICTR to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals appears
to be on track. The Tribunals continue to contribute
to procedural and evidentiary international criminal
law in a professional manner. They have taken several
measures to improve the drafting of judgements,
translation, outreach and the preservation of archives.
The Tribunals' initiatives on assistance and support
to victims, as well as legacy- and capacity-building
projects, are steps in the right direction.

The Tribunals need to demonstrate continuing
commitment to the timely conclusion of their
proceedings. We hope that the Tribunals will make
every effort to complete their judicial work as quickly
as possible, while taking into account the fundamental
rights of the accused and the appellants to due process,
according to international standards.

In the process of winding down the work of
the Tribunals, we recognize the challenges in the
assignment of work to judges, staff management and
the preparation of archives. The recruitment of workers
and the retention of staff with institutional memory

of cases are a crucial part of the completion process.
Adequate resources should therefore be provided to the
Tribunals to fulfil their responsibilities in an optimal
manner.

While there are no outstanding fugitives under
the jurisdiction of ICTY following the arrest of Ratko
Mladie and Goran Hadzie, there are individuals indicted
by the ICTR who remain at large. We hope that with
the cooperation and efforts of relevant Member States,
the remaining fugitives will be held accountable. We
support the efforts of the ICTR President and Registrar
to find hosts for the relocation of individuals who have
either been acquitted or have served their sentences.
We call upon States that are in a position to do so to
positively respond to the Tribunals' requests. The
relocation of the acquitted and released persons to third
States would give them an opportunity to restart their
lives.

Over time, the decisions of the Tribunals have
produced a body of jurisprudence that will influence
the fight against impunity and shape the future of global
criminal justice. It is therefore important to preserve
the legacy of the Tribunals because of their rich
contribution to the fields of international humanitarian
law and legal doctrine. The Tribunals' contribution to
jurisprudence and precedence in international law is
important. We hope that the Tribunals will contribute
to the process of reconciliation and lasting peace in the
Balkans and the Great Lakes region.

