Mrs. Byaje: At the outset, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on peace
and security in Africa, with a focus on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and the
resolution of conflicts. We also wish to thank you,
Sir, for providing this platform and opportunity to
review the efforts made in this particular field with
a view to enhancing collaboration and building more
ties while also opening up opportunities for closer
operational cooperation. The Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) highly appreciates the
contributions shared during this debate.

Maintaining global peace and security requires
collaboration among several actors. In that respect,
ECCAS acknowledges the milestones achieved in
addressing issues that are impeding peace and security,
putting forward conflict prevention, preventive
diplomacy and good offices through our strategic
partnership with the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) and thanks to the assistance of our bilateral
and multilateral partners, civil society and networks of
women and youth.

In that regard, my contribution to this debate will
focus on three major points. I will first give a brief
historical background on the involvement of ECCAS in
peace and security issues. I will then highlight areas of
cooperation with other entities, before concluding by
looking at the remaining gaps and challenges, calling
for concerted actions to speed up the implementation of
initiatives aimed at preventing conflicts.

Before delving into today's theme, allow me
to revisit briefly the security situation in Central
Africa - a region prone to all sorts of conflicts
owing to its geographic location at the heart of a
volatile geopolitical landscape that is regularly marked
by recurrent conflicts that adversely compromise
peace and security, with a negative bearing on the
subregion's community.
It is worth mentioning that that alarming state
of affairs has been in the making not as of today or
yesterday, but mainly since the period from 1992 to
1998, during which seven of our 11 States members
went through violent wars and devastating genocide,
prompting the institution to embrace a new orientation
in its objectives. ECCAS, which focused initially
on the promotion and enhancement of harmonious
cooperation and balanced and self-sustained economic
and social development in all areas, with the ultimate
goal of realizing regional integration, was then
compelled to reinforce its objectives in February 1999
with the creation of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa (COPAX), whose core mission was to
prevent and resolve conflicts in the subregion.

Since its inception, COPAX has focused its action
on the area of conflict prevention, early warning
mechanisms and, more recently, strengthening
cooperation with civil society organizations active in
the area of conflict prevention. Political and diplomatic
actions have also been conducted to counter and control
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
that framework, the Heads of State and Government
have vowed to enhance the promotion of peace and
security at the highest level as a prerequisite to improve
citizens' living conditions, security and stability in
the region.

However, preventing conflicts of different natures
from erupting in the region, leading to social crises,
and curbing systemic problems rooted in poverty and
all sorts of exclusion, as well as governance issues at the
root of political and institutional conflicts, have proven
to be a tedious exercise. Tensions tend to escalate
during electoral processes, while attacks related to
terrorism and violent extremism and their corollary of
forced migration, transnational crimes and maritime
insecurity are on the rise, eating away all resources
devoted to development. Worth mentioning are also
cross-cutting issues linked with human trafficking,
smuggling and illicit cross-border trade, as well as
arms proliferation.

We note with concern long-standing traditions,
such as transhumance and pastoralism, that have now
become sources of conflicts, triggering instability and
the resurgence of negative forces and armed groups
looting natural resources. Battling those challenges
in a holistic and inclusive manner has been promoted
by all parties involved. In that regard, ECCAS lauds
the meaningful involvement in preventive efforts by
women and youth networks, which have proven to be a
strong asset to rely on in order to achieve lasting peace.

ECCAS will therefore continue to work in tandem
with the AU and the United Nations through the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
building capacity to empower those agents of change,
namely, women and youth, so as to ensure their equal
participation in all efforts deployed to promote peace
and security and in enabling them to play a central role
in leadership and decision-making.

Collaboration among all those actors is also needed
to curb and eradicate the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons ifwe are to silence the guns by 2020,
create the necessary conditions for development to
thrive and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
It is urgent to realize that those changing realities of
conflicts coming in sophisticated and multifaceted
dimensions in the area of conflict prevention call for
a drastic shift in our response. That is at the root of
the new and innovative approach prompting the AU
and its main pillars, namely, the regional economic
communities and member States, to try to embrace
other avenues and endogenous solutions to peace and
security issues.

In order to achieve that noble goal, Africa is leaning
towards financing a major part of its own operations
of maintaining peace while expecting assistance
from this organ, which holds the responsibility of
maintaining peace and security in the world. Pooling
predictable resources to find adequate solutions to the
challenges remains relevant in complementing efforts
to be deployed.

Within the framework of subsidiarity, complementarity
and solidarity, the AU, the United Nations, ECCAS
and other regional entities have worked together
to coordinate and harmonize their interventions in
terms of prevention and addressing the root causes
of conflicts. Allow me to illustrate some areas of
collaboration and joint action conducted under regional
arrangements with several examples that have yielded
tangible results.

Progress has indeed been achieved through several
mediation, good offices and political missions that have
eased hostilities and recently resolved political crises.
Some of the latest positive developments owing to
the role played by regional organizations include the
collaboration of ECCAS, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring States
in supporting the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
panel of facilitators - made up of ECCAS member
States and actors from neighbouring countries - as
well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the engagement of the European Union in that
process were instrumental in the implementation
of the African Initiative road map and in easing
tensions with armed groups, which led to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

We witnessed a peaceful transition of power for
the first time in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has led to positive changes. The just-concluded
national dialogue in Cameroon has sparked new hope
in the resolution of differences affecting communities.
At this juncture, it is important to mention that ECCAS
is about to conclude an institutional reform that will
boost the capacity of the Central Africa Early Warning
Mechanism and the Central Africa Multinational Force,
with a view to aligning them with the continental
architecture. Currently, those two bodies are quite
challenged, and their level of intervention minimized,
despite their comparative advantage with regard to
their proximity to the scene of action.

Among their stumbling blocks are the
decision-making process and the lack of human,
logistical and financial resources. There is therefore a
great need to build their capacity to enable them to mount
fast interventions in an emergency situation - often
hampered by the tedious nature of decision-making, as
it requires a green light from the Conference of Heads
of State and Government to be put into motion.

In order to meet those challenges, ECCAS urges
our economic and financial partners to enhance
the capacities of the Central Africa Early Warning
Mechanism and of the Central Africa Multinational
Force in the image of the AU Peace and Security
Council or the Security Council. In contributing to
those initiatives, ECCAS will continue to push for
regular COPAX meetings during the Summit of Heads
of State and Government, while ensuring reporting on
its work on a daily basis to inform the decision ofHeads
of State and trigger action if needed.

ECCAS commends the United Nations for
recognizing the role of complementarity played by
regional and subregional organizations, mainly in the
pacific settlements of disputes. The AU reform gives
an even more important role to the regional economic
communities, and the ECCAS reform has taken into
account all those changes and the contributions and
new responsibilities assigned to them. ECCAS values
the AU technical support for our organ of early-
warning system, which will help it in reaching its
operationalization to the level of other regional organs
and enable it to deliver on its mandate.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the strong
commitment of ECCAS to the importance of investing
in the prevention of conflicts and relying on preventive
diplomacy - instead of using force - in mediation
efforts as the only viable path leading towards
conflict resolution.

