Mr. Zebari (Iraq): In accordance with resolution
1790 (2007), the mandate of the Multinational Force in
Iraq is now due for review. Iraq extends its thanks to
the Security Council for the opportunity to address its
member States on the current situation in Iraq as part
of the review process.

We recently passed the five-year milestone in
Iraq's democratic transition. Although my country
continues to endure profound challenges, we have
made commendable and significant accomplishments
in the security, political and economic fields. My
Government acknowledges, however, that our tangible
and visible gains are vulnerable and fragile. Our
priority is to consolidate and capitalize on what has
been achieved.

1 am pleased to report to the Security Council that
Iraq is experiencing the lowest levels of overall
violence and the smallest number of terrorist attacks
since March 2004, more than four years ago. Our
country has stepped back from the brink of civil war,
and the Iraqi people, from all communities, have
encouraged a number of initiatives to protect our
civilians and our livelihoods.

We have witnessed, in the Awakening movement,
former insurgents turning their arms towards the
fighting of foreign terrorists. With the help of local
communities, we have rooted Al-Qaida out from its
neighbourhoods and strongholds. We have seen
widespread support for the Government's programme
to demobilize unlawful militias that operate against the
rule of law. In particular, during the last six months, we
have seen a continuation and consolidation of the
significant trends that began last year with Operation
Rule of Law and the positive impact of the surge
strategy in support of the Iraqi security forces.

The Iraqi security forces continue to be
strengthened in capacity, skill and confidence, thanks
to clear and positive improvements in training and
professionalism, enabling it to implement law and
order in an impartial, non-sectarian manner. The forces
have increased in size - to nearly 600,000 strong -
and they improved their equipment. They now have
primary responsibility for over half of Iraq's 18
provinces. Their efforts have won them the trust and
cooperation of the Iraqi people and, with the support of
the multinational forces, they have turned the corner in
the fight against the insurgency and terrorism in Iraq.

At the same time, we continue to monitor the
vigilance of military and security force leaders in
preventing civilian casualties and maintaining respect
for international humanitarian law during their
operations.

Over the same period, the Government of Iraq
has taken concrete action in the form of security,
political and economic measures to strengthen national
reconciliation and impose the rule of law. In April of
this year, the President, the Prime Minister and heads
of political parliamentary blocs issued a 15-point
statement calling on all parties and political blocs to
dissolve and disarm their militias, a move much
praised by the Iraqi public.

Let me note here the Government's successful
imposition of the rule of law in Basra, a city where the
authority of the State had been challenged by unlawful
militias, criminals and armed groups. The willingness
of the Government to confront head-on illegal
elements, not only in Basra but in Sadr City, Mosul -
and indeed, anywhere in Iraq - is evidence of our
greater confidence and ability to boost security. It also
demonstrates the progress of the Iraqi security forces
and their capacity, with Multinational Force support, to
undertake increasingly difficult missions.

To consolidate these security gains, the ongoing
challenge for my Government is the equitable
provision of essential public services in order to raise
the standard of living for the Iraqi people. Electricity,
water, sanitation, health care and fuel are key
priorities.

At the same time, we are dealing with the
momentous humanitarian challenges caused by the
internal and external displacement of Iraqi people, in
particular securing for them a safe, dignified and
sustainable return home with the support of basic
services in order to reintegrate them into their
communities.

As a result of our security gains and the
perseverance of political and community leaders in
striving for national dialogue and reconciliation, Iraqis
have pulled together to reverse a potentially
devastating descent into sectarian war, and they have
forcefully rejected the extremist agendas that incite
conflict, hatred and civil strife in our country.

Significant political progress and critical strides
made on our ambitious legislative agenda have also
contributed to the consolidation of security and
reconciliation. We have successfully passed key
legislation, namely the Justice and Accountability Law,
the General Amnesty Law, the regional powers law
and, in 2008, the largest budget in our history, almost
40 per cent of which is allocated to public
infrastructure and services.

Our Council of Representatives is hard at work to
follow up with other pending laws, including the
electoral and hydrocarbon laws that will be crucial to
further promoting national reconciliation through
expanding political inclusiveness and through reaching
consensus on the equitable sharing of Iraq's resources.
Iraq has also ratified the United Nations Conventions
against corruption and against torture, demonstrating
our commitment to transparent, accountable
governance and to upholding human rights.

Clearly, there have been delays in formulating
and passing certain key legislation. 1 would remind the
Security Council that Iraq is still recovering from
decades of war, sanctions and dictatorship, which tore
the very fabric of our society. Building trust to reach a
consensus on a common national agenda takes time and
space, but there is a renewed political will to bring
negotiations to a closure.

We now have a unique opportunity to address
difficult, divisive issues and strengthen our national
unity through the constitutional review process,
culminating in reaching agreements on constitutional
amendments on federalism, resource sharing and other
issues. By expanding political dialogue and further
integrating those groups that renounce violence in
favour of peaceful political participation, we are taking
further steps towards sustainable peace and stability.
We look with confidence towards our next major
milestone: the provincial elections scheduled for
October, which will be contested in an open, inclusive
and dynamic political environment and which will
mark the completion of one full electoral cycle.

With respect to the economy, in 2007 Iraq
considerably improved its budget execution, spending
nearly triple what it spent in 2006, despite difficult
conditions. This result was praised at the recent
ministerial Conference of the International Compact
with Iraq held in Stockholm.

Significantly, the volume of oil output is at its
highest level since 2004. We have also managed,
through sound monetary policy, to reduce annual core
inflation from 36 per cent at the end of 2006 to the
present 16 per cent, to the great benefit of all Iraqis.
Since 2003, unemployment has dropped over 10 per
cent, while annual per capita income has increased
considerably, from $465 to $2,100. The International
Monetary Fund predicts that prospects will continue to
improve in the coming years and described Iraq's
achievements under the standby agreement as
impressive and remarkable in the given context.

Iraq is a wealthy country, and although our
resources are clearly underutilized, we have become
the principal funder of all our reconstruction efforts.
We recently concluded the first annual Review
Conference of the International Compact with Iraq in
Stockholm, which has provided a key framework for
international cooperation in all spheres of political
governance and socio-economic recovery.

Through a series of Government initiatives, Iraq
will work with its international development partners
on reconstruction to increasingly leverage Iraq's own
resources so that it may realize its full potential
through mutually beneficial cooperative partnerships in
the region and beyond, reducing reliance on financial
donors.

Regionally, the relationships between Iraq and its
neighbours continue to develop through direct dialogue
and diplomacy. The series of neighbouring countries
meetings, expanded to include the permanent members
of the Security Council, the world's leading economies
and other key countries and organizations, is now an
ongoing Iraqi-led process recognized and supported by
the United Nations. It has led to concrete mechanisms
through which Iraq and its neighbours can address
issues of common interest and resolve issues through
the Working Groups on Energy, Border Security and
Refugees. Efforts continue to resolve issues such as
war repatriation, debt relief and water.

We are pleased to note the decisions of the United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Jordan and other countries to
appoint ambassadors to Baghdad, and we urge our
other neighbours and other Arab countries to follow
this example.

Security continues to be the leading concern and
the foremost responsibility of the Iraqi Government, as
well as the principal prerequisite for progress in the
fields of reconstruction and social and economic
development. Even though the Iraqi security forces are
now better trained, better equipped and greater in
number, they still fall short of being able to
independently assume full responsibility for the
maintenance of security throughout the Iraqi territory
and thus to allow the Multinational Force to complete
its mandate. In particular, the support of the
Multinational Force may prove essential to support the
forthcoming provincial elections in October.

The Government of Iraq continues to be grateful
to Multinational Force for its vital contribution towards
establishing security and stability in Iraq and towards
developing the self-sufficiency of Iraqi forces. Iraq
continues to need the assistance of the Multinational
Force, whose mandate is now due for review, pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1790 (2007) and in
accordance with Iraq's request in a letter from Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki to the Council, dated
7 December 2007 and annexed to that resolution.

The Government of Iraq welcomes the continued
support of the Multinational Force, consistent with its
mandate as set forth in resolution 1546 (2004),
including the tasks and arrangements specified in the
letters annexed thereto, as extended by resolutions

1637 (2005), 1723 (2006) and 1790 (2007),
recognizing that the mandate may be terminated upon
request of the Government of Iraq.

I bring it to the attention of the Security Council
that Iraq is currently negotiating bilateral strategic
agreements with the United States to provide the
framework for security arrangements that will address
Iraq's security needs covered at present by the
Multinational Force's mandate. The strategic
framework agreement and the status-of-forces
agreement, together as one single package, should
reflect the progress achieved in the development of the
Iraqi security forces. The transition from multilateral to
bilateral security arrangements will entail transparent
processes, subject to the approval of the elected
Council of Representatives and preserving the
sovereignty and national interests of Iraq and the Iraqi
people.

The Government of Iraq also welcomes the
continuation of the current arrangements regarding the
Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) and its International
Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB) as extended
in resolution 1790 (2007). My Government reaffirms
the important roles of the DFI and the IAMB in
ensuring the responsible management of Iraq's
resources to the optimal benefit of the Iraqi people. It
also acknowledges the contribution of those
mechanisms towards strengthening Iraq's partnership
with the international community through transparency
and accountability in resource distribution. We further
request a reconsideration of Iraq's compensatory
obligations, which have increased considerably in
magnitude over the last year and which continue to put
pressure on the Iraqi budget and reconstruction and
development programmes.

My Government wishes to extend its appreciation
for the work of United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, as set forth in resolution 1770 (2007), and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in recognition of the invaluable
support they are providing to help Iraq address the
challenges it faces today. We also note, and encourage,
the trend to increase the presence of the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in Iraq.

As Iraq continues to pursue its strong drive
towards full normalized integration into the regional
and international communities and the globalized
economy, we are burdened by the heavy legacy of debt
incurred by the previous regime. Iraq seeks assistance
from its neighbours and the international community to
find solutions and support us in overcoming the
financial obligations that were bestowed upon us, so
that we can all benefit from mutually beneficial
economic ties that will contribute towards the
prosperity and stability of Iraq and the region.

Finally, there is a renewed sense of optimism for
my country. We have proved we can be successful in
Iraq, and my Government is confident of recovery.
This is once again an important year for the people of
Iraq, and we call upon the family of nations to stand
with us in solidarity and in hope.

