Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Allow
me to join others in expressing my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his latest report on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) and to France for having
convened this open debate. I thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh
for his insightful briefing, and I also thank Ms. Virginia
Gamba for her briefing and warmly congratulate her on
her appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
while paying tribute to the efforts of her predecessor,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui.

The Kingdom of Thailand aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

Children represent a quarter of the world's
population and are key to our future development and
prosperity. In situations of conflict, children must be
protected so that we can safeguard their potential to
engage in society and become modern voices for change
and progress. The Kingdom of Thailand condemns the
involvement of children in violence and armed conflict.
In that context, we recognize the important efforts
made so far on this issue, such as the adoption of the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments, as well as
the convening of the conference on protecting children
from war, held in Paris in February.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
more than 4,000 violations of children's rights were
committed in 2016 by Government forces. The best
way to address that phenomenon is to ensure the
universality and the full and effective implementation
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and all
of its Optional Protocols. For the same period, more
than 11,500 verified violations were attributed to
non-State groups. That is an alarming trend, and the
best approach to address the problem is to engage and
cooperate with the States involved and take careful
account of the unique context of each conflict. In any
case, all parties to a conflict must respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and put a
definitive end to the culture of impunity.

We all have an important role to play on this issue,
and we should do so together. Civil society, the media,
academic institutions and Governments must work in
concert in order to keep pace with the evolving tactics
of non-State actors, including online recruitment and
aggressive use ofsocial media. In that regard, awareness-
raising and education can provide the best defence for
children who would otherwise fall prey to those tactics.
At the same time, the international community must
continue to address the long-term impacts on children
who have been recruited by formulating adequate plans
for their reintegration and rehabilitation.

The Secretary-General's annual report plays an
important role in guiding Member States in their efforts
to strengthen child protection in situations of armed
conflict. For that reason, all listing efforts should be
objective and comprehensive, based on credible and
impartial information. In that regard, we commend
the work of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in enhancing dialogue with Member States
in the preparation of the report. We also support its
efforts in exploring new ideas so as to ensure the
full implementation of its mandate, particularly by
conducting further relevant research and analysis,
as well as focusing more on raising awareness on
the issue. That approach could be particularly useful
if conducted at the regional level by engaging with
regional organizations.

The suffering endured by children in armed
conflict is not acceptable. The international community
must work to put an end to that suffering, and those
responsible must be brought to justice.

