Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council is meeting yet again to
discuss the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab
territories under the agenda item "The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question". This
item is centred exclusively on the Arab-Israeli conflict,
the Palestinian question and how to compel Israel to
end its occupation of Arab land in implementation of
resolutions of international legality, including
resolutions of the Security Council. It does not refer to
any other issues that are not covered by the historical
definition of the item.

However, instead of focusing on the substance of
this agenda item, some unfortunately attempt to engage
the Council on other issues in order to dilute the
essence of the item, under which the Security Council
seeks to effectively engage in reviving the peace
process, ending Israeli occupation of occupied Arab
land and establishing a Palestinian State on the basis of
the 1967 borders. However, the reality on the ground
reaffirms that there is a systematic Israeli pattern of
behaviour that some do not want to hold to
international accountability. This pattern contradicts
the core provisions of international law and
international humanitarian law and demonstrates
Israel's disregard for international legality.

Among Israel's most egregious practices are its
great colonialist theft of territory through its history of
settlement, including land confiscation, the demolition
of homes, the expulsion of citizens from their homes
and replacing them with foreign settlers, the
construction of the racist separation wall, the
Judaization of occupied Jerusalem, support for settlers'
oppressive and extremist racist practices against
unarmed Palestinians, under the protection of the
occupying forces, and the unjust imposition of the
blockade against Gaza.

On 15 May and 5 June, on the anniversary of
Israel's occupation of their land, Israel fired live
bullets at unarmed demonstrators, claiming the lives of
many martyrs and wounding a great number of people.
That is the underlying aggressive nature of the State
terrorism practiced by Israel. Israel continues to refuse
to return the occupied Syrian Golan to its motherland,
Syria, and to implement resolutions of the international
community, in particular resolution 497 (1981), which
declared the annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan
null and void and without international legal effect.

Israel pursues its policy of intimidating and
oppressing Syrian citizens in the Golan. It continues to
confiscate land, expand settlements and plunder the
riches and resources of the Golan, distorting its history
and robbing its historic monuments. It continues to
plant mines on the territory.

Comprehensive and fair peace will be achieved
only through complete Israeli withdrawal from all Arab
territories to the 4 July 1967 lines, and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. The Security Council
is called on to sincerely and effectively commit to
finding a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict without
delay or partial solutions. The Security Council has an
important opportunity to prove its ability to play its
Charter role by supporting the internationally backed
and fair Palestinian request to establish an independent
State on its territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. That would be achieved by accepting Palestine
as a full Member of the United Nations, pursuant to the
resolutions of international legality.

In that regard, we recall General Assembly
resolution 273 (III) of 1949, which established the
conditions for Israel's admission as a full Member of
the United Nations: its commitment to the principles of
the Charter and respect for the rights of the Palestinian
people to establish its independent State and of
Palestinian refugees to return to the homes from which
they had been forcibly expelled.

However, some speakers have used non-objective
and exaggerated language in their statements to
describe recent domestic events. They have sought to
engage the Council in internal affairs on fragile and
unfounded pretexts that have nothing to do with the
Council's role or responsibilities. That is why I wish to
underscore that the goal and substance of this agenda
item are clear. I would like to make the following
points.

Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad has declared a
comprehensive reform programme that the Government
has begun to implement to promote democratic
national reconciliation and to increase the participation
of all citizens in the political and economic process, as
well as to sanctify national unity and to ensure law and
order for all citizens. We sent a letter to the Secretary-
General, issued under the symbol S/2011/353, in which
we stated our position vis-a-vis recent developments in
Syria.
Syria has held consultations on new bills
concerning pluralism and the participation of political
parties in Syria. The consultations recommended the
establishment of a supreme human rights council and a
political committee to revise the Constitution to ensure
pluralism and to promote human rights, social justice,
the rule of law and the rights of women and children.

I wish to comment on the statements made by
certain representatives when a group of young people
demonstrated outside the French and United States
embassies to voice their views on interference by those
embassies in our internal affairs. We stress that the
Syrian authorities are committed to protecting the
security of those two embassies. We recall that the
Syrian embassies in certain countries have been
attacked and that the countries where those attacks
took place did little to protect them.

It is clear that any internal reform undertaken by
a Member of the United Nations should comply with
the United Nations Charter and should be respected.
Those outside the country advocating reform should
not deliberately ignore serious reform measures or
undermine the Syrian model of tolerance and
coexistence among all citizens. They should not draw
conclusions from or base their analysis on fabricated
and false information. They should ignore neither our
reform efforts nor the sabotage and crimes being
committed by organized terrorist groups in Syria.

We would have hoped to hear in those statements
even a single word of condemnation of Israel's use of
live fire against unarmed civilian demonstrators on
15 May and 5 June. That is the behaviour at the heart
of this issue and falls within the purview of the
Security Council's mandate, pursuant to relevant
resolutions.

