Ms. McAskie: Let me thank the representatives
of Mali and Jamaica and the other speakers who have
given their support for the strengthening of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
I can assure the Council that these words are actually
extremely useful to us, and that OCHA, although it is
mostly voluntarily funded, is a Secretariat department
and must abide by Secretariat rules and regulations and
go through the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ), the Fifth
Committee and so on to establish posts in the field. So
concrete measures of support from the Council on our
operations are extremely useful to us in speeding up
these processes.

The United Kingdom asked specific questions
about the appointment of a humanitarian coordination
and the timing of the establishment of a subregional
office. On the latter, we are working now to establish a
small unit in Abijan that would work on early warning
and contingency planning but would also provide a
base to an OCHA person, whom we would base in one
of the three Mano River Union countries to provide the
information and strategic analysis functions and a link
to the United Nations Office for West Africa. We are
working on that now. The appointment of the
humanitarian coordinator is under discussion with the
concerned agencies, and we would hope to make it
quickly; I cannot give a specific date.

The United Kingdom also asked a question about
the movement of refugees out of the Languette. With
40,000 already moved out, we are anticipating that
another 30,000 will move in the next two weeks. I will
come back to that in response to the questions from the
representative of France.

In response to Colombia's question about the
relationship of the United Nations Secretariat with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), speaking very specifically for OCHA,
although we do not have direct cooperation with
ECOWAS on humanitarian delivery, obviously - that
is not their role - we are working very closely with
them on early warning and, in fact, are assisting them
in strengthening early-warning mechanisms.

The representative of France asked some very
specific questions about refugee return movement. I
can assure him that I think we all agree that this is a
major concern. We all agree on the basic principle of
voluntary return and on the need for security in the
country of asylum, which has often been linked to the
question of proximity to borders. As Council members
know, there is a paragraph in the Organization of
African Unity Convention that refers to an estimated
distance from borders, recommended at 50 kilometres.
The situation that arose in the Languette proves the
usefulness of that particular guidance, and as such the
movement of refugees to areas away from the border
has been ongoing now since 3 May. It is true that
original plans included the possibility of only the able-
bodied walking, with the others being trucked. But in
fact arrangements have been made to truck everyone
out, so people are being driven to the new camps. That
is why the exercise is taking slightly longer; it actually
would have been faster if they had moved on foot. A
major obstacle has been finding the trucks. As to
whether this means that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
would no longer provide assistance to refugees in the
Languette, the answer is, yes, it would not. When we
have a major policy with the Government of Guinea
and the international community to move them away,
an offer of assistance to refugees in the Languette
would mean the failure of the project. We cannot offer
assistance to the same people in two spots; it is not
consistent. That does not mean that those in need of
humanitarian assistance within those areas will not be
getting some assistance. A number of major non-
governmental organizations, supported by the United
Nations, will continue to operate in the area -
Me'decins sans Frontieres, Action contre la Faim and
Caritas 4 for example, will continue to offer
assistance with our support.

On the question of the slowing down of the boat
traffic 4 yes; there are very few candidates, actually,
for return by boat. It is not a deliberate policy of
UNHCR or the International Organization for
Migration to stop the boat traffic. The population of
Forecariah has diminished, but in addition the Guinean
Government is trying to encourage refugees to stay
away from Conakry because of the overcrowding there.
I believe my colleague covered the point on the
Kambia crossing. There is no doubt that the opening of
the Forecariah-Kambia route in the future will offer a
significant opportunity for the safer and more
comfortable return of refugees. Finally, the report
being prepared by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, with support from OCHA, in accordance
with paragraph 9 of resolution 1346 (2001), should be
ready in a few days.

The last question of which I took note was the
question from Singapore about juxtaposing the
expenditure of UNAMSIL and the tribunal and
spending on development and humanitarian aid.
Obviously, I do not have a figure for the totality of
development and humanitarian aid for the region,
because much of it comes from non-United Nations
sources. Suffice it to say that for this year, if we add up
the funds that we have collected from the appeal for
Sierra Leone and the appeal for the region, it totals
about $25 million, and we are already well into the
month of May. So we will be actively seeking
additional support.

Finally, I was very pleased to hear the support for
the regional approach. I think we are all aligned on
that. But that should not blind us to the fact that
solutions must also play out at the country level. In
Sierra Leone, the end of war is only the beginning. I
think that we have in Sierra Leone a classic example of
where the international community, the international
institutions and the United Nations need to work
together to avoid any question of a humanitarian gap.
As I said, this is a classic test case for the international
community.

The lesson we have learned in Guinea is that the
international community has tools at its disposal to
assist refugees and countries in crisis, but not to assist
host countries of refugees. Guinea has suffered from
this for a long time, and now that it has a humanitarian
crisis of its own, we have to look at the link between
massive underdevelopment and regional instability.

Finally, on Liberia, the third of the three
countries, the deteriorating humanitarian situation is
only the tip of the iceberg. Given its long isolation,
there is very little capacity in Government, civil society
or the international agencies present on the ground.
When conditions permit - and I realize that some of
those conditions are quite strict - there will be a need
for a long-term and in-depth approach to Liberia.

If you, Mr. President, will permit me to do so, I
should like to end on a lighter note in our discussion of
a serious subject. You referred to the fact that this was
a man-made disaster, not a natural disaster. I can assure
you that that is one expression on which we are not
seeking gender equity.

