Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Today, the Security
Council delivers on its commitment to commemorate
the twentieth anniversary of the opening for signature
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
on 24 September 1996. Malaysia wishes to convey its
appreciation to delegations and contributors involved in
negotiating the text for their constructive engagement
and tremendous work in that regard. We remain hopeful
that resolution 2310 (2016) is a positive move, from the
standpoint of the Council, to encourage the early entry
into force of the CTBT. In that context, Malaysia voted
in favour of the resolution.

It must also be emphasized that our commitment
and that of the international community towards
general and complete disarmament can be realized only
through the entry into force of the Treaty. We wish to
put on record that, while we need to see incrementally
positive progress to ensure that the CTBT enters into
force, we iterate that these measures do not have the
same permanent and legally binding effect to end
nuclear-weapon testing and all other nuclear explosions.

My delegation notes with serious concern that the

CTBT has yet to enter into force. As we celebrate two
decades since the Treaty was opened for signature in
1996, we firmly believe that more could be done to
facilitate the entry into force of the Treaty, including
maintaining all existing moratoriums on nuclear-
weapon-test explosions.

As the CTBT contains no provisions that commit
the nuclear-weapon States and States with nuclear-
weapon capabilities to total nuclear disarmament, the
call enshrined in the Treaty cannot be disregarded and
needs to be further recognized. My delegation has
some reservations that resolution 2310 (2016) does not
sufficiently recognize that fact.

While we support the spirit and intent of the
commemoration of the CTBT resolution, the resolution
is not a substitute for, nor should it be construed as,
a sufficient effort by all CTBT signatory States,
particularly the nuclear-weapon States. Therefore, it
is crucial that States with nuclear-weapon capabilities
undertake their responsibilities to ratify the Treaty. In
that respect, we urge the annex 2 States to do so at the
earliest possibility.

Our responsibility is henceforth far from complete.
We remain committed to working together in good
faith and with strengthened resolve to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 2310 (2016). While fully
understanding that the text is a product of constructive
negotiations, the fact remains that the challenge ahead
lies in ensuring that there should be no precedent on
referencing documents in Council resolutions that
can be agreed to by only a handful of States. That is
the basis for Malaysia's position of ensuring such a
resolution secures the broadest support possible, and
that the concerns of all members of the Council are
taken on board in a balanced manner. Otherwise, this
negates the authority and credibility of a resolution that
is meant to provide guidance in our common pursuit of
maintaining international peace and security. In terms
of being constructive, allowing all Council members an
equal opportunity and ample time to carefully review
the provisions of the text would encourage our joint
effort in facilitating implementation.

Malaysia also underscores that it is the responsibility
of all members of the international community to abide
by the obligations outlined in the regime under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
On that basis, the pursuit of general and complete
nuclear disarmament must remain, first and foremost, a
shared and enduring commitment of all of us here.

