Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank the Secretary-General, The Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ms. Qadeem for their impressive and
inspiring briefings. Let me also thank you personally,
Mr. Minister, for convening and presiding over this
important debate.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

The Secretary-General emphasized the
responsibility of all Member States to seize
opportunities for mediation in order to prevent or
manage conflict and to build and sustain peace. In
that light, today I will focus on three specific points:
first, the role of the Security Council in that context;
secondly, the importance of inclusivity in mediation;
and, thirdly, the relevance of mediation in all phases of
the conflict cycle.

On my first point, the role of the Security
Council under the Charter of the United Nations,
as set out in Article 33 of the Charter, on the pacific
settlement of disputes, the Security Council has a
responsibility to resolve and to prevent conflicts. An
important instrument in that context is mediation,
and we commend the Secretary-General for making
that his priority. As the nature of conflicts changes,
the Security Council and the United Nations need to
find new approaches to address new challenges. Let
me highlight examples such as Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, especially, Syria, where
civil wars rage and non-State actors play decisive
roles. Those examples demonstrate that we require an
adaptation of the existing instruments.

The international community is struggling to
meet such challenges. That often results in a wide
array of mediation initiatives by States and by
non-governmental organizations. What is lacking is
coordination. In many cases, the United Nations is well
placed to provide that coordination with an ambition
to build sustainable peace. The Council has its own
role to play in supporting the efforts of the United
Nations. However, the Council needs early warning to
take early action, and we appreciate the Secretariat's
ongoing efforts for more proactive reporting. While it
is the Council's role to support the use of mediation
and other tools mentioned in the Charter, we encourage
the use of such tools before situations become a threat
to international peace and security. That may benefit
situations such as those in Cameroon and Nicaragua.

On my second point, the importance of inclusive
mediation strategies, an inclusive approach ensures
the involvement of all stakeholders, allowing civil
society representatives, for example, to reach out to
communities and to convey grievances. A good example
of that is the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation,
which pulled the Central African Republic back from
the brink of conflict.

As other speakers have done, let me also focus on
the specific role of women. Resolution 1325 (2000) not
only recognizes the effects of conflict on women but
also refers particularly to the essential contribution
of women in peacebuilding. Women must be equal
partners in peace processes, particularly in mediation
efforts. Examples of effective efforts include the
Mediterranean Women Mediation Network, FemWise
and the Nordic Women Mediator's Network, and we pay
tribute to those initiatives. We encourage the United
Nations to seek active cooperation with networks such
as those, as well as to appoint more women as envoys.

On my third point, let me emphasize the importance
of using mediation throughout the conflict cycle and of
integrating it in the sustaining peace agenda. Successful
mediation prevents the escalation of violence and helps
to avert mass atrocity crimes. In addition, mediation
efforts must go further than finding compromise among
the parties. They must lead to solutions that are in line
with international law, accountability and transitional
justice. In our View, the involvement of relevant
actors such as the African Union (AU), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, religious leaders and organizations is key. The
mediation in the Gambia in 2016 and 2017 as part of
the joint effort of ECOWAS, the AU and the United
Nations is a good example of successful collaboration
for mediation.

As has been said, mediation is key to prevention.
To quote the Secretary-General, the television cameras
are not there when a crisis is avoided. Prevention takes
place under the radar and is discreet. Unfortunately, it
is therefore often forgotten. Because it is forgotten, it is
underfunded. Prevention is at the core of the work of the
United Nations, and currently it is funded by voluntary
contributions. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a
long-term donor in that field and will continue to be so.
However, what we need is assessed contributions for
sustainable prevention action by the Secretary-General.

Moving forward, we must live up to the
commitments stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations. We must ensure that mediation processes are
inclusive. We must prioritize prevention and use tools
such as mediation, address root causes and fund the
mediation efforts of the Secretary-General properly.

In conclusion, there are no quick fixes to the
conflicts that define our generation. We must continue
to support the Secretary-General and the High-level
Advisory Board on Mediation in the efforts to expand
mediation work in the context of prevention and of
sustaining peace. Enhancing the capacity of the United
Nations is key to the prevention agenda. It is our joint
responsibility to help the Secretary-General to realize
his priority.

