Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to lend my voice
to those who have welcomed you in our midst today,
Mr. President. We believe that your presence at this
debate is profoundly indicative of the prominence that
Jordan accords the question of the Middle East. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

The prolonged stalemate in the Middle East
process is impeding an early resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and causing considerable concern
across the world, as you, Sir, must have heard today
from the speakers. Indeed, the internal dynamics in
Israel and Palestine appear to be stalling a return to
negotiations. We encourage the leadership on both sides
to demonstrate the necessary political will to allow for
a resumption of negotiations in consonance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and other agreements between the parties.
At a meeting held in Munich in February, the
Quartet called for a prompt resumption of talks between
the parties. Nigeria endorses the position of the Quartet
on the need for talks to take into account Israel's
security concerns while respecting the aspirations
of Palestine for statehood. Nigeria unequivocally
reiterates its support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace and
security, as the only basis for a final resolution of the
question of Palestine.

In his final briefing to the Security Council
as Special Coordinator last month (see S/PV.7417),
Mr. Robert Serry urged the Council to take the lead
and present a framework for negotiations between the
parties. We share his View that such a course of action
is the only viable way to preserve the goal of a two-
State solution.

Nigeria is particularly concerned about the
difficult humanitarian situation in Gaza occasioned by
last summer's war. Much more remains to be done in
the Gaza reconstruction effort, which has been largely
hindered by an acute shortage of funds. Six months after
a donor conference was held in Cairo, only a fraction of
the funds pledged have been redeemed. We encourage
donors to honour the pledges they made to expedite the
reconstruction of Gaza.

United Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) carrying out vital operations
in Gaza need to be supported financially. UNRWA's
activities have been severely constrained by a lack of
funding. Greater commitment by donors would not
only bolster the activities of UNRWA, but it would also
facilitate its service delivery to needy Palestinians and
prevent further deterioration in the dire humanitarian
crisis in Gaza.

Turning to Yemen, Nigeria is deeply concerned by
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country.
Reports indicate that over 250,000 refugees have
been affected by the ongoing conflict. We note with
appreciation that, despite the challenging circumstances,
United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners
continue to coordinate with the Yemeni Red Crescent
and local authorities to delivery emergency assistance
to those in dire need. We pay tribute to the humanitarian
workers on the ground who sometime risk their lives in
the course of fulfilling their duties.

A cessation ofhostilities is vital to ameliorating the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and restoring peace
and stability to the country. Nigeria therefore urges the
parties to the ongoing conflict to return to the political
process. Ultimately, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, as well
as the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference
involving all parties in Yemen, constitutes the most
viable framework for sustainable peace in the country.
Nigeria's wish for Yemen is a peaceful, prosperous,
united and democratic country where cultural diversity
will be a vital source of strength.

