Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): I would like to welcome
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, to the Security Council
and to thank him for his briefing and his detailed
report. My delegation has listened carefully to the
Prosecutor's message; he has left no doubt about who
he believes is responsible for the situation in Darfur.

Croatia is very disappointed by the continued
failure of the Government of Sudan to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court. The appointment of
the indicted ICC fugitive Mr. Ahmad Harun as Minister
of State for Humanitarian Affairs in the Government
serves as the most tangible proof of this and underlines
a blatant disregard for the victims - but also for the
Court and its Prosecutor and, not least, for the Security
Council, which referred the situation in Sudan to the
Court in its Chapter-VII resolution 1593 (2005).

Considering the gravity and clarity of the
Prosecutor's report, my delegation takes the position
that strong action by the Council is needed to solicit
the cooperation of the Government of Sudan. In that
regard, we support the Costa Rican draft presidential
statement that has been circulated, and we thank the
delegation of Costa Rica for its timely preparation.

My delegation reiterates its dismay at the
situation, as expressed by the European Union
declaration of 31 March 2008. It reiterates that the
International Criminal Court is an essential means of
promoting respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights, thus contributing to freedom,
security, justice and the rule of law, as well as
contributing to the preservation of peace and the
strengthening of international security.

We understand the sensitivities on the ground and
the importance of keeping all tracks on the move,
including the political one. But we strongly believe
that there can be no lasting - and especially, no
comprehensive - peace without justice. Allowing
impunity to persist is not a prudent way to seek
political settlements.

So, once again we call on the Government of
Sudan to comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and to cooperate unconditionally with the
ICC, as is requested in resolution 1593 (2005).

Finally, we would also like to reiterate the
European Union announcement that the Union will
support further measures against those who bear
responsibility for Sudan's failure to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court if that failure to cooperate
continues.

