Mr. Eler (Turkey): We thank the Nigerian
presidency for organizing an open debate on this
important issue, and welcome the first-ever stand-alone
draft resolution on security sector reform (SSR).

One of the most important questions on post-
conflict peacebuilding relates to the ways and means
to ensure the viability of peace. Security sector
reform lies at the core of this debate. A mismanaged
and dysfunctional security sector can significantly
challenge sustainable development, stability and
peace. On the other hand, a comprehensive, coherent
and coordinated approach to security sector reform
will help form functional, effective and economically
viable States. As such, approaching security sector
reform as part of a comprehensive and inclusive
peacebuilding strategy and coupling our efforts with
the broader framework of strengthening the rule of law
is of utmost importance. Also, support to the security
sector, especially in terms of resources, training and
institutional capacity-building, should continue after
the termination of peacekeeping operations, if needed.

The role of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund in security sector reform is crucial in assisting
national authorities to define and implement a credible
security reform strategy. Every society has its own
particular structures, needs and experiences with
conflict. The experience of the past 20 years has shown
that one-size-fits-all approaches do not produce viable
results. It should be the primary responsibility of
the host country to define the shape and direction of
security sector reform.

On the other hand, the norms and principles that have
been developed by the United Nations and elaborated
in the Secretary-General's reports and United Nations
documents provide a general framework that should be
taken into account in security sector reform. Rule oflaw
and human rights standards are of particular importance
in that regard. While governments have the central role
to play, SSR activities must be extended to include the
broader population and ensure the needs of all citizens
in an inclusive manner. In addition, collaboration
with all relevant stakeholders, including regional and
subregional organizations, domestic stakeholders and
civil society is essential to preventing duplication and
to making optimal use of scarce resources.

Needless to say, it is necessary to sufficiently
address the root causes of conflicts, the solutions of
which lie at the very heart of communities and groups
in terms of their aspirations and legitimate wishes.
Political reconciliation among the parties to a conflict
through mediation, negotiation and facilitation as
the main instruments is among the primary methods
to be employed in the peacebuilding endeavour.
Mainstreaming gender issues and ensuring women's
participation in security sector reform, as well as the
more general peace processes and conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, recovery and mediation
efforts is of utmost importance.

Turkey prioritizes security sector reform activities
as part of its global engagement for peace. Turkish
peacekeepers continue to serve in various United
Nations, NATO and European Union missions across
the globe, including in Afghanistan, Africa, the
Balkans and the Middle-East, where they contribute to
the training of security personnel as well as capacity-
and institution-building of military and security forces.

In the same vein, Turkey has robust security
cooperation, particularly with Afghanistan, Somalia
and other countries in Africa, the Middle East and
Central Asia on a wide range of issues, from providing
technical assistance and strengthening civilian and law
enforcement institutions to providing training courses
to law enforcement officials. Bilateral agreements have
been signed with a large number of countries including
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Somalia, Mongolia, Libya, C6te D'Ivoire and
many countries in South-Eastern Europe, Central Asia
and Africa, on various aspects of support to security
reform.

Training is prioritized by Turkey. Between 1997
and 2013, more than 20,000 foreign law enforcement
officials from 54 countries - mainly in Africa, the
Middle East and Central Asia i benefitted from
various professional and vocational training courses
held by the Turkish National Police. The Police
Vocational Training Centre in Sivas, which has trained
more than 1,500 Afghan National Police cadets since
2011, is only one example. Likewise, hundreds ofpolice
officer candidates from various countries have attended
graduate or undergraduate studies at the Turkish Police
Academy. The Turkish International Academy Against
Drugs and Organized Crime, established in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
has been playing an important role in boosting regional
efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized crime
through its training and capacity-building programmes
for countries in need.

Solutions in the field of security sector reform
can be viable only if they are applied within a
comprehensive framework of peacebuilding,
comprising several elements in the humanitarian,
development, democratization and governance fields.
Turkey employs this comprehensive, multidimensional
and synchronized approach in places such as Somalia,
South-Eastern Europe and Afghanistan, enriching its
efforts in the security area to include humanitarian
aid, local development, the construction of basic
infrastructure, education, health and support to peace
processes.

Let me conclude by thanking the Nigerian
presidency, Member States and all relevant United
Nations bodies that engage in conducting and enhancing
the important practice of security sector reform.

