Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I would like to thank President Fausto Pocar,
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, President Dennis Byron
and Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow for their
briefings on the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
China has taken full note of the continued progress in
the work of both Tribunals, and we welcome this
progress. We also have confidence and expectations
regarding the full implementation of the completion
strategies of the two Tribunals.

Six months ago, my delegation pointed out (in this Council) that the successful implementation of the
Tribunals' completion strategies relies on three key
elements. First, both Tribunals need to improve their
efficiency in trial proceedings. Secondly, countries of
the regions need to play their role in these proceedings.
Thirdly, countries in the regions need to cooperate with
both Tribunals.

The latest reports of the Tribunals set out a
number of highly effective measures for improving
efficiency in their proceedings. The Security Council
should fully acknowledge these measures.

With regard to the referral of cases involving
intermediate and lower-ranking accused to competent
national jurisdictions, we are very pleased that both
Tribunals have considered this to be an important part
of the implementation of their completion strategies.
Since this question is closely related to capacity-
building for the judiciaries of the countries in the
regions, much more remains to be done. These
countries should enjoy greater trust and be provided
with more opportunities. States that have the ability to
do so should provide further financial and technical
support so that the countries in question are fully
prepared for the gradual transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions at an early date. Both Tribunals seem to
have run into difficulty on the question of cooperation.
Therefore, we call upon those countries in a position to
do so and countries in the region to continue to
strengthen their cooperation with the two Tribunals.

China notes that the reports refer to the issue of
the legacies of the Tribunals. We welcome early
consideration of and implementation of various follow-
up mechanisms to the completion strategy. Meanwhile,
in China's view, the residual issues should be
approached with a mechanism that has been carefully
worked out on the basis of adherence to the principles
and timeline of the completion strategy, as established
by the Security Council.

In the process of the implementation of the
completion strategies, difficulties and complications
are to be expected. However, we believe that with
goodwill and strengthened cooperation, those issues
can be solved in a satisfactory manner.

