I congratulate Germany on its assumption the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July 2020, and I thank you, Sir, for organizing this quarterly debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive and detailed briefing. My delegation aligns itself with the statements submitted by the delegation of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and by the Permanent Representative of Senegal, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People (annexes 20 and 24, respectively). As the world battles the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, Israel continues with its settlement-expansion policy as well as the destruction of Palestinian structures, displacing men, women and children. I take this opportunity to remind Israel that settlements are illegal under international law and represent an obstacle to peace and the two-State solution. I also take this opportunity to welcome the 9 June decision of the Israeli High Court of Justice to strike down a 2017 law that enabled widespread expropriation of private Palestinian land and the retroactive legalization, under Israeli law, of thousands of housing units in Israeli settlements. While settlement expansion and the destruction of Palestinian-owned properties represent an obstacle to peace, the greatest threat to the two-State solution is that of annexation of parts of the West Bank. Namibia is extremely concerned at the proposal put forward by Prime Minister Netanyahu to begin annexation of parts of the West Bank. Any annexation would have serious implications in terms of international law, the two-State solution and the prospects for a negotiated, sustainable peace, as reiterated by the Secretary-General. Taking unilateral steps in any conflict will not bring about peace and stability. It will only create further division and tensions. As the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process warned in his briefing to the Security Council on 24 June: "Annexation could irrevocably alter the nature of Israeli-Palestinian relations. It risks upending more than a quarter of a century of international efforts in support of a future viable Palestinian State living in peace, security and mutual recognition with the State of Israel." (S/2020/596, annex 2) It also represents a threat to regional and international peace and security. We therefore call on and urge the Israeli Government to refrain from taking such steps. We also call on the international community to remain committed to the rule of international law and all United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016), and to the international compromise on a just solution for the Palestine question. COVID-19 represents a dire challenge for the Palestinian people. Namibia is particularly concerned about the situation of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, where the health system continues to face immense challenges. As of April 2020, 44 per cent of essential medicines and 30 per cent of essential medical supplies in the Strip had less than a month's stock remaining. The COVID-19 pandemic has also damaged Gaza's economy across all sectors. While the Palestinian people experience the same effects and consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic as the rest of the world, it should be recalled that their Government's ability to respond to its effects in the same way as an independent, sovereign State is far more challenged. I would like to express my deep appreciation for the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Its provision of vital services represents a stabilizing element in a region that continues to be the victim of violence. The importance of the Agency has only been reinforced through the essential emergency assistance it has provided to help Palestinian refugees confront the COVID-19 pandemic. Icall on the Security Council to remain dedicated to its Charter obligations by upholding its responsibilities and duties. If any form of annexation of the West Bank were to take place, Namibia would urge the Council to act urgently in response to any such action that would not only violate international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, but would also represent a threat to regional and international peace and security. I conclude by reiterating Namibia's long-standing and fervent support for, and solidarity with, the Palestinian people. The people of Palestine have fundamental rights to self-determination and independence. We must achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between Israelis and Palestinians, with the establishment of the two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders.
