Mr. De Almeida Filho: On behalf of the Guinea- Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am grateful for the invitation to brief the Security Council, and I recognize the excellent cooperation between the Council and the PBC. Since its establishment, in 2007, the configuration's primary focus has been to support the Governmentin addressing its reform agenda, including the 2016 Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)road map, and to tackle the challenges impeding stability and long- term development. While there has been notable progress over the years on peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, today the challenges to stability and development have deepened with the arrival of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic during a year of three transitions - first, the drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team; secondly, the country's transition to new political leadership, which has not been uneventful; and, thirdly, the closure of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau. During the past months, the Permanent Representative of Brazil, His Excellency Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho, has engaged with several experts and stakeholders to fully grasp current dynamics in the context of COVID-19 and the way forward for the country's peacebuilding priorities. I note in particular his engagement with the World Bank's Country Director for Guinea-Bissau, with whom he discussed the Bank's activities, its response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic outlook for Guinea-Bissau. He was pleased to learn that, while continuing to implement its ongoing portfolio, including increasing access to basic services and expanding economic opportunities, the Bank is also employing a multipronged approach to COVID-19 that includes a direct medical response as well as support for livelihoods, with a focus on agriculture and post-COVID-19 recovery needs. While the Bank's response to the crisis is encouraging, the economic outlook for Guinea-Bissau is fragile and uncertain. The pandemic's restrictions on mobility hamper exports, and the 4.5 per cent gross domestic product growth once projected by the World Bank before the pandemic could now be a contraction of roughly 3 per cent instead. The Bank continues to work closely with the broader humanitarian and development community on socioeconomic issues, as well as with the International Monetary Fund on key macroeconomic issues. Continued international engagement and sustained focus on the country's peacebuilding priorities will be critical to ensuring economic recovery and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau. In that context, Ambassador Costa Filho convened a meeting of the configuration on 24 June, with the participation of Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Fernando Delfim da Silva, Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Abdou Abarry, Permanent Representative of the Niger, Chair of ECOWAS, and Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, who provided an update on political developments and the COVID-19 pandemic in the country, and how both are impacting peacebuilding and the United Nations transition process. During the meeting, configuration members were deeply concerned that the institutional crisis and the outbreak of COVID-19 and its accompanying movement restrictions were hampering United Nations support for peacebuilding efforts, including political dialogue and urgent reforms such as the constitutional review, as well as the fight against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. Furthermore, members recognized that the poor socioeconomic situation risked further weakening social cohesion and community resilience and deepening gender inequalities. In the light of that, members emphasized the expectation for the Peacebuilding Commission to continue to play a catalysing role in helping to mobilize and sustain international and regional support for Guinea-Bissau's peacebuilding priorities, particularly for national development plans and the future United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework. Keeping in mind the simultaneous challenges of post-COVID-19 recovery and_ the UNIOGBIS transition, they also underscored that the PBC's attention to economic revitalization, the country's cooperation with international financial institutions and institution-building will be of particular relevance in the coming months. In addition, members recognized and valued the important role played by the Peacebuilding Fund in Guinea-Bissau, especially through projects aimed at dialogue on reforms, empowering women, fostering meaningful engagement with youth and promoting reconciliation and conflict resolution. I recognize the Fund as a unique avenue for assisting the United Nations country team during and after the transition in its critical functions linked to dialogue and stabilization, and I encourage Member States to consider additional support. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Peacebuilding Commission's commitment to UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team during this transition and to the immediate longer-term needs of the Bissau-Guinean people. I thank the members of the Security Council for their continued support for the configuration and for their interest.
