Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are honoured
that Micheline Bachelet, President of Chile, has
presided over this important Security Council debate.
We thank Ambassador Patriota and Ms. Gbowee for
their insightful briefings.

Peace and security, development and human rights
are the three pillars of the United Nations system and
collective security. Those pillars are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. General Assembly resolution
66/288, entitled "The Future We Want", adopted in
pursuance of the Rio+20 Conference, once again
established a firm correlation between sustainable
development and peace and security.

Poverty eradication; sustainable patterns of
consumption and production; sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth; reduction of inequalities;
fostering of equitable social development; and inclusion
and promotion of the integrated and sustainable
management of natural resources and ecosystems
create an enabling environment for peace and security
and gradually remove drivers of conflict. Draft goal 16
of the sustainable development goals, adopted in the
Open Working Group last year, stipulates the promotion
of peace and inclusive societies for sustainable
development. The Secretary-General, in his synthesis
report (A/69/700), says that participatory democracy
and free, safe and peaceful societies are both enablers
and outcomes of development.

Inclusive development shapes a salutary milieu for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The purpose of highlighting the correlation between
inclusive development and peace and security is not to
encourage the Security Council to take up the issues of
sustainable development or financing for development,
which are dealt with by the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, nor will the Security
Council have the capacity to do so. Those issues are
being rightfully addressed by the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the High-level Political
Forum, the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and other relevant forums. The
purpose is to promote synergy among various United
Nations bodies.

The Security Council and its peace operations
and missions are trying to resolve conflicts driven by
the lack of inclusive growth, inequitable distributing
of resources and weak institutions. The strategies to
resolve conflicts should therefore include economic
deprivation and marginalization. That is particularly
important in the post-conflict peacebuilding phase so
as to stem a relapse into conflict. A targeted focus on
development and long-term economic revitalization
in an inclusive manner is essential to achieving that
objective. Regional organizations and the Peacebuilding
Commission are ideally placed to build and strengthen
the nexus between security and development.

The President's concept note (S/2015/6, annex), so
ably written, goes beyond inclusive development. It
projects a holistic view of international security and
recommends inclusion as a way to effectively prevent
intra-State conflicts and asymmetric warfare that
undermine the governance of societies and international
peace and security. The prevention of conflicts remains
the primary responsibility of Member States, but in
conflict situations prevention requires a comprehensive
approach and the constant support of the international
community, particularly the Security Council. The
concept note has, in a synoptic manner, highlighted how
the Security Council has assisted in the management
of inclusive transitions, peace dialogues, electoral
processes and governance structures in Iraq, Yemen,
Mali, the Central African Republic and West Africa
and how nations like Rwanda, Burundi, Haiti have seen
a turnaround by pursuing national reconciliation and
inclusive development.

We endorse the President's view that peace
missions, under the guidance of the Security Council,
should continue to work for inclusive peace processes,
development and security. The very concept of
inclusion implies that the United Nations system should
work as a whole, and not operate in parts, in silos.
Nations must eliminate the exclusion, discrimination
and marginalization that lead to violence, strife and
conflict. With equal vigour, they should promote
national, territorial, religious, ethnic, racial, social
and cultural cohesion and inclusion. The Security
Council might consider issuing public documents on
lessons learned and best practices from various conflict
situations. Such publications could help decision
makers and peoples grappling with similar situations.

Finally, synergy on the issue of inclusion among
United Nations bodies does not mean they should
trespass on one another's mandated space but should
rather share experiences and perspectives aimed at
enhancing the United Nations system's effectiveness.
The jurisdictional boundaries of each forum must be
respected. The objective is to work towards lasting
peace and development that serves the people of the
world.

