Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
today's briefers for their informative briefings.

The United States recognizes the contribution that
contingents make in increasingly insecure environments
around the globe. We welcome the opportunity to work
together, through existing working groups, to make
peacekeeping as effective as possible. The United States
Views peacekeeping reforms through the lens of our
five peacekeeping principles. Peacekeeping missions
must support political solutions; have the cooperation
of the host country; possess realistic and achievable
mandates; have an exit strategy; and adjust to progress
and failure.

The United States has worked tirelessly over the
past two years to promote a culture of performance
within United Nations peacekeeping. That will improve
the ability of peacekeepers to carry out their mandates
effectively. The unanimous adoption of resolution 2436
(2018) made it clear that United Nations peacekeeping
performance and accountability are a Security
Council priority.

To that end, we support the recommendations
outlined by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The Panel recognized
that enhanced triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) is essential
to strengthening performance.

The United States consults extensively with host
countries, peacekeeping mission personnel, troop-
and police-contributing countries, the United Nations
Secretariat and fellow Security Council members to
gain valuable information about the realities on the
ground for each peacekeeping mission. We conduct
those consultations regularly in New York, Washington,
D.C., and capitals prior to the creation or renewal of
mandates. We will continue to do so.

That informal dialogue is an important mechanism
to discuss progress achieved, fluid dynamics on the
ground and areas for improvement with existing
peacekeeping mandates. It is important to keep the
discussions focused on the purpose and specific
requirements of the missions, including the protection
of civilians, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel and improved performance and
accountability. It is equally important to avoid overly
formalizing triangular consultations, as has been noted
by many of our colleagues here today. Adding layers of
unnecessary bureaucracy would ultimately weaken the
mandating process.

The United States notes that triangular
cooperation is already discussed in the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
The Working Group has reiterated its commitment
to hold consultations between itself and troop- and
police-contributing countries at different stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We would
encourage more TCC Member States to make greater
use of those forums by both attending and participating
in the discussions.

Triangular cooperation is also discussed in
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, which
reviews working methods for the Security Council
to, among other things, enhance interaction and
consultation between the Security Council and troop-
and police-contributing countries.

In addition to efforts to enhance triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and TCCs and PCCs, we must also remember there
are other forums where all Member States have an
opportunity to engage with the Secretariat and to
provide guidance on issues that impact United Nations
peacekeeping, in particular in the General Assembly
Fifth Committee and in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.

We are deeply concerned that recent negotiations
in the Fifth Committee on cross-cutting peacekeeping
policy issues were ultimately unsuccessful in
reaching a resolution owing to the parochial national
interests of a few Member States. That was a critical
missed opportunity for all Member States, including
TCCs and PCCs, to make recommendations on
peacekeeping policy.

In the continued spirit of Security Council
efficiency and effectiveness, we strongly encourage
future discussions on this topic to remain in existing
Security Council working groups. Those forums are the
best vehicles for discussions, especially on mandates.

