Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this interactive meeting
with the force commanders. They are doing an
excellent job under truly difficult conditions, and we
owe them our deepest gratitude. The insight they bring
from the hot spots of operational theatres is very
valuable, and we very much appreciate their presence
here today. In fact, we have always stressed the need to
improve the Council's access to military advice, not
only before mandate approvals and renewals but
throughout the whole life cycle of a mission. Today's
meeting thus provides a good example, which should
continue. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Alain Le Roy for his briefing.

Today, as requested, I will focus on practical
issues, but rather than making comments, will limit my
intervention to five sets of questions addressed to the
Force Commanders.

First, on mandates given by the Council, we all
agree that mandates should provide strategic and
political guidance that helps to address the operational
challenges that missions face in the field. They must
also be feasible and realistic, rather than theoretical
and overambitious in a way that fails to take into
account the limitations of specific missions. Do the
Force Commanders believe that is currently the case,
and how can the Council better craft mandates that
match the situation on the ground and are a better
guide in the field? I know that other colleagues have
also raised these questions.

Secondly, the linkage between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is crucial to attaining lasting peace. In
this regard, peacekeepers are often identified as early
peacebuilders. As the practitioners on the ground, do
the Commanders feel that way and, if so, are they
sufficiently equipped to discharge those peacebuilding
responsibilities? If not, who should lead peacebuilding
in the field?

The linkage between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is also seen as a reflection of the critical
relationship between security and development. That
point has been covered by my Brazilian colleague.
How do the Commanders see this connection, and do
they think there is a sufficient level of coordination and
cooperation between peacekeepers and development
actors, either on the ground, at the operational level, or
here, at Headquarters, at the strategic level?

Thirdly, without capacity no strategic guidance
can ensure the achievement of our political and
operational objectives. In that respect, what are the
most critical capacities that missions lack in the field,
and how could that gap be most effectively closed?

Fourthly, the need to improve the quality of
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries is constantly stressed, and we fully agree
with that, but what sorts of difficulties arise at the
operational level due to inadequate consultations at the
strategic level, and what might be the means of
redressing this problem?

My final question concerns interoperability. The
troops led by the Force Commanders are from different
countries and represent varied cultures, thus ensuring
that interoperability among them must be a massive
challenge. An effort is ongoing in the Secretariat to
generate standardized training models and a global
training network, which we support. But what are the
problems that the Commanders currently face, and how
can we help them overcome them? I know these
questions require long and detailed answers, which
may keep us here longer, but I wanted to highlight
them as areas where we could greatly benefit from the
first-hand input of our Force Commanders.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
the Force Commanders who are present here and ask
them to convey our sincere gratitude to the servicemen
and women in blue helmets who are putting their lives
in danger every day and night in order to maintain
peace and security.

