Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to express our appreciation to
your delegation, Mr. President, for taking this initiative
to debate the issue "No exit without strategy". This
reflects the strength of your commitment to a more
effective Security Council, an objective for which the
Netherlands has worked tirelessly and effectively
during the period of its membership in this body.

(spoke in English)

Our debate is tackling a very important issue -
ensuring that the ultimate goal of any peacekeeping
mission is to strengthen the prospects for sustainable
peace and decrease the likelihood of the resumption of
violent conflict. Canada believes that in order to
achieve this goal, our focus must encompass the
political and socio-economic context of conflict,
including aspects of the rule of law and the human
rights situation, rather than solely the military and
humanitarian aspects. This means building on
traditional concepts of peacekeeping and working
towards a broader and more integrated View of peace
support. In this respect, we encourage the Security
Council to include long-term peace-building strategies
when planning missions and drafting their mandates.
The long-term, peaceful resolution of conflict requires
a collaborative and inclusive approach with other
United Nations bodies, international organizations,
including the international financial institutions,
responsible non-governmental organizations and
Member States.

Canada has always maintained that elements of
peace-building should be integrated into the mandate of
a peacekeeping or peace mission from the very
beginning. We remain fully engaged in international
efforts to conduct peacekeeping operations that
integrate military peacekeeping, civilian police and
human rights components with humanitarian aid and
the development aspects of peace-building. In this
respect, we will continue to promote an enhanced
capacity of the United Nations to respond to crises
rapidly, effectively and in an integrated manner.

We have also stressed - as does your paper, Mr.
President - the need for peacekeeping mandates to be
shaped by requirements on the ground, including long-
term conflict resolution, and not by short-term, distant,
outside political or financial considerations. Mandates
must be matched by the necessary resources. Recent
experiences of peacekeeping have taught us that an
excessive focus on keeping costs down, while cheaper
in the short run, is more costly later on if missions fail
to achieve their objectives. The Council must have the
staying power to ensure that the international
community's investments in peace are not lost because
of short-sighted political expediency. That goes to the
heart of the title of this subject, "No exit without
strategy".

At the same time, the Council must also be
judicious in deciding where to make those investments
in peace. Put another way, in the words of Ambassador
Chowdhury, there should be no entry without strategy,
either. A key consideration in this regard, and one
which you, Mr. President, pointed out in the very
useful paper you prepared to frame today's discussion,
is the attitude of the parties on the ground, in particular
their disposition towards peace. If there is no peace
agreement, or if military options continue to be
pursued in spite of one, the Council should think twice
before agreeing to deploy in the first place. Attempts to
import solutions from outside will go only so far if the
will to pursue peace is not shared within the societies
or regions in question. We will need to reflect on this
fact as we consider, for example, the renewal next
month of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The pursuit of
peace in a country torn by internal conflict poses
special and complex challenges. One of the lessons we
are learning in the pursuit of sustainable and durable
peace in countries emerging from conflict is that we
need to ensure that there is an indigenous capacity to
manage conflict without Violence. Peacekeeping is a
key instrument in building human security, a concept
that aims to protect the security of people and puts
people first.

Against this background, we fully support the
Brahimi Panel's recommendations aimed at enhancing
the Council's ability to address the root causes of
conflict as the greatest deterrent to violent conflict.

Moreover, in a world where crises evolve quickly,
the need for integrated planning of a multidisciplinary
core mission is crucial from the very outset. This
includes all relevant players such as the military,
civilian police, international humanitarian and human
rights agencies, and other civilian experts. Like France,
in this respect we welcome the Brahimi report's
recommendation to enhance the Secretariat's early-
warning capabilities linked to information gathering
and analysis in the establishment of an information and
strategic analysis secretariat. We also welcome the
recommendation to create integrated mission task
forces to improve the United Nations support and
planning capacities, which will enable the Council to
plan better for the long term.

I should like to say a word about troop-
contributing countries. This is an area in which, I think,
we have come some way, but we still have a
considerable distance to travel. I would draw people's
attention, particularly those who are not members of
the Council, to resolution 1327 (2000), adopted by the
Security Council a few days ago, on the Council's
response to the Brahimi report, and in particular to the
fact that part I of its annex underlines

"the importance of an improved system of
consultations among the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretary-General and the Security
Council, in order to foster a common
understanding of the situation on the ground, of
the mission's mandate and of its implementation".

The resolution also states that the Security Council

"Agrees, in this regard, to strengthen
significantly the existing system of consultations"

and so on.

The importance of working with the troop-
contributing countries can hardly be exaggerated.
Political and military guidance must be given to the
forces in the field so that they know what is expected
of them and have a common understanding of it; so
they know what they are there to do and so that we
know what they are doing; and so that the troop-
contributing countries are not off in another corner
somewhere, in another room, while the Council is
trying to make decisions that have such a direct bearing
on the well-being of the troops and, ultimately, on the
success of the mission.

I think that this is an area on which the Security
Council will be concentrating in the coming months,
and I think also that it is one whose importance can
scarcely be exaggerated.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to formulate a plan on strengthening the
United Nations capacity for peace-building strategies.
We look forward to his report on conflict prevention,
due this spring, and trust that it will include practical
suggestions, for both States and the United Nations
family more generally, to develop practical and
pragmatic strategies.

Canada has been active in finding ways to
strengthen peace-building initiatives. In 1996 we
launched our own peace-building initiative and
programme, aimed at assisting countries in conflict to
deal with their differences and to manage their own
conflicts peacefully. This programme also promotes
and underwrites our ability to participate in
international peace-building initiatives. Such initiatives
include activities such as enhancing demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration; supporting national and
community-based small arms reduction and disposal
efforts; addressing the protection, welfare and rights of
war-affected children; promoting reconciliation
between populations, including displaced populations;
and factoring the gender dimension into development
assistance, and particularly into conflict prevention and
conflict resolution.

Canada would be pleased to lend its support to
the United Nations in the development of a new
framework for the management of contemporary
conflict to help build a more peaceful world.

We support existing efforts to sustain United
Nations peacekeeping interventions, in particular
follow-on United Nations peace-building offices and
missions in places such as Liberia, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Haiti. These initiatives,
while not perfect, help to sustain our investments in
peace, and they help to demonstrate the continuing
commitment of the international community, and the
continuing interest of the international community, in
building peace in those countries.

(spoke in French)

Effective international action to support peace-
building requires coordination at the international level
between various types of actors, including the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, international
financial institutions, non-governmental organizations,
peacekeeping forces, civilian experts, and, above all,
the affected populations themselves.

I should like, finally, to stress that it is Vital for
external peace-building assistance to support, while
endeavouring not to replace, local initiatives designed
to bring about lasting peace.
