Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on France's presidency of the Council this month at
this extremely sensitive juncture. We thank you, Sir,
for organizing this meeting at the ministerial level to
discuss the dramatic and tragic situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, the repercussions of which are being
felt beyond the borders of that country, affecting
neighbouring countries. I would also like to thank you,
Foreign Minister Fabius, for having invited the Syrian
Arab Republic's neighbouring countries, including my
own country, Jordan.

It is appalling for all of us to recognize that the
tragic situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
has lasted over a year and a half now, persists and is
deteriorating. Likewise, the bloodshed has not ceased,
but has increased over that period. The situation has
deteriorated to the point that, every day, hundreds
of sons and daughters of the Syrian Arab Republic,
regardless of age, are engulfed in violence, which
continues to increase. The violence is forcing hundreds
of thousands of Syrians to flee the country in order to
escape the violence and terror, and to seek food.

What we are witnessing today in Syria has far
exceeded our fears that Syria could potentially slide
into the inferno of civil war. The increase and spread
of violence and murder have very clearly begun to tear
apart the social fabric of the Syrian Arab Republic and
peace in that country. It threatens social cohesion and
the unity of the country. This serious threat requires
that we act decisively and immediately so that Syria
does not fall into a civil and sectarian war, a war that
would have repercussions reaching far beyond the
Syrian borders, jeopardizing the stability of the entire
region.

His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein has
expressed Jordan's fears about the disastrous situation in
Syria and our concerns about its possible implications.
His Majesty has spoken on the subject on more than
one occasion, in particular at the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation summit in Mecca. Our position in
Jordan is very clear. We are convinced of the need for
a political solution to the Syrian crisis, despite the fact
that time seems to be running out. We recognize that
circumstances are making such a solution more and
more difficult. Still, that is the ideal means - indeed
the only means - to resolve the crisis in Syria.

We believe that a political solution must include a
transition framework, and that it must be implemented
immediately, leading to the realization of the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people - aspirations for which
it has shed its blood and made bitter sacrifices. Such a
solution is the only way to guarantee Syria's political
independence and unity. It is the only solution that
could lead to internal cohesion and peace. We believe
that a political solution is inseparable from a cessation
of violence, which was the first step in the six-point
plan proposed by Kofi Annan, former Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. I wish to take this opportunity to thank him for
his work and his efforts to fulfil his responsibilities.

I also express our gratitude to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi
for having agreed to become the new Joint Special
Envoy. Jordan supports him, and we express the hope
that the international community will likewise unite
in supporting him in his extremely difficult mission.
We are confident that his experience and competence
will assist him in his work, leading to a transition in
Syria and to an agreement allowing for a return to
stability without external military intervention. Jordan
hopes that the Security Council will be able to speak
with one voice and undertake united efforts to resolve
the humanitarian situation brought on by the political
cr1s1s.

Jordan is Syria's closest neighbour, in geography,
population and spirit. We are affected by the tragedy
along with the Syrian people. While we clearly and
unequivocally condemn the violence and the bloodshed
taking place in Syria, and while we appeal for its
immediate cessation and for the realization of the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, at the same
time we do not accept any violation of Syria or threats
to its social cohesion and domestic peace. We condemn
and reject approaches that fuel the events in Syria that
have driven more than 180,000 Syrian citizens to cross
their borders to seek refuge in Jordan.

Despite the economic and financial difficulties and
our limited means in water and energy, it is with good
will, founded in our deep and organic relationship with
the Syrian people, that we share our resources with our
Syrian brothers. For the same reasons we will open the
doors of our educational institutions and health facilities,
offering them services free of charge, as if they were
Jordanian citizens. As I speak here to the Council it is
almost midnight in Jordan. As our Syrian brothers cross
the border by night their numbers may have swelled to
186,000 by the end of my statement - and even more by
the end of this meeting. I say that based on the number
of Syrians who have crossed the border in the past four
days - 12,000 refugees. It is important in that regard
to state that, despite the challenges we face, given our
limited means even under normal circumstances, we
have not taken any steps in Jordan to prevent the entry
of the increasing number of refugees.

Nevertheless, we are quickly approaching a
dangerous situation whereby we will exceed by twice
our capacity, and the massive flow could lead to
consequences for public order and general security,
forcing us to take measures to fulfil our responsibilities
to our own population for its security. I therefore appeal
to the international community to help us respond to
the humanitarian, health and educational needs of our
Syrian brothers on our territory. I thank those States
and international organizations, both governmental and
non-governmental, that have provided us assistance in
facing the difficult burden of having refugees in our
territory.

The Government of Jordan has launched a joint
appeal, along with the United Nations, detailing the
priorities and needs of our Syrian brothers now living
in Jordan. Copies of that appeal will be distributed to
those wishing to offer assistance. I reaffirm our support
to any who offer humanitarian assistance to those in
need ofit inside Syria, through recognized international
mechanisms and procedures. I also reiterate that any
humanitarian assistance provided to Syria will also
help Jordan in responding to the needs of Syrians in
Jordan, especially in matters of health and education.

(spoke in English)

Human suffering requires the international
community to be united, and assisting in coping with
the humanitarian tragedy in Syria requires us all to
be committed. Our Syrian brothers and sisters in
Jordan, Turkey and other neighbouring countries are in
desperate need of serious help. The countries that are
hosting them are in serious need of help, logistical and
otherwise, in coping with the humanitarian tragedy.

(spoke in Arabic)

The initiative to invite Syria's neighbouring States
was a wise one. We hope that it will occur periodically
in order to facilitate a follow-up of the developing
situation in Syria at the ministerial level.

