Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation will support the draft
resolution before us relating to Iran's nuclear
programme. We will do so because we believe that the
draft, the outcome of lengthy and complex
consultations, focuses on the affirmation of measures
that Iran must take in order to produce confidence in its
nuclear programme, formulated by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). In other words, the main thrust of the draft
resolution we are to adopt today is the support of the
Security Council, through its authority, of the Agency's
activities in that area.

It is crucial that the restrictions being introduced
on cooperation with Iran apply to those areas that are
the cause of the IAEA's concern. In that regard, we
firmly believe that cooperation with Iran in areas and
using resources that are not restricted by the draft
resolution shall not be subject to the draft resolution's
restrictions.

We believe that some of the draft resolution's
wording could have been made clearer.

We are convinced that ways effectively to resolve
the Iranian nuclear problem are to be found exclusively
in the political, diplomatic and legal framework. In that
context, it is important that the measures provided for
in the draft resolution be taken in accordance with
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter and commit
no use of force. In strengthening the global non-
proliferation regime for nuclear weapons, it is
necessary to seek the establishment of solid regional
and international security and stability.

Russia views the draft resolution as a serious
message to Iran regarding the need to cooperate more
actively and more openly with the IAEA to resolve the
remaining concerns and questions relating to its
nuclear programme. The parameters for the required
cooperation have been set forth in the resolutions of
the IAEA Board of Governors and supported by the
Security Council.
06-68094
The draft resolution clearly reaffirms that, if Iran
suspends all activities relating to the enrichment and
chemical reprocessing of uranium, the measures
spelled out in the draft resolution will be suspended.
That will make it possible to launch the negotiating
process in the interests of a solid political settlement of
the Iranian nuclear problem. The proposals that have
been transmitted to the Iranian Government on behalf
of the "six" remain valid.

We hope that Iran will correctly and most
earnestly consider the contents of the draft resolution
and take the measures necessary to redress the
situation. Constructive steps by Tehran to comply with
the draft resolution will make it possible to mitigate the
urgency of the questions relating to Iran's nuclear
programme.

