Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is gravely concerned about chemical weapon attacks
in Syria and expresses its sympathy to the Syrian
people for their sufferings. China is firmly opposed
to the use of chemical weapons by whichever country,
organization or person, for whatever purposes and
under whatever circumstances.

We have always maintained that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) should
carry out comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigations into chemical weapon attacks in Syria,
basing its work on solid evidence, and draw conclusions
that can stand the test of time and reality. Only if it does
so can the perpetrators of chemical weapon attacks
in Syria and those accountable be brought to justice
and can the Syrian people be free from the sufferings
caused by chemical weapon attacks.

China has noted that in its recent report (S/2017/904, annex), the JIM. has indicated that for security reasons,
and because the attacks occurred too long ago, it decided
not to go to Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh for on-site
visits. We have also noted that some Council members
have different views regarding the methodology and

conclusions of the JIM. China supports the Mechanism
in further carrying out its work. At the same time, we
also hope that it will improve its working methods
and procedures, overcome difficulties and problems
relating to on-site investigations, use more scientific
and rational methods for investigation and evidence
collection, and further improve its performance so as to
ensure the reliability and credibility of the conclusions
and address the concerns of all the parties.

By the draft resolution that was just put to a vote
(S/2017/962), the Council would have decided to extend
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism by
one year. It contained some positive provisions, such as
condemning chemical weapon attacks in Syria, calling
for investigations into the incidents, calling upon all
the parties to assist the Mechanism in carrying out
on-site visits, and expressing concerns about the use
of chemical weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorist organizations. However, with regard to specific
measures to improve the working methods, the draft
did not fully address the legitimate concerns of some
Council members. In view of those considerations,
China abstained.

With the joint efforts of all the parties, the Astana
talks registered good results. A new round of Geneva
talks will soon be held. A political settlement of the
question of Syria is now at a critical stage. The Council
should proceed from the overarching goal of reaching
a political settlement on the question of Syria, remain
united on the question of chemical weapons in Syria and
create favourable conditions for a political settlement.
On that question, the international community should
join hands and push all the parties in Syria to pursue,
under the auspices of the United Nations, a political
process that is owned and led by the Syrians so as to
reach a solution that is acceptable to all.

China will continue to play a constructive role
in seeking a political settlement so as to find a
comprehensive, just and proper solution to the question
in Syria at an early date.

