Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): Our primary concern
has always been and remains to ensure the continuation
without disruption of the United Nations humanitarian
programmes in Iraq. This draft resolution accomplishes
that objective. We could have lived with the simple
extension of the oil-for-food programme, leaving the
contentious issues aside. However, we are satisfied that
we now have a draft resolution that makes progress in
addressing the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi
people, and we are happy to support it on that basis.

On the issue of how to manage the additional 5
per cent of revenue redistributed from the United
Nations Compensation Commission, our understanding
was that this additional revenue was to have been
targeted at specific needs. We would have liked to see a
separate escrow account established to deliver targeted
nutrition programmes to children and pregnant women.
This would have been especially useful, given Iraq's
reticence in providing funding for these programmes.
This could not be agreed. We welcome nevertheless the
focus on delivering assistance to the most vulnerable
citizens. The next distribution plan negotiated with the
Government of Iraq should include a stepped up
nutrition programme and other targeted programmes
for the most vulnerable. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's report in 180 days on that issue.

With respect to Iraq's payment of its United
Nations dues, our position continues to be that we do
not support the transfer of humanitarian funds for this
purpose. We do not think it is appropriate to divert
humanitarian funds to pay for the United Nations
Secretariat and members of the bureaucracy. For the
purposes of compromise, we have, however, accepted
the decision to examine this issue further.

On the oil sector cash component, we believe its
cash components are necessary, and we supported their
inclusion in resolution 1284 (1999). We are not fully
persuaded that separating out the oil sector from others
is the best way to meet the needs of the Iraqi people.
Again, we recognize that there are differing views on
this issue among Council members and that we have
arrived at a workable way forward.

We agree with the need for the observation
capacity to be fully implemented by the Office of Iraq
Programme within 90 days, if possible, and we
welcome this element.

Finally, we call on the Government of Iraq to
cooperate fully in implementing this draft resolution
and resolution 1284 (1999).

