Mr. Cunningham (United States): Many of those
who have spoke today have discussed resolution 1405
(2002) - a resolution that the United States sponsored.
Let me be clear for the record on the meaning of that
resolution, lest its purpose be distorted. My
Government was and remains concerned about the
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian civilian
population and in the Jenin refugee camp. The
resolution called for the lifting of restrictions imposed
on the operations of humanitarian organizations and
emphasized the urgency of their access to these
civilians. It also welcomed the initiative of the
Secretary-General, with the cooperation of the
Government of Israel, to establish the facts about
events in the Jenin refugee camp. That is, the Council
welcomed and supported an effort that was just then
coming into being. It did not require or demand
anything of the Secretary-General, the Government of
Israel or the Palestinians. It welcomed an effort to
develop accurate information about what had
happened.

While it is regrettable that the Government of
Israel decided in the end that it would not be able to
cooperate with this initiative, we supported the
Secretary-General's efforts and his conclusion that it
was not possible for him to implement his initiative to
dispatch a fact-finding team. We supported his decision
under the circumstances to disband that team. We also
favoured the Council's responding to the Secretary-
General's letter on this subject along those lines. We
proposed a draft resolution, which I believe
commanded the support of the vast majority of Council
members, but action on it was blocked.

We also would have supported a letter from the
Security Council President in response, but action on
that was blocked as well. Now we are addressing
present needs and looking to the future. The United
States, along with others, is dealing urgently with the
humanitarian situation of the Palestinians, including in
Jenin.

Before moving to other areas of discussion
tonight, I also want to note that speakers here have
repeatedly referred to a massacre in Jenin. As facts do
emerge and are emerging, there seems to be growing
clarity that there is as yet no evidence that a massacre
occurred in Jenin.

We have also heard invoked other recent Council
actions on the Middle East. As you will recall,
Secretary Powell embarked on his April mission to the
Middle East with a mandate from President Bush to
pursue implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). That
resolution calls upon both parties to move immediately
to a meaningful ceasefire, calls for the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Palestinian cities, including
Ramallah, and demands an immediate cessation of all
acts of violence, including acts of terror, provocation,
incitement and destruction.

No one should be surprised that it has taken time
and hard work, but we have seen significant progress in
recent days. Most notable is the peaceful resolution of
the situation in Ramallah, in part thanks to the hard
work of the United States. Yet here in New York, one
would hardly know anything positive had occurred this
week. The reality is that there has been significant
movement towards implementation of Council
resolutions by the parties with the help of many
international actors. We welcome those positive
developments.

United States diplomatic efforts continue without
pause. Yesterday in Washington we convened a
meeting of the "quartet". The "quartet's" members are
committed to working with the Israelis and the
Palestinians, with Arab Governments and the
international community to restore the hope of all the
people in the region for a peaceful, secure and
prosperous future.

Our Middle East strategy, worked out in
coordination with the "quartet", embraces the
principles and goals set forth by President Bush, by
Crown Prince Abdullah and by United Nations Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002). It consists of three elements.

The first element is the restoration of security
from terror and violence for Israelis and Palestinians.
We are encouraging Chairman Arafat to do everything
possible to restore calm. We want to see established
effective and responsible Palestinian security
institutions which will work closely with Israeli
institutions to rebuild confidence.

The second part of our strategy is to address the
urgent humanitarian needs of the Palestinian people
and help build strong, accountable, democratic and
market-oriented institutions for Palestinians, as the
basis for a vibrant Palestinian State. Right now, the
Palestinian people need access to jobs, access to
markets, food, medical supplies and all kinds of things
to relieve their suffering. We are determined to respond
to those needs. This is in keeping with the message of
resolution 1405 (2002). All those in the international
community who can help meet the humanitarian needs
of Palestinian civilians should be part of this effort. We
welcome the commitments made in Oslo last week to
provide over $1 billion in assistance. The United
States, itself, has over $300 million dedicated to aid to
the Palestinian people. We continue to work with all
concerned on an urgent basis to meet the pressing
needs in Jenin, as well as throughout the West Bank
and Gaza.

As the third part of our strategy, we committed
ourselves to the promotion of serious and accelerated
negotiations towards a settlement. Yesterday, the
"quartet" discussed how best to begin to prepare for an
international conference this summer, including a set of
principles to serve as the basis for the meeting. As
Secretary Powell said, it is time for prompt action to
take advantage of this new window of opportunity that
has been presented to us, and we intend to do just that.
I think the other members of the "quartet" agree with
that intention.

The United States is deeply committed to doing
all it can to help bring about a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East. We have seen ample
evidence in recent months that terrorism and the use of
force only move the parties further from that goal. We
continue to hold fast to the belief that the only way
forward is through negotiations guided by Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002). We have seen that sustained diplomatic efforts
on the ground in the Middle East can produce results.
Our sincere hope is that the positive events of recent
days will be followed by more encouraging
developments that begin to restore hope to both Israelis
and Palestinians.

