Mr. Sallah (Gambia): Allow me, Sir, to express my
heartfelt gratitude at seeing you, as Foreign Minister of
Gabon, chairing and addressing this formal meeting of the
Security Council. My delegation feels honoured by your
presence here. It is a fitting occasion, since we are

 

dealing with the issue of the Central African Republic, in
which the Gabonese Republic is playing a leading role.

Once again, I wish to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for his very informative report on the Central
African Republic. Our heartfelt appreciation and gratitude
go to the Republic of France and to the member countries
of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB), as well as to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), whose very vital and
timely intervention in the crisis in the Central African
Republic contributed immensely to the restoration of peace
and tranquillity in that country.

The Bangui Agreements constitute the foundation of
the peace process in the Central African Republic, and the
authorities concerned, with the participation of MISAB and
other international agencies, are taking giant steps towards
the successful implementation of these provisions.
However, the task of meeting the financial obligations vis-
a-vis a very sensitive sector of the population of the Central
African Republic will certainly require the rapid
intervention of the international community in order to
prevent the emergence of social unrest and general
insecurity. This would negate the whole peace process and
might return the situation back to square one. Therefore,
my delegation urges the donor agencies and the Bretton
Woods institutions to come forward and offer financial
support to the operations in Bangui.

As a result of the effective intervention and continued
presence of MISAB in the Central African Republic,
relative peace and security reign in Bangui, but it is evident
that this state of affairs is very fragile, for the smouldering
embers of violence are yet to be completely extinguished.
Now and again, they manifest their existence through
various forms of retrogressive activities in the country.
Thus, with the imminent withdrawal of the French troops
and the eventual expiration of the mandate of MISAB, a
vacuum could be created that could make things fall apart,
thereby leading to the return of general chaos and insecurity
in the country. Such a precarious situation could also
threaten peace and stability in the whole region.

In this regard, the maintenance of a credible
peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic will
be a decisive step in the right direction in safeguarding the
Bangui peace process and allowing stability to be firmly
rooted in the country. Such a mission could be very
instrumental in creating an atmosphere conducive to the
holding of legislative and presidential elections.

It would be inconceivable to abandon the Central
African Republic in the middle of the Rubicon, thereby
rendering futile all the laudable efforts that have been
exerted so far in the restoration of a credible peace and
security in that country. Thus we add our voice to that of
President Patasse in requesting that the United Nations
consider positively establishing a peacekeeping mission in
the Central African Republic in order to ensure that there
is no gap in the continued presence of peace and stability
in that country, for the slightest vacuum in this regard
could result in the country, or even the region, falling
back into the conflict situation that we have worked so
hard to prevent.

The clarion call made by the Gabonese delegation to
the international community to come to the rescue of the
Central African Republic in particular, and Africa in
general, at this crucial moment is worth reiterating. Thus
my delegation supports the extension of MISAB until it
is replaced by a United Nations peacekeeping force, as
stated in paragraph 33 of the report of the Secretary-
General.

The Gambia supports the draft resolution before us,
and we will vote in favour of it.
