Ms. Fore: On behalf of everyone at UNICEF, we welcome the adoption of this important presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/8) to protect education from attack. We thank Permanent Representative Abdou Abarry for making this issue a priority during the Niger's presidency of the Security Council. The coronavirus disease has disrupted learning for over | billion children worldwide. But at the same time, we must remember those who have no education waiting for them, including many of the 75 million children who live in countries in conflict. Today's armed conflicts are increasingly protracted and complex in cause, consequence and character. They are also increasingly violent and marked by an alarming contempt for international humanitarian law by parties to conflict - State and non-State alike. This week, as schools around the world prepare to open their doors in the midst of the pandemic, we have an opportunity to once again shine a light on those places where going to school can be dangerous and even deadly. Last year alone saw 494 verified attacks on schools, and there have been more than 13,000 since monitoring and reporting began. These attacks are seemingly designed with one purpose in mind: to rob children, communities and countries of any semblance of safety, hope or optimism for the future. One-fifth of last year's verified attacks took place in West and Central Africa, including in the Sahel region. And year over year the number is rising. In Burkina Faso, 55 schools were attacked in just the last year and a half. Conflict-related insecurity, combined with the pandemic, resulted in the closure of over 2,500 schools as of August. This leaves nearly 350,000 girls and boys without an education. In the Niger, over 340 schools have been closed owing to insecurity - more than a three-fold increase since the start of 2020. It is important to remember that the Sahel is already home to a disproportionate share of the world's children who need humanitarian protection and assistance. About one in four who need support live in 10 countries in West and Central Africa, including the Sahel. But the denial of education is just part of the challenge faced by these children. Out-of-school children - and children living in conflict generally - face a world of danger. They are at a higher risk of recruitment by armed forces or groups, gender-based violence, child marriage and early pregnancy, abuse and trafficking. And numbers cannot capture the heartbreaking cost to the spirits of these young people when their schools are attacked. For one moment, look through the eyes of Mohammed, a 12-year-old. Mohammed was forced to flee Banki in north-east Nigeria, because his school was attacked and set on fire. He explains: "Twas at school when! heard shouting, and we ran. A classmate of mine opened the gate. They destroyed everything we worked on in our books, and they burned them. One of my teachers was killed." Mohammed has seen things that no child should ever see. His experience reminds us that protecting schools from attack and providing education in the midst of emergencies is more than a humanitarian need - it is a moral obligation. To children and communities alike, in the 30 years since the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, it is clearly a moral obligation that we are failing to meet, because the reality is that our words about protecting schools from attack - our policies, pronouncements and normative frameworks, and even our laws - do not reflect the situation on the ground for students, for teachers, for schools. Along with our humanitarian partners, UNICEF's teams on the ground are doing all that they can to respond to the needs of out-of-school children - from providing essential learning materials, such as school kits and textbooks in Burkina Faso, the Niger and Mauritania; to supplying tents fortemporary classrooms; to re-building learning spaces and training teachers; to providing counselling and psychosocial support to children who have witnessed the worst of humankind; to working with governments across the Sahel to provide distance-learning opportunities, including through the use of radio, television and online tools. Around the world, UNICEF is using the pandemic as an opportunity to accelerate the development and use of these tools worldwide - tools that can provide an excellent alternative to traditional classrooms for children living under conflict. To support all of this work, we call on our generous donor Governments to commit to multi-year, flexible funding to help communities rebuild education systems over the long term. This area of work is critically underfunded in the Sahel - with a UNICEF funding gap of 66 per cent across seven countries in the region. This is one of the biggest funding gaps for education globally - a gap that must be urgently closed before countries lose an entire generation of young minds. But we must also recognize that this work - as vital as it is - treats only the symptom, not the disease of attacks on education. Treating the disease means going beyond what we have done so far. Otherwise, how can we - who have the power to change this - look a child like Mohammed in the eye and tell him we are doing everything we can to make life better for him and his classmates and teachers? In short, we need the Council's help to treat the disease itself. I call on members to lend their voice and influence to condemn all attacks on schools and students alike - whether through resolutions or presidential statements, such as the one we are uniting behind today; to take concrete measures to fulfilobligations and commitments to protect education from attack; and to end impunity for those who violate international law - both parties to conflict and individual perpetrators - whether at the national level or through international tribunals. Let us match words with consequences. I call on members to demand that all States endorse the Safe Schools Declaration - as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines did yesterday, becoming the 105th state to do so - and to take steps to fully live up to their commitments. There is no excuse. We must protect education from attack and end the military use of schools now. And finally, I call on members to follow the lead of Niger and encourage future Council Presidents to make education under attack a regular thematic topic for the Council's deliberations - not just around the International Day to Protect Education from Attack, but on a sustained basis during the year. The security of countries and our world is directly tied to the education and protection of the children within these countries. Peace and prosperity - in the short and long terms - cannot be separated from a child's ability to learn and build a future for themselves. Finally, we urge the Council to continue making this issue a priority, and give Mohammed - and every child living through the horror of conflict - a chance to build their future and contribute to the lasting peace that we all seek.
