Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Upon
assuming its responsibilities as a member of the
Security Council, Mexico would like to express its
profound concern at the violence unleashed in recent
days in the Gaza Strip, which has resulted in numerous
victims among the Palestinian civilian population.

Mexico condemns the excessive use of force,
represented by the bombardment and subsequent land
operations carried out by the Israeli army in Gaza,
which has now been going on for 11 days. We also
condemn the launching of rockets into Israeli territory
from the Gaza Strip, which has also claimed victims
among the civilian population. It is necessary to break
the vicious cycle of violence that, far from improving
security in the region and solving the root causes of the
conflict, will only contribute to a situation of increased
uncertainty and fear.

Echoing the press statement issued by the
Security Council on 28 December 2008, Mexico calls
for the cessation of hostilities and of all military
activity in order to address the humanitarian crisis on
the ground, including by opening border crossings to
ensure the provision of humanitarian supplies - food,
fuel and medicines - as well as to generate the
minimal necessary conditions to boost peace talks in
the region.

Of particular interest to Mexico is that the parties
should recognize that it is imperative to respect the
provisions of international humanitarian law, especially
those contained in the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Mexico therefore urgently calls for the granting of
access to international organizations and humanitarian
aid in order to avoid further loss of human life and to
guarantee the security of the civilian population, as
various agencies of the United Nations have already
demanded.

Peace in the Middle East, including the resolution
of the Palestinian question, depends on the
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), which would lay
the foundations for a peaceful and definitive solution to
the conflict. The search for a comprehensive and long-
term solution to the Middle East conflict is not
conducted through the use of arms. Rather, that
solution is linked to a political approach based on
constructive dialogue, in accordance with international
law and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Resolution 1850 (2008), which the Security
Council adopted on 16 December, clearly establishes
that a lasting peace can only be based on an enduring
commitment to mutual recognition, freedom from
violence, incitement and terror, as well as on bilateral
negotiations, building on previous agreements and
obligations.

From the 1991 Madrid Conference and the Oslo
process to the most recent efforts made through the
2002 Arab Peace Initiative and the Annapolis
Conference, the imperative need to build a region in
which two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, can
live side by side in peace and within secure and

recognized borders has become increasingly obvious.
Mexico supports the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the Quartet to seek an immediate cessation of
military activities and to address the humanitarian
crisis, as well as the essential efforts of all those
neighbouring States that are genuinely interested in
contributing to a lasting and mutually acceptable
solution.

All States have the right to protect their security
and, even more, the obligation to guarantee it for the
benefit of their citizens. In their actions, however, they
must comply with international humanitarian law,
without which civilized coexistence is impossible.
Likewise, all terrorist activities, which run counter to
the achievement of a political solution that guarantees
respect for the right of peoples to a stable and lasting
peace, must be stopped. In that context, it is essential
to put an end to illegal trafficking in weapons and
military equipment, and to all activities that promote
terrorism.

The Security Council must contribute decisively
to finding a solution to the conflict, support the peace
process and build confidence in the quest for a political
solution. The credibility and effectiveness of the
Security Council in shouldering its responsibility to
promote international peace and security depend on
that. The Council must constructively propose
guidelines that will help to create a more favourable
atmosphere for negotiations and a just and lasting
peace process, not just react to immediate events.

Finally, Mexico believes that, given the continued
deterioration of the situation on the ground, including
the Israeli bombing of a United Nations school today,
the efforts of the international community - including
the initiative announced today by President Mubarak of
Egypt - must come together in an operational
resolution aimed at finding a solution to the conflict in
all its aspects. That will require that the Security
Council define and establish a monitoring mechanism
that guarantees observance of the ceasefire by the
parties, as well as other commitments to be undertaken
in various areas referred to during this debate, in order
to create an environment conducive to achieving a
lasting peace in the region. Mexico is willing to
support a Security Council resolution containing those
elements.

