Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and all his efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria.
The United States fully supports his initiative to bring
the parties back to Geneva and begin work on a new
constitutional committee in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), but we are not going to bring about peace
as the situation on the ground continues to escalate with
dire risks for the security of the entire region.

Earlier this week, Iranian-backed militias in
southern Syria launched a drone into Israeli territory.
It was an egregious and unprompted escalation. Iran
was once again doing what it does: risking conflict and
testing the will of its neighbours and opponents to resist
its aggression. Israel rightly took action to defend itself.
The United States will always stand by its ally when
confronted by provocations from Iran, Hizbullah or the
Al-Assad regime, but that incident shines a spotlight on
the reality in Syria today. We are seeing actors engage
in a dangerous game of pushing boundaries instead of
behaving responsibly and committing to peace.

Last week, pro-regime forces launched an
unprovoked attack against the Syrian Democratic
Forces and advisors from the coalition to defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. This was a large
attack involving numerous tanks, artillery and fighters.
The coalition acted in self-defence to repel the attack,
and the United States will always reserve the right to act
in self-defence. But the attack showed the recklessness
of pro-regime fighters. Parties on the ground need to
adhere to all established deconfliction mechanisms,
and ensure that nothing like that ever happens again.

The Al-Assad regime has become a front for Iran,
Hizbullah and their allies to advance their irresponsible
and dangerous agenda for the Middle East. On every
front of the conflict, we find fighters imported by Iran

from Lebanon, Iraq and Afghanistan. When we see the
Al-Assad regime starving civilians in eastern Ghouta
or pummelling schools and hospitals in Idlib, we see
advisors from Iran and Hizbullah helping direct those
atrocities. That support for the Al-Assad regime, of
course, is not new, but the drone flight this week was
a wake-up call for all of us. Iran and Hizbullah are
making plans to stay in Syria. When we look out across
the Middle East, we know one thing for certain: when
Iran and Hizbullah move in, instability always follows.

Therefore, when we talk about peace in Syria, we
need to face the reality of what is happening on the
ground. Peace is urgently needed in Syria. All of us
on the Security Council know that, but we cannot offer
support for peace, on the one hand, and ignore the fact
that the chief sponsor of terrorism in the Middle East
and its terrorist militia are digging in, on the other.
Even as we talk about peace at the United Nations,
the fighting is getting worse. Much of the violence is
happening in so called de-escalation zones. Russia was
supposed to guarantee adherence to those de-escalation
zones in order to help the political process, but, then
again, Russia was also supposed to guarantee the
removal of all chemical weapons from Syria. Instead,
we see the Al-Assad regime continues to bomb, starve
and - yes - gas civilians.

All ofus on the Council know what it will take to get
to peace in Syria. More than two years ago, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), which
includes a framework for ending the war. The United
States is committed to seeing the full implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), which President Trump and
President Putin also reaffirmed when they met in Viet
Nam in November 2017. We also know how peace
talks need to happen. There is no doubt that Geneva
and the United Nations-led political process are the
sole, legitimate venue for coming up with a political
solution in Syria. Special Envoy De Mistura has talked
about setting up a constitutional committee, and he
must be fully empowered to do so. No party should
have a veto over the United Nations decisions about the
composition of the constitutional committee, but it is
hard to see how a peace process will work while the
Al-Assad regime continues to launch all-out attacks
against the Syrian people and Iran and Hizbullah are
entrenching themselves within the country. Ultimately,
we must recognize that the Al-Assad regime does not
want peace unless it is peace on its terms - a peace in
which every person in Syria who opposes the regime
is murdered, tortured, starved, imprisoned or forced to
flee the country. If the Geneva process is going to work,
therefore, we need to see a change. As one ofAl-Assad's
key backers, Russia can change that behaviour. It can
push the regime to commit to seeking a real peace in
Syria - a peace that helps the Syrian people, a peace
that helps ensure the region's security. Now is the time
for Russia to use that leverage.
The road to peace will come when all of the parties
stop provoking each other and choose the responsible
path. That path is clear: follow resolution 2254 (2015),
support Geneva and, most of all, push the Al-Assad
regime to do what it plainly does not want to do. If we
rally around those goals, we will achieve real peace
in Syria.

