Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to see you, Mr. President, at the helm of the
Council for this month. At the outset, I would like
to align myself with the statements made by the
representatives of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the of Kuwait on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.

At the outset, I should like to reiterate my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Council and on organizing this
important discussion to review the progress made at
the procedural level and with regard to note S/2010/507
by the President of the Council on improving and
enhancing the working methods of the Council in a
transparent manner that would achieve the aspirations
of all States Members of the United Nations, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter relating to
the competencies and mandates of the Security Council
on the maintenance of international peace and security.

I would also like to extend my thanks to you,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2015/793, annex), which
you circulated to States Members to inform these
deliberations.

Reform of the Council's modus operandi and
procedures constitutes an important part of achieving
comprehensive reform in a manner that establishes
equitable geographic representation of the world's
continents, especially with regard to Africa, which
includes 54 States, and which is the region of concern
in 67 per cent of the questions before the Council.

While we are focusing today on the procedures
necessary for improving the efficiency ofthe Council, we
underscore the Position of the Non-Aligned Movement
concerning the working methods of the Security
Council as stipulated in the relevant paragraphs of the
final document (S/2011/407, annex I), held in Bali,
Indonesia, in May 2011, on the reform of the working
methods of the Security Council. With regard to the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 on the
reform of procedural matters, making the Council's
daily agenda available to everybody and circulating the
monthly journal to all States members are priorities. We
appreciate the efforts of some member States, which,
while taking over the presidency, have organized a
briefing to which all Member States of the United
Nations are invited and all the matters on the monthly
agenda are reviewed with transparency and objectivity.

With regard to the briefings, despite the increase in
open meetings, it is a universally acknowledged truth
that the majority of the Council meetings are closed
consultations for only Council members and members
of the Secretariat whose guidance the Council is
seeking. Transparency and objectivity require that the
States concerned can participate in such consultations.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of
fostering the principle of consultation and cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with the letter
and spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

We also recall that the rights of Member States are
safeguarded in the Charter and the Council's provisional
rules of procedure with regard to the participation of
any Member State in open meetings, in accordance
with rules 37 and 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There are a number of matters of concern to the
Sudan currently under discussion in the Council, which
manages its proceedings according to Article 34 of the
Charter. In our experience, Member States must share
any matter that concerns them and, when dealing with
such matters, the Council should allow adequate time to
the States concerned when undertaking any procedure.
The matter should also be accorded further attention
when it or its manifestation coincides with a weekend,
as may be the case with developing events. After all,
the Security Council must focus first and foremost on
the maintenance of international peace and security.

We appreciate the efforts on the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We look forward to the outcomes and
recommendations of the Working Group in accordance
with the annual report to be presented by the Council
to the General Assembly so that all States will be able
to participate in the recommendations and outcomes.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, with regard to Chapter VII of the
Charter, I would like to recall part of a statement
delivered in the Security Council six decades ago:

"A very sharp instrument has been entrusted to
the Security Council by the United Nations under
Chapter VII of the Charter, and the Security
Council must be careful that this instrument is not
blunted".

I believe that statement is still valid and is even more
relevant today.

