Ms. Power (United States of America): Today
the Security Council has taken another step aimed at
stopping the use of chemical weapons in Syria. That
step is necessary because, despite our previous efforts
to stop the use of chemical weapons, the attacks have
continued. Those efforts have included the Council's
adoption in September 2013 of resolution 2118 (2013),
which required the Syrian regime to dismantle and
destroy its chemical weapons programme under
international supervision. But while the resolution
made significant progress towards that end, the attacks
continued. Our efforts also included the adoption of
resolution 2209 (2015), which condemned the use of
chlorine as a chemical weapon and made clear that
such attacks were a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).

Yet still the attacks continued. We know that those
chemical attacks continued not only because of the
testimonies of survivors and medical professionals,
such as the harrowing account members of the Council
heard in a closed meeting in April from Dr. Tennari, a
physician from Sarmeen, who described his inability to
resuscitate three siblings, ages one to three, following
once such attack in March. We know not only because
of the gruesome footage of those suffering from the
effects of such attacks, including seizures, asphyxiation,
foaming at the mouth - footage that we have all seen.
We know for a fact because the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has carried
out thorough and impartial investigations into alleged
attacks and ultimately concluded that chemical weapons
were used.

Let me read briefly from a report from one of
those investigations lest we forget just how grotesque
the effects of chemical weapons are. According to the
OPCW'S third fact-finding report (see S/2015/138),
when the village of Talmenes was attacked on 21 April
2014, residents described seeing what they called
a "honey wax-to-yellow coloured gas" (S/2015/138, enclosure IV, annex 2, para. 5.15) rise from the point of
impact reaching above the minaret of the town's mosque
up to 75 metres in the sky. Survivors next described a
pungent irritating smell, like chlorine.

A seven-year-old boy, who lived approximately
15 metres from the place the bombs hit, died almost
immediately. Residents told investigators that his body
showed no signs of physical trauma but "turned blue in
colour" (ibid., para. 5.17). A teenage girl from the same
house died days later, as did an elderly woman from a
neighbouring home. Their bodies, like the boy's, showed
no physical trauma. Olive, pomegranate and fig trees
shed their fruit, and their leaves dried and shrivelled
and turned yellow shortly after exposure. Younger
animals died immediately; fully grown animals a few
hours later. Some 200 people rushed to a Talmenes field
hospital with nearly identical symptoms - symptoms I
would note that were just like the ones that Dr. Tennari
described treating following the attack in Sarmeen:
a burning sensation in the eyes, face, throat and on
their exposed skin, tearing, blurred vision, shortness
of breath, a feeling of suffocation, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, headache, generalized
weakness, drowsiness, disorientation, and a loss of
consciousness. This is what a chemical attack looks,
smells and feels like.

Witness accounts, photographs and videos of the
attacks and their victims, as well as other forms of
evidence, led the OPCW to determine that there was

"compelling confirmation that a toxic chemical was
used as a weapon, systematically and repeatedly,
in the villages of Talmanes, Al Tamanah, and Kafr
Zeta" (ibid., enclosure III, annex 2, par.29)

between April and August 2014. The OPCW reported
that 32 witnesses saw or heard the sound of helicopters
over the three opposition-held towns right before the
attacks occurred.

Until we adopted resolution 2235 (2015) today,
there was no mechanism to take the obvious next
step - determining who was involved in such attacks.
Even when there were obvious signs pointing to the
parties responsible, investigators were not empowered
to point the finger. This has compounded an already
rampant sense of impunity in Syria.

Pointing the finger matters. Let us imagine for a
moment if we asked an investigative team to determine
whether certain atrocities had occurred i such as
rapes, tortures or executions - but did not ask that
team to determine who was involved in such brutal
acts. As we all know, that determination ties the
perpetrator to the action, and that link is essential to
eventual accountability and to helping prevent future
abuses from occurring. That is what the new United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism will
do in response to incidents in Syria that involved or
likely involved the use of chemicals as weapons. The
Mechanism will gather evidence aimed at identifying
the individuals and entities that have a hand in such
attacks, and it will do all it can to name those individuals
or entities.

Now, we all know that we currently lack an effective
mechanism for holding criminally accountable those
responsible, but when the day comes that we have
one - and that day will come - the evidence gathered
by the Joint Investigative Mechanism will stand as
a record not just of what has been done but of who
has done it. Those who think that impunity will last
forever for the perpetrators and all others involved in
chemical-weapons attacks - those who order chemical
attacks, those who fill munitions with chemicals, and
those who drop chemical weapons - should look at
all the perpetrators today who find themselves being
forced to answer for acts committed years or even
decades ago. They should look at those who have been
convicted for carrying out the genocide and war crimes
in the Balkans, or those now being prosecuted in The
Hague. They should look at Hissene Habre', who is
currently standing trial for atrocities he carried out in
Chad three decades ago.

Let me conclude. Resolution 2235 (2015) was
adopted today with the Council's unanimous support.
This sends a clear and powerful message to all those
involved in chemical-weapons attacks in Syria - the
Joint Investigative Mechanism will identify you if you
gas people. It bears repeating as well that we need
to bring the same unity that we have shown today to
urgently find a political solution to the Syrian crisis.

