Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
beginning, I would like to convey my delegation's
appreciation to Kazakhstan for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at this critical juncture for
Palestine and the Middle East.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is the
core and central aspect of all conflicts in the Middle
East. The injustice has been ongoing for more than
seven decades, exacerbated through the Israeli
expansionist, aggressive and apartheid policies towards
Palestinians and the region. Each time we meet here,
there are new announcements of illegal settlements or
annexation plans. That should not be surprising from a
regime governed by a Prime Minister who admits that
"There was not and will not be a better Government
for settlement than our Government." The Israeli
regime now works day and night to negate any right of
Palestinian statehood and to entrench the occupation.

The latest case in hand is the provocative decision
of the United States to recognize Al-Quds as the capital
of the Israeli regime, which revealed the complicity of
both regimes to deprive the Palestinians of their basic
rights to establish an independent State of their own,
with Al-Quds as its capital. The whole international
community rejected that illegal and politically wrong
decision in the General Assembly on 21 December 2017
and manifested its support for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinians, despite all grotesque intimidations
exercised before the vote.

The fast-growing illegal settlements in Palestinian
territory constitute not only a grave breach of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, but also a war crime that is another

clear indication that the Israeli regime has never had
any interest in peace. Israel's entire history starts with
the illegal occupation of Palestinian land and is full of
aggression against its neighbours and other countries in
the Middle East, at least 14 times since 1948.

That regime arrogantly and flagrantly continues
to violate at least 86 resolutions adopted by this
Council, from resolution 54 (1948) to resolution 2334
(2016). on illegal settlement activities. There are many
more from the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council and United Nations specialized agencies,
all adopted in response to its illegal occupation,
repeated acts of aggression and its well-documented
atrocities, apartheid policies and war crimes against
the Palestinian people. The Israeli regime, emboldened
by the impunity provided to it by the United States,
shamelessly and flagrantly continues to violate all
Security Council resolutions on the Middle East, while
shedding crocodile tears for those resolutions it chooses
to like.

Israel continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing
to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. Surprisingly
and shamelessly, that regime seeks sympathy by
claiming that it, in fact, is the one under threat, and
not the Palestinians. No political theatre can hide the
fact that Israel's policies of incremental aggression and
expansion and its behaviour towards its neighbours are
the main source of the threat to peace and security in
the region.

The destructive role of the United States in
international conflicts, particularly in the Middle East,
is incontestable. The United States has never been an
honest partner for peace andjustice in that conflict, and
it never willbe. It is a discredit to the Council when it fails
to act with regard to genuine issues, such as the long-
lasting occupation of Palestinian territory - to which
this agenda item is dedicated - or to the indiscriminate
bombing of Yemen over the past three years that has
brought hunger, disease and destruction to the Yemeni
people, as well the blockade preventing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, which has led to the largest
famine the world has seen in many decades, as described
by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. The list of
such failures attributable to the obstructionist approach
by the United States delegation goes on and on.

Although the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory certainly is the main contributor to the
instability of the Middle East, there are other
contributors. Every instance of foreign intervention,
occupation and its ensuing instability, and attempts
to engineer societies in the Middle East has proven to
provide breeding grounds for terrorist and extremist
groups. Unfortunately, the American and the Israeli
regimes prefer to resort to, promote and spread
Iranphobia, and that has become a kind of ongoing
obsession and hysteria for them. We have heard them in
today's open debate and over the past several months.
That hysteria is actively perpetuated by those willing
to sell or spend their dollars on beautiful American
weapons. It has nothing to do with peace and security
in the Middle East. On the contrary, it is an undeniable
fact that, while Iran was helping the people of Iraq and
Syria to defeat Da'esh, the United States and others
were busy arming its members.

In conclusion, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing increasing Israeli aggression, Iran reaffirms
its long-standing solidarity with the Palestinian people,
while recognizing their decades of resilience despite
much suffering and injustice, and reiterates its strong
support for their legitimate and inalienable rights,
including to self-determination and freedom in an
independent and viable State of Palestine, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.

