Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
very warmly welcome the presence of Judge Jorda here
today. We have begun to study his report with great
interest and regard his speech to us this morning as
containing a good deal of extra material which we want
to study and take careful account of.

The United Kingdom, as he and the whole court
know, is very strongly committed to the work of both
the Yugoslav and Rwandan courts. We regard them as
effective and impartial, and we remain consistently
eager to ensure that they are able to undertake their
important task as efficiently as possible.

The success of the court so far is a tribute to the
work of everybody involved in it, but of course that
success has itself led to an increased workload of
trials -what Judge Jorda has called this morning the
management of quantity while preserving the quality of
the court. It is very important to consolidate the
Tribunal's achievements in the development of
international humanitarian law, and their contribution
towards the restoration of international peace and
security more generally, by ensuring that indictees are
brought to trial quickly. That applies both to prompt
arrest and to surrender to the Tribunal, and, once in
custody, to minimum delay in bringing cases to court.

We are very pleased that the Tribunals are taking
these issues so seriously, and in particular that efforts
are already being made by the judges to act on the
recommendations of the Expert Group - for instance,
by streamlining pre-trial procedures and expediting
hearings. We look forward to seeing what difference in
practice these improvements might make.

We welcome Judge Jorda's initiative in analysing
the work of the Tribunal and the possible future
demands on it. The proposals on how to manage that
workload represent an important contribution. As
Judge Jorda knows, the speed of trials has been an
issue of concern to the United Kingdom for some time,
and we appreciate the degree of flexibility that he has
now built into the proposals.

The Judge has assessed, we think rightly, that
certain options in the paper are not appropriate. The
immediate Balkan region, for instance, is not yet a
suitable site for trials because of reasons of political
stability and safety. We are not in favour of setting up a
second tribunal. The issue remains how best to make
the Yugoslav Tribunal work effectively.

We are not yet in a position to offer substantive
reaction to the recommendations, and will not be until
the implications - especially the financial ones - are
clearer. Further detailed discussion will then be
necessary, in which the United Kingdom will
participate actively. But we think that, in particular, as
others have noted before me, two key elements of the
proposals need to be looked at in detail.

The first is how, in practice, the increased use of
senior legal officers in the pre-trial process would
increase the efficiency and pace of the pre-trial phase.
We would like to discuss in more detail the thinking
behind that idea, as compared with a single judge's pre-
trial responsibilities under the present system. The
second is, if an increased number ofjudges is required,
whether permanent or ad [item judges would be of
most benefit to the Tribunal. We understand that the
judges have considered both options, but we would
want to look carefully at the advantages and
disadvantages of opting for an ad litem system.

The United Kingdom is of the view that the
option of an additional trial chamber deserves
consideration, though the cost implications have to be
studied.

The effect of these proposals on the other organs
of the Tribunal, including the staffing implications, will
need to be looked at in detail. One issue for the judges
which is not covered in the report is the impact of
increased efficiency at the pre-trial and trial stages of
the Appeals Chamber. We note that the judges agreed
with the recommendation of the Expert Group for two
new judges to join the Appeals Chamber from the
Rwanda Tribunal, and we would be grateful for Judge
Jorda's views on whether further measures at the
appeals level also need to be considered.

We are very grateful to have this discussion this
morning under your leadership, Mr. President. We
welcome Judge Jorda's presence here and look
forward, as I said, to further detailed discussion.

