Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
been following with great concern events following the
Khan Shaykhun incident, which claimed the lives of
dozens of innocent Syrian civilians. Numerous reports
have confirmed that the incident was once again the
result of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
have also been following the dangerous developments
concerning the Syrian situation on the ground since
last night.

The Khan Shaykhun incident and other incidents
and crimes in Syria of the past seven years are a clear
indication ofa lack of conscience. They are living proof
that the people of the region - specially the Syrian
people - are the main victims of a proxy war that
has paralysed the international community. Serious
dialogue has been absent because of the decision of
many parties to fall back on their narrow interests,
as if the deaths of hundreds of thousands of civilians
and the displacement of millions of Syrians were only
a matter of collateral damage to be deferred to a later
date following a political deal that the puppeteers of
this war might reach in line with their interests.

I honestly believe that, within the Security
Council, the disagreements and the rivalries that
sometimes concern issues unrelated to Syria have led
to the daily increase in the number ofinnocent civilians
killed. We are exasperated by statements of regret
and condemnation by the international community
following every human tragedy that befalls the Syrian
people. We are fed up with such statements because
they have become empty expressions and mere words
that are unaccompanied by any genuine and serious
international effort that would meet the interests of
the Syrian people and have a genuine impact on their
daily lives. I therefore urgently call on all members to
dispense with their disagreements and divergent views,
and focus on a way out of the Syrian maze.

All parties at the international, regional and
Syrian levels should support an immediate ceasefire
and seriously and objectively move forward without
any preconditions or procedural manipulation within
the framework of the International Syrian Support
Group (ISSG) under the auspices ofthe United Nations
in Geneva.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, achieving their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support
for containing the negative impact of the spoilers and
helping Syrians combat terrorism in Syria and build
their own State on a firm and stable foundation.

Perhaps the time has come to be frank. I call
on the United States and the Russian Federation in
particular, owing to their capacities, role as co-Chairs
of the ISSG and their influence on the various local and
regional parties, to move resolutely in that direction
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
to reach middle ground and a political settlement in
Syria. I urge them to resume their coordination and
cooperation on the ground and in the political realm
so as to salvage what can be salvaged and avoid any
further deterioration of the situation.

In conclusion, I stress that a Syrian settlement
will be possible only if it is based on clear and sincere
intentions. Egypt will welcome every honest and
serious action to save Syria from the abyss and contain
the present and future repercussions of the crisis in
the region.

