Mr. Cunningham (United States): Madam
President, I will try to be very brief given the hour, but
I want to pay tribute to you and your delegation as
presidency and as members of the Security Council, as
others have done, and to acknowledge the contribution
that you and your team have made and that
Ambassador Ward has made. I should also like to recall
your contribution as a prominent member of Security
Council missions to Sierra Leone and Kosovo, where I
remember very fondly your personal input and
contribution.

Without being complacent, I think we can say
that we have done a lot of good work this month. I am
not going to review the agenda, but simply note the
progress we have made on terrorism, Afghanistan, the
oil-for-food programme for Iraq and reinforcing a
growing trend towards consensus, which I think is
positive. We had a good series of high-level meetings
on Africa, which I think on balance were a positive
factor, although we hoped that we could have achieved
more of a relationship between those meetings and
developments in the real world.

I want to mention two specific items out of the
many that have been mentioned here this morning.

First, on transparency, I agree that we need to do
a better job at this, but that does not necessarily mean
holding more open meetings. For example, I am not
sure that we have today's format right, as others have
said. What we do need to do is find a better way, under
the label of transparency, to build a stronger connection
between what we do and the rest of the membership,
and to be innovative in finding ways to do that. As
some others have suggested, that means promoting
more interaction. I think the best way to do that is
through less formal, not more formal, proceedings.
After a couple of years here, my conclusion is that the
less formal the setting - whether for this body or for
its interaction with others - the more genuine the
discussion and interaction we have.

We have a couple of good examples to look at,
and I am sure there will be others in the coming
months. Ambassador Greenstock has set a good
example in his approach to outreach and his work on
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Jamaica itself set a
good example in helping to sponsor yesterday's very
good meeting on peace operations and in coordinating
that meeting with the Security Council's schedule. That
was not in any strict sense a meeting between the
Security Council and anyone else, but it brought
together interested members of the Council, outside
interested people and Members of the United Nations
that are not Council members in what I thought was a
very interesting and useful discussion. We ought to find
more ways to do that. Ambassador Ward deserves
credit for trying to find ways to improve the way in
which the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries interact and to build a way for real exchanges
in that connection as well. Sometimes formal meetings
and formal presentations can be useful, but my own
guess is that we are too far down that path ~ it takes a
lot of time, and they are also limited in potential and
impact.

Secondly, on ministerial meetings, I agree with
others who have suggested that we ought to use
Security Council meetings at ministerial level
sparingly. It is an important instrument, and we should
not dilute the impact of it. We should also use the
presence of Ministers here, whether during ministerial
week or otherwise to enhance interaction between other
countries and the Council members, particularly when
we have the occasion to address regions in conflict,
such as we had recently with the Lusaka Political
Committee. I think that we can all do a better job at
preparing for those meetings and try to make sure that
we get results out of them that translate into effects in
the real world.

