Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO): Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan.

We support in principle the conclusions set out in
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2007/152). We thank Mr. Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
for their briefings.

We note that some progress has been made in the
reconstruction process in Afghanistan. Eight of the
12 benchmarks set for 2006 in the Afghanistan
Compact have been met. The international community
continues to take an active part in normalizing the
situation in the country.
At the same time, CSTO member States are
concerned about the growth of violence and terror
provoked by Al-Qaida and Taliban fighters. The

deterioration of the security situation not only hampers
the reconstruction process in Afghanistan, but also
calls into question the progress made in the political
arena. In that connection, we believe it is essential to
ensure full implementation of the sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council.

We remain concerned about the illicit production
and trafficking of drugs out of Afghanistan. The
findings of the UNODC report entitled "Afghanistan:
Opium Survey 2006" show an increase in poppy
cultivation and in the production and trafficking of
illegal drugs.

The flow of drugs out of Afghanistan poses a
serious threat to regional and global security. The
CSTO believes that its mission is to halt drug
trafficking by all possible means and in close
cooperation with those participating in the anti-drug
coalition. A concrete example of the practical anti-
drug-trafficking efforts of CSTO member States is the
successful implementation of an international
preventive operation entitled "Channel 2006".
Operation Channel has been carried out regularly since
2003 by the law enforcement agencies of CSTO
member States. As a result, we have detected and
suppressed activities related to heroin smuggling. Tons
of illegal drugs and large amounts of firearms and
ammunition have been confiscated. We have long
called upon our NATO partners to take part in
Operation Channel.

Aware of the importance of military and
humanitarian aid provided within the framework of
international assistance aimed at the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, we are convinced that it is high time to
give priority to the country's economic and social
problems. Grave social and economic conditions are
among the reasons why support for the Taliban and for
Al-Qaida fighters is growing and why extremists can
consolidate their positions and increase their resistance
against local authorities. The situation in the Musa
Qala district is a case in point.

In that context, we must focus efforts on
establishing conditions favourable for economic
development and job creation in the country. New
economic opportunities for a better life would help to
create conditions for trade and economic activities and
to reduce drug production and terrorist activities.

We believe that in the post-Bonn period the
United Nations should maintain its leading role in
Afghan affairs, including by coordinating the
peacebuilding and reconstruction efforts of the
international community within the framework of the
Afghanistan Compact.

Our States are committed to promoting peace,
stability and economic prosperity in Afghanistan.
There are many examples of successful economic
cooperation between CSTO member States and
Afghanistan, including Uzbekistan's participation in
rebuilding the highway between Mazar-i-Sharif and
Kabul and reconstructing 11 bridges, and its
transmission of electric power to Afghanistan's
northern regions under favourable contract conditions.
There is also the export of electric power from
Tajikistan to the province of Kunduz and the resolving
key issues related to ensuring active and long-term
work by major Russian companies in Afghanistan.

In that connection, we believe it is essential to
enhance regional cooperation, including the interaction
between Afghanistan and its neighbours on a wide
range of security issues, economic projects and the
fight against drug trafficking. The CSTO Council of
Foreign Ministers has established a working group on
Afghanistan, which will put forward proposals aimed
at enhancing cooperation. Our member States have
submitted a number of such proposals, particularly
with regard to developing transborder transport
communications. We note the initiative to establish an
international trans-Afghanistan transport corridor. Our
States have knowledge and experience as well as
economic and technological capabilities that could be
effectively utilized in that regard. More specifically,
we believe that the CSTO can play a significant role in
the implementation of projects within the framework of
the Afghanistan Compact. We are also prepared to
provide a broad range of inexpensive, high-quality
products necessary for the successful implementation
of such projects, including by taking orders together
from donor countries and international organizations.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the CSTO
is playing a major role in ensuring security in the
region. We will continue to participate constructively
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

