The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria.

I am delighted to be part of this important
discussion on moving forward with the challenges of
and opportunities for support by the United Nations for
security sector reform (SSR), particularly from an
African perspective.

Nigeria is a country whose history exemplifies
the challenges and benefits of transforming security
arrangements to reflect and respond to a country's
post-conflict reality. Before the term SSR was coined,
the Nigerian civil war, which lasted from 1967 to 1970,
had made it imperative for my country to deal with the
aftermath of conflict, including the issues of
demobilization, reintegration and reforms. One of the
lessons learned from our experience is that reforming
the security sector is a lengthy process and must be
part of a broader national agenda. We also learned not
only that such a reform exercise is highly political, but
also that the security of citizens and the State are
intrinsically linked.

We have since learned that the governance,
reform and transformation of the security sector are
vital not only for societies emerging from war, but also
for those experiencing peace. In order to consolidate
the gains of our democracy and avoid recourse to
conflict, it is important that our security institutions
function effectively under the rule of law. I would
therefore emphasize the importance of SSR moving

beyond peacekeeping and extending to the entire
peacebuilding continuum.

In that regard, I congratulate the Secretary-
General and his team on the commendable
achievements made since this Council first debated the
issue in 2007, under the presidency of Slovakia (see S/PV.5632). Nigeria notes with appreciation the
establishment of the United Nations inter-agency
Security Sector Reform Task Force, which has rapidly
emerged as a mechanism for promoting coherence in
United Nations support for SSR. It is encouraging that
a roster of SSR experts has been established and that
guidance is being developed. I acknowledge the
commitment of those Member States benefiting from
United Nations support for SSR and the generosity of
the broader international community, which has
worked hard to support those national reform
processes.

Nigeria supports the major principles of the
United Nations approach to SSR, as contained in the
2008 report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/39),
particularly its emphasis on national ownership. I
strongly encourage the Secretary-General to continue
to ensure that United Nations support for SSR is based
on national requests and Security Council mandates.
Without national ownership, deficits in legitimacy and
sustainability will persist.

We are concerned that, although Africa is the
main theatre of SSR, the voices and perspectives of
African States in defining and setting the SSR agenda
have typically been faint or, in some cases, mute. Thus,
"lessons learned" become "lessons lost", and
opportunities to learn from the perspectives of those at
the receiving end of SSR support are missed.

Under the circumstances, the need to accentuate
African and recipient perspectives on SSR cannot be
overemphasized. In that regard, I would like to thank
the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the United
Nations for jointly organizing, with the Nigerian
Mission, the High-level Forum on African Perspectives
on Security Sector Reform, held in May 2010. We are
grateful to the Government of the Netherlands for
supporting that event. We encourage similar initiatives
that promote national ownership and sustainability.

The rapid emergence of African States as
providers of SSR support is one development that, thus
far, has remained outside the scope of the prevailing
SSR discourse. In that connection, there is growing
recognition that African States are both recipients and
donors of SSR support. In line with the recent report on
civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85), we encourage further initiatives to support
South-South exchanges in SSR.

While SSR is recognized as an essential element
of multidimensional peacekeeping, it must form part of
a broader national reform agenda to ensure national
peace and security. Thus, while SSR is often a core
element in a peacekeeping exit strategy, it can also
contribute to conflict prevention by helping to build
effective and accountable security institutions. SSR is
also part of the long-term process of regular
institutional renewal for all States, regardless of their
level of development.

The lesson we learn from the indivisibility of
security is that national efforts to ensure security can
fall short if not tied to regional and global threats to
security. Let me therefore emphasize the intrinsic
interconnection between national SSR reform
processes and various regional and global initiatives.
The national SSR processes of several Member States
and the global framework being propagated by the
United Nations are interrelated. Indeed, regional
security frameworks not only help to address
transborder security challenges but also represent the
bridge between national and global levels of security
sector governance.

It is encouraging to note the excellent
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations in the area of SSR. We are confident
that the African Union SSR policy framework being
drafted at the request of the African Union Heads of
State and Government will form a critical building
block of the United Nations global SSR framework.
Once the African Union SSR policy framework has
been formally endorsed, the African Union will
continue to require the assistance of the United Nations
in ensuring an effective implementation of the policy.

Beyond Africa, I wish to strongly encourage the
Secretary-General to further explore general
approaches and frameworks for supporting the reform
and governance of the security sector. Nigeria is
willing to collaborate with States Members of the
United Nations and will explore with stakeholders,
including the SSR Group of Friends, possible ways of
enriching that agenda. We will work within the African
Union to ensure that a continental SSR policy
framework is expeditiously finalized with a plan of
action for its implementation.

In this regard, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the Nigerian Defence College will be collaborating
with an international foundation to organize an
international expert conference with the theme
"Promoting democratic security sector governance:
National experiences and best practices from
international actors", to be held in Abuja from 2 to
3 November.

Let me conclude by calling on the Secretary-
General to consider reviewing the United Nations
current engagement in this area since the release of his
report in 2008. His views on the current challenges
encountered in delivering on this important area of
work will support the creation of an enabling
environment and the generation of the requisite
resources for the United Nations to support Member
States more effectively and coherently in this area.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to members of the Council.

