Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and the representatives of Yemeni civil society for their briefings. China appreciates the efforts of the United Nations aimed at achieving a ceasefire, advancing the peace process and improving the humanitarian situation in the country. On 12 March, as President of the Security Council for that month, I presided over the last meeting held in the Council Chamber (see S/PV.8745), which was a public meeting, and on subsequent consultations, both on the situation in Yemen. Today members of the Council have overcome difficulties and returned to United Nations Headquarters for today's in-person meeting, again on Yemen. This fully demonstrates the great importance the Council and its members attach to the Yemeni issue. I thank the Secretariat staff for its efforts in this respect. Weare still not optimistic about the current situation in Yemen, as it is fraught with war, the risk of famine and disasters, and people living in dire conditions. The international community must step up its efforts to push for an early breakthrough in a political settlement of the Yemeni issue. China supports the search for a solution to the Yemeni problem involving the following three aspects: a nationwide ceasefire, economic and humanitarian measures and comprehensive political negotiations. Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity should be fully respected and safeguarded. In this regard, I would like to stress the following three points. First, the parties to the conflict should stop violence and improve the security situation on the ground. From April to May this year, a general ceasefire was achieved in northern Yemen. This shows that, as long as there is political will, it is not impossible achieve a ceasefire and stop violence. However, the recent increase in hostilities among parties to the conflict in Yemen has destabilized the security situation in the north and the south of the country. China is deeply concerned about this. Military means cannot solve any problem, but will only prolong the war and the suffering of the people. China urges all parties concerned to set store by the future of the country and interests of the people by actively heeding the call of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and immediately ceasing all hostilities. Secondly, we must remain committed to a political settlement and continue to promote good offices and mediation. Since last March, Special Envoy Griffiths has worked hard to broker a new peace initiative but, owing to various factors, progress has not been satisfactory. With regard to the issue in the south, the relevant parties once made political and military arrangements for the implementation of the Riyadh agreement under the auspices of Saudi Arabia. The progress in the implementation has been limited. Over the past few days, all parties have shown some positive movement in terms of the implementation of the agreement, which we hope can be translated into actual results. China calls on all parties to the conflict to strengthen cooperation with the Special Envoy, engage in in-depth consultations on the peace initiative, build consensus and narrow differences so as ensure the future of the agreement. At the same time, it is necessary to fully mobilize the countries of the region and urge them to play an active role, in synergy with the mediation efforts of the United Nations. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Yemen should be improved and humanitarian access guaranteed. The people of Yemen are facing multiple threats, such as violent conflict, economic crisis, floods, locusts and other plagues, including COVID-19. It is urgent to remove barriers to humanitarian access and expand the scale of humanitarian operations. The international community should encourage concerted actions by all parties in Yemen to assist the United Nations and relevant agencies in carrying out humanitarian relief operations so as to ease the suffering of the Yemeni people. Special attention should also be given to the difficulties and needs of women, children, people with disabilities and other vulnerable groups. The United Nations should also urge parties that have actual control in various regions to take effective measures to prevent and control the pandemic. On 15 July, China once again provided Yemen with a batch of supplies to fight the pandemic. We will continue to support and assist the Government and the people of Yemen, and we call on donor countries to fulfil their pledges as soon as possible. The issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker should be given great attention. We hope that all parties concerned will maintain dialogue on this issue in order to ensure that the United Nations technical team can conduct safety assessments and repairs of the tanker as soon as possible. We have noticed that there has been no substantive progress on access to the tanker so far, and the Yemeni Government and relevant neighbouring countries are seriously concerned about this matter. The Council should urge relevant parties to take practical actions to prevent the tanker from causing an environmental, human and economic catastrophe.
