Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this essential debate. We
join previous speakers in thanking the Secretary-
General and Under-Secretary-General Holmes for their
briefings and their active involvement in addressing
this important subject.

Armenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union. We would also like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitment to protect civilians, through the
implementation of the provisions of international
humanitarian law. Therefore, we share the views
expressed by Council members and other speakers,
which call for more systematic attention to protection.
We believe that this issue should be frequently
reflected in the deliberations of the Security Council.

We are also convinced that increased efforts to
fight impunity at the national and international levels
are essential. Armenia therefore welcomes the Austrian
initiative to hold this open debate. It provides an
opportunity to recap and reflect on the Council's past
experience in dealing with the issue of the protection
of civilians and to highlight priority aspects for united
practical action. In a lessons-learned process, this
debate should also enable the Council to more
effectively address specific concerns related to the
protection of civilian populations.

The Council has to send a clear message to all
parties to armed conflicts, reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law.

It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians, including women,
children and older persons, as well as international
humanitarian personnel, continue to suffer in conflict
situations.

Armenia believes that the international
community must effectively seek thorough compliance
by all parties with the norms of international
humanitarian law. The relevance of that need was
underscored by the tragic events in the early 1990s in
Nagorny Karabakh, when only Armenia's involvement
prevented ethnic cleansing, which had been subtly
conducted by Azerbaijan during the 70 years of Soviet
rule and was aimed at wiping out Armenians from their
ancestral homes.

The position held by Azerbaijan, with its long-
established distortion of facts, came as no surprise to
us. In 1992, the Azerbaijani President told the
European media that responsibility for the slaughter of
the civilian population of the Azeri city of Khojalu,
which was referred to in this Chamber, near
Stepanakert, the capital of Nagorny Karabakh,
completely lay with the Azeri opposition group, the
Azerbaijani National Front. In the days following the
event, President Mutalibov, in an interview with Czech
journalist Dana Mazalova, said that the militia of the
Azerbaijani National Front had actively obstructed and
actually prevented the exodus of the local population
through the mountain passages which had been
especially left open by Karabakh Armenians to
facilitate the flight of the civilian population.

The hope and the intention of the Azerbaijani side
was to utilize civilian losses of such a magnitude to
instigate a popular uprising against the Baku regime
and seize the reins of power. The attempts of the
Azerbaijani authorities to resolve the dispute militarily
brought about unexpected consequences for them.
What had promised to be a quick campaign to rid
Nagorny Karabakh of its native Armenian population
turned out to be an exhausting military conflict with a
loss of territory, numerous casualties and hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons
on both sides.

In that conflict, as in any other conflict, it is
civilians living on both sides of the border who
continue to suffer the consequences of the unresolved
dispute.

The peaceful resolution of any conflict is not an
easy enterprise and requires strong political will and
painful compromises from both sides. We believe that
the time has come to replace the unchanged rhetoric of
warmongering and hollow allegations with constructive
steps aimed at making the environment more
conducive to a peaceful settlement.

Armenia remains committed to the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorny Karabakh conflict and
strongly believes that a fundamental resolution of the
problem can be achieved only by peaceful means based
on the principles of international law.

We believe that the Security Council should
further contribute to the strengthening of the rule of
law and to upholding international law by supporting
criminal justice mechanisms.

