Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing.
I join previous speakers in welcoming Mrs. Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and I thank her
for her briefing. As a European, I fully subscribe to
Ms. Ashton's statement. I assure her ofmy country's full
support in the Council, in the context of her mandate,
to strengthen cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations in promoting international
peace and security.

As a founding member both of the United Nations
and the European Union, Luxembourg appreciates the
values shared by the two organizations. In the words of
the Charter of the United Nations, those values include

"faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small".

The United Nations and the European Union have
the same goal of promoting peace. Each represents a
peace project born of the same desire to protect future
generations from the scourge of war.

This third presentation to the Council by the High
Representative, following those of 2010 and 2011,
clearly shows that the European Union remains a
reliable partner of the United Nations. The 27 members
of the European Union contribute more than one-third
of the ordinary and peacekeeping budgets of the United
Nations. The European Union and the United Nations
closely cooperate at Headquarters and on the ground.
The European External Action Service and the United
Nations Secretariat maintain continuous contact. Our
joint actions now involve all aspects of responding
to international crises, in particular emergency crisis
management, humanitarian efforts, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and development.

Allow me to echo the High Representative in
highlighting two examples that illustrate the synergy
of efforts undertaken by the European Union and the
United Nations in Africa - in Somalia, in the regional
context ofthe Horn ofAfrica, and in Mali, in the regional
context of the Sahel. Since 2011, the European Union
has developed its Strategic Framework for the Horn of
Africa, which emphasizes the need to link security, the
fight against poverty and good governance. In Somalia,
the significant support of the European Union relates to
those three areas.

Since its launch in March 2007, the European Union
and the United Nations have supportedthe African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). To date, the EU has
contributed more than €400 million to pay the salaries
of the Green Helmets and the Mission's operations in
Nairobi through the African Peace Facility. AMISOM's
contribution to security in Somalia is inestimable, and
for now remains essential. In the medium-term, it will
be up to us to decide how the international community
will support Somalia in order to ensure that the Somali
National Security Forces - which are supported by
an EU training programme - will be able to assume
responsibility for their country's security.

Also in 2011, the European Union developed its
Strategy for Security and Development in the Sahel.
In recent months, the international community's
attention has rightly focused on Mali to respond to the
multifaceted crisis affecting that country. The European
Union and the United Nations are dynamically engaged
politically, militarily and financially to respond to
a situation that threatens regional and international
peace and security. In the next few months, the synergy
between the European Union training mission in Mali
and the stabilization mission to be established under
the auspices of the United Nations will be crucial.
Beyond the crisis in Mali, it is now urgent that the
United Nations also develop an integrated strategy on
the Sahel.

The European Union is actively committed also
in the Middle East, playing a key role in the efforts
of the international community with respect to the
nuclear programme in Iran. Europe maintains a firm
attitude in that regard, while calling for diplomacy and
dialogue. We therefore welcomed the announcement
that negotiations will resume between Iran and the
E3+3 in Almaty on 26 February, after several months of
interruption. Like the High Representative, we express
the hope that those discussions will lead to significant
progress towards achieving a negotiated solution.

In Syria, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate day by day. A protracted conflict will
lead only to the destruction of the country. Every
effort must be made to promote a negotiated political
settlement of the crisis. At the start of the week, as
was noted, Mr. Al-Khatib once again called upon the
Syrian authorities to follow up on their initiative to talk
with the aim of ending the bloodshed. We hope that the
Damascus authorities will respond to that request for
dialogue extended by the head of the Syrian National
Coalition. As the High Representative mentioned,
it will be necessary for the European Union and the
United Nations to continue to work hand in hand at the
political level and to provide assistance to the affected
populations in Syria and in neighbouring countries.

I would like to add a comment on the peace process
in the Middle East. We of course support the efforts
made by the European Union as a member ofthe Quartet,
along with the United Nations, the Russian Federation
and the United States, to foster a resumption of direct
talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians. If there
is an area where close cooperation and engagement have
added value, it is there. When the talks resume - which
we hope will happen soon on the basis of a structured
framework and the parameters indicated by the High
Representative - the parties will require appropriate
international support and determined commitment on
the part of all key stakeholders.

Finally, allow me to highlight a subject that is dear
to our hearts - the protection of children in armed
conflict. Yesterday we celebrated the International
Day against the Use of Child Soldiers. We welcome the
joint press statement on that subject issued by the High
Representative and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. For 10 years now, the European
Union has taken a stance on children in armed conflict.
The European Union and its member States can promote
the protection of children in armed conflict through
political dialogue and cooperation measures.

Luxembourg particularly welcomes the European
Union initiative to allocate its Nobel Peace Prize money
to projects devoted to child victims of war. In particular,
that initiative will help to revive hope among Syrian
refugee children in Iraq and the children displaced by
the conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo by providing them with access to basic education.
In that area as in others, the European Union and the
United Nations can make a difference by working
together and in complementarity. Luxembourg pledges
its continuous support to strengthen that partnership.

