Let me begin by thanking Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing, as well as her tireless efforts and sustained diplomatic shuttling between the Libyan parties. Her wide- ranging and consistent consultations with all actors in Libya testify to the fact that women can lead when given the opportunity to do so. Ms. Williams has given pride to millions of women everywhere, especially this year as we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations - towards the future we want. We also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Taher Elsonni, to this meeting, and look forward to his briefing on the latest developments in his homeland. South Africa is encouraged by the recent positive developments in Libya, which we believe have initiated a process for leading Libyans on a positive trajectory. We therefore encourage the parties to continue the positive momentum in the interest of all Libyans. In that regard, my remarks this morning will focus on three points: security developments, the political track and the economic and humanitarian situation. First, South Africa welcomes the progress made in Libya following the signing of the ceasefire agreement on 23 October and the continued in-person engagement of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission to give practical expression to the agreement. We welcome the relative calm and the cessation of hostilities that have resulted from the holding ceasefire. We are also encouraged by the prevailing amicable and harmonious conduct of the parties to the negotiations. Those developments build trust and confidence in the process as it unfolds, and we must sustain that momentum going forward, reaffirming that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya. That has proven to be self-evident, as the drawn-out conflict brought no benefit for the people of Libya but only destruction and unnecessary suffering. Instead, the constructive discussions we have witnessed have paved the way towards a political road map that should ultimately contribute to a peaceful and sustainable political solution. In that regard, South Africa wishes to reiterate that an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process is essential to building a sustainable political solution. Secondly, South Africa believes that united institutions in Libya must form the basis for the restoration of justice and accountability for all Libyan citizens, and we continue to express our full support for the United Nations three-step political process, as during the United Nations-led Berlin process. We welcome the resumption of the in-person Libyan Political Dialogue Forum launched in Tunis on 9 November and express our appreciation to the Government of Tunisia for supporting the Libyan people in their quest for peace and stability. Those talks are significant and have led to agreements being reached on critical decisions, including the holding of elections on 24 December 2021, the opening of airports and the resumption of local flights, the opening of roads linking cities and the establishment of a joint force to protect oil facilities and infrastructure. We express our full support for those talks as the parties move ever closer to creating a road map for free, fair and credible parliamentary and presidential elections. In that regard, South Africa reiterates its support for the ongoing efforts of the African Union (AU) through its Peace and Security Council and the High- level Committee on Libya and its Contact Group, as well as the work of the AU Special Envoy for Libya, as they continue to engage with the main stakeholders in the country. We believe that the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union should work in unison in order to achieve the common goal of ending the conflict in Libya. Thirdly, we must all bear in mind that if the conflict in Libya continues, it will lead only to a further deterioration of the humanitarian and economic conditions, made worse by the coronavirus disease pandemic. South Africa is therefore deeply concerned about the devastation and humanitarian damage that the conflict has already wrought. We welcome the resumption of oil production and exports for the benefit of all Libyans. We are pleased to note that oil production has now reached 1 million barrels per day, which will increase revenue and alleviate some of Libya's economic suffering. We also welcome the efforts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya to ensure that all Libyans do in fact benefit and that the arms embargo is respected, in order reduce the possibility of fuelling further conflict. In that regard, we call for an end to all foreign interference in Libya, as it not only prolongs the suffering resulting from continued armed conflict but also threatens the sovereignty of Libya and the efforts to unify State authority. Much remains to be done to consolidate this positive start towards ensuring sustainable peace, security and development in Libya. It will be important to put in place a ceasefire monitoring and verification mechanism to help to preserve the current relative calm and prevent any further violence. Verifying the repatriation of foreign fighters, along with all their equipment and arms should form an important part of that process. It is also necessary to remove all landmines around cities, service points and infrastructure. As for the path ahead, in terms of the political dialogue and putting the constitutional framework in place for the eventual holding of elections, we call on all parties as well as the United Nations and the AU and their partners to make every effort to start that work as soon as possible so that elections can take place as agreed by the parties. We believe that those steps can take place concurrently with the African Union's efforts to convene an intra-Libyan reconciliation conference in Addis Ababa, which will be key to bringing Libyans together and healing the country. In that regard, South Africa would like to call on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Envoy without delay to oversee and support the political process in Libya, in accordance with resolution 2542 (2020). In conclusion, we are confident that the Libyan people will soon deliver themselves from the near-decade-old tumult and armed conflict, through sustained inclusive political dialogue with the coordinated support of the international community.
