Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Kuwait, who is presiding over
today's meeting of the Security Council. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing. We
appreciate and support his efforts in carrying our the
duties entrusted to him. Similarly, my delegation thanks
UNAMI for its important and outstanding efforts in
discharging its mandate. We encourage it to continue to
foster dialogue and coordinate efforts to strengthen the
process for peace and reconciliation in Iraq.

We begin by commending the Iraqi security forces
on their Victory over Da'esh, which was announced
by Iraq's Prime Minister, Mr. Haider Al Abadi, on
9 December 2017. We reiterate our sincere gratitude
to the Iraqi security forces and to the entire Iraqi
population for their courage, sacrifice and resolute
fight against terrorism on our behalf. That significant
achievement should lead to greater unity among all
sectors in society. To that end, political actors and the
Government must focus on eliminating sectarian and
divisive rhetoric, and call for unity and reconciliation in
an effort to achieve stability and reconstruction in Iraq.

In addition, we underscore that, in line with
the mandate outlined in resolution 2379 (2017), the
Secretary-General and the Government of Iraq agreed
on the terms of reference to establish an investigative
team to determine those responsible for atrocities
committed by Da'esh and bring them to justice before
Iraqi courts. We firmly believe that the establishment
of an investigative team, led by a special adviser, is
crucial to combat impunity, make amends to the victims
and bolster reconciliation efforts.

Similarly, amid efforts to rebuild Iraq, we
underscore Kuwait's support and willingness to
cooperate, as demonstrated by its hosting of the
International Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq
on 12 to 14 February. We hope that the pledges will
improve the plight of the Iraqi people by prioritizing
their development, stability and prosperity. Nonetheless,
in spite of such progress, we regret that asymmetrical
attacks that claim the lives of innocent civilians still
occur. During the reporting period, at least 108 people
were killed and more than 240 wounded, including
women and children. The plight of more then 1,500
Yazidi women and children still under the control of
Da'esh remains a concern that must be addressed as
soon as possible.

We take note of the electoral calendar adopted
by the Council of Representatives. We hope that the
legislation and legal mechanisms required for the
electoral process in May this year will be developed in
a participatory and inclusive manner by and for Iraqis,
with a view to holding orderly, peaceful and transparent
elections. We believe that we must step up efforts to
ensure the dignified and safe voluntary return of more
than 6 million internally displaced persons, and enable
them to return to their homes, regain control of their
lives and participate freely in the electoral process.

The clearing and removal of explosive remnants
of war is essential, as the security of the population
is indispensable to the process of reconstruction.
Once again, we underscore the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service in Iraq. We call upon the
international community to support its work and unite
efforts to effectively implement resolution 2365 (2017).

With regard to efforts conducted by Iraq to identify
areas where mass graves might be located and to recover
and return Kuwaiti property, we take note of the remains
founds in Basra and Najaf, and we the support role of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. We call
upon the international community to provide support to
build capacity within the Iraqi Government to identify
mass graves and increase and enhance technical skills
for improved forensic testing.

Finally, we encourage the parties involved to
redouble their efforts to deliver tangible results and
give continuity to the process of reconciliation in Iraq
and Kuwait.

