Mr. de Moura (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): I begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of the Government of
the Republic of Angola and on my own behalf, on your
assumption for February of the presidency of this
important United Nations body, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
international security.

Let me also congratulate His Excellency Ambassador
Emilio Cardenas, the outgoing President, on the way in
which he conducted the work of the Council last month.

Our warm congratulations go also to the newly
elected members of the Security Council, to which I wish
the best of success in their work in solving the numerous
problems that the international community is facing.

 

The presence in this Chamber of a ministerial
delegation from the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
composed of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of several
African countries, heartens us and further shows us that
African countries, whether independently or through their
continental organization the OAU, are deeply committed to
the search for solutions to the extremely serious problems
afflicting the African continent. We hail the presence of the
Foreign Ministers here today and thank them for their
gesture of solidarity with the Government and the people of
Angola, who aspire to peace and understanding.

Of late, Angola has been discussed extensively in this
important United Nations body because of the devastating
war that has lasted for several years, with respect to the
resolution of which the Security Council continues to make
an invaluable contribution.

At the last meeting of the Council devoted to the
situation in Angola, we described to members the efforts
that the Angolan Government and the international
community are making towards a negotiated solution of the
post-election crisis in Angola. Today, the situation in
Angola has evolved in a positive way, and there are
prospects for a lasting peace for the Angolan people. Over
two months have elapsed since the formal signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. Notwithstanding the understandably slow
pace of the process due to its complexity, we can state our
certainty that the implementation of the phases provided for
in the Lusaka Protocol is, from our point of view,
irreversible. This leads us to believe that, this time, peace
has come to stay.

Therefore, it is a pleasure for me to announce before
this forum that the current military situation on the ground
in Angola is calm. The cease-fire that entered into force on
22 November 1994 is being observed without any major
incidents. The minor incidents that have occurred are not
unusual in a sensitive process such as ours and, therefore,
are far from posing a threat to the success of the peace
process and cannot be used as a pretext for hindering or
delaying the completion of the steps set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol. The Joint Commission created under the Lusaka
Protocol is operating normally under the guidance of its
tireless Chairman, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, who has
made every effort to promote the full implementation of the
provisions of the Protocol.

As members know, the invitation addressed by His
Excellency President Jose Eduardo dos Santos to the leader
of Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA),
Mr. Jonas Savimbi, for a meeting within Angolan territory
and the acceptance of that invitation constitute another
positive step towards the creation of a climate of
confidence for the Angolan people and the international
community, which will help strengthen peace and national
reconciliation.
I stress that, with the letter the President sent to
Mr. Savimbi and Mr. Savimbi's recent response in which
he gave his agreement to the meeting - with proper
preparation - and took due account of his responsibility
for the meetings taking place, the meeting could well
take place shortly.

The meetings of the military chiefs of staff of the
Government and of UNITA, held at Chipipa, Huambo
province, and at Waku-Kungo, Kuanza-Sul province,
constituted another important step towards building trust
between the two military forces, which in the near future
will form a single army under the command of a single
commander-in-chief. A practical result of these meetings
was the acceleration of the disengagement of Government
and UNITA forces in the areas in which they were in
direct contact, thus avoiding the risk of confrontation and
allowing the establishment of verification, monitoring and
control machinery, including a three-way communications
system, the beginnings of free movement of people and
goods, and the cessation of hostile propaganda between
the Government and UNITA.

The report of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, on the evolution of the peace process in
Angola since the adoption of resolution 966 (1994)
clearly illustrates the situation as I have described it.

Taking into account the positive developments in the
process, which to some extent allay the concerns of the
Council as expressed in its resolution 966 (1994), my
Government considers that the conditions have been
created for the speedy constitution of a UNAVEM. III
with a specific mandate as set forth in the Lusaka
Protocol, including technical, material and human
resources sufficient for it to carry out its mandate. The
creation and rapid deployment of UNAVEM. III would be
one of the best ways to avoid the mistakes that were
made at the time of the implementation of the Bicesse
accords, thus avoiding the derailment of the process.

We are aware of the high costs involved in the
deployment of UNAVEM. III, but, quoting His Excellency
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos,

 

"these costs will be but a fraction of the cost of a war
and dealing with its victims".

In this context, my Government wishes to emphasize
the need for the quick deployment of UNAVEM. III,
because it alone - as we all know - will bear
responsibility for the quartering, disarming and selection of
UNITA troops that are to be integrated into the unified
national army of Angola and for the demobilization of the
excess military personnel that will be reintegrated into
civilian life after receiving vocational training.

My Government wishes to reaffirm that the Lusaka
Protocol signals the beginning of a decisive step towards
the definitive solution to the Angolan internal conflict, by
establishing a unique opportunity for eliminating completely
the threat of renewed war. At the same time, it has paved
the way for the normal functioning of the democratic
institutions that emerged from the multi-party elections,
which both the United Nations and the international
community declared to be free and fair.

The Lusaka Protocol thus creates prospects for the
exercise of democracy in Angola, a democracy free of
armed parties and one in which the will of the people,
expressed at the ballot box, will be respected. Under such
conditions, the Government of the Republic of Angola will
be in a position to concentrate all its efforts on the social
and economic development and well-being of all the
Angolan people. In order for us to fulfil this aspiration, it
is important that the international community should
continue to play its role in the consolidation of peace and
stability in Angola and discourage all those who plan to act
in a manner contrary to the spirit and the letter of the
Lusaka Protocol.

The Angolan Government believes that this meeting of
the Security Council, with the creation of UNAVEM. III,
will open up a new phase, because it will spare the people
of Angola, who yearn for peace, more frustration. As to the
responsibilities of the Government, I wish to reiterate our
determination to make every effort to facilitate the tasks of
UNAVEM. III by ensuring safety and providing the
necessary facilities for its work.

Though such an amount is unprecedented in the annals
of the Council's peace-keeping activities, my Government
estimates that the costs of the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol may be as much as $1.26 billion. As we have
previously stated, both here and at the bilateral level with
some of those present here today, that amount would cover
the following expenses: installation of UNAVEM. III in
Angola; installation and temporary cantonment of UN ITA
military personnel and their families; reconstruction of the
main airfields, railways, ports, roads, bridges, streets and
other infrastructure that will be used by the United
Nations troops - here I wish to state that, according to
studies carried out by my Government through its relevant
Ministries, there are at this time 109 destroyed bridges, a
number not equalled even in the colonial war;
resettlement of displaced persons, of whom there are
approximately 3.5 million in the country, victims of the
war; demobilization of excess military personnel, both of
UNITA and of the Government; social reintegration of
demobilized personnel, including technical vocational
training before reintegration into productive society;
re-establishment of the State administration in areas
previously under the control of UNITA forces, which,
under the provisions of Security Council resolution 864
(1993), will have to pull out of those areas; reconstruction
of the various kinds of infrastructure destroyed during the
war; and Government administration and communications.

Towards the amount I have referred to, and in order
to address the various points I have indicated, the
Government will immediately contribute approximately
$64.7 million in cash. This amount would be allotted as
follows: $15.5 million outlaid from the Government
budget for a residential compound; parking facilities;
harbour space for vessels; harbour and airport
warehouses, including offices; and fuel and fuel
derivatives. This would include a 30 per cent discount on
international prices for incoming goods, exemption from
customs-clearance formalities, the granting of parcels of
land and so on. The disbursement of these amounts by the
Angolan Government will be facilitated if UNITA
completely disengages itself from the mining areas it
occupies in the province of Lunda, where it is illegally
mining diamonds.

Although there is a general climate of peace as far
as military activity is concerned and there is already free
movement of people and goods, the social and
humanitarian situation is still a matter of concern. The
consequences of the war are clearly evident. Other tasks
that we must carry out include reintegration of the excess
UNITA troops to be demobilized, various forms of
assistance to the millions of displaced persons and
refugees who are returning to their places of origin,
reconstruction of basic infrastructure and clearance of
land-mines.

Since this is a far-reaching humanitarian operation
that will include people from UNITA and other political

 

parties within the framework of a true national
reconciliation, the international community is urged to play
an important role as part of this operation and not impose
conditions of various kinds. Peace is within our grasp; it is
close. Let us not focus on absurd or contradictory demands
different from positions already taken by the Assembly or
Council.

The mobilization of financial and humanitarian aid is
therefore a sine qua non for us to overcome the challenges
that we face under the present circumstances. In this
context, therefore, I launch an appeal to the international
community and to all governmental and non-governmental
organizations, asking them to continue, even more
vigorously, to lend their support, in all possible forms, to
the Angolan Government, which truly wants a lasting peace
for all Angolans so that conditions may be created for
beneficial cooperation with all Member States with which
the Government of Angola maintains relations.

I also wish to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Angola, to express our
gratitude for the generous humanitarian assistance that we
have so far received from various Governments, at the
bilateral and multilateral levels, specialized agencies in the
United Nations system and non- governmental organizations.
Our special thanks go to those who have been directly
involved in the distribution of humanitarian aid to the
needy, very often at the risk of their own lives.

Before concluding, I reiterate the deep appreciation of
my Government to my colleagues the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs who, representing, firstly, the Organization of
African Unity and, secondly, their respective Governments,
travelled to New York to express their solidarity with the
people of Angola at this time when it is striving for a well-
deserved and lasting peace. I assure Their Excellencies that
we will do honour to this gesture of solidarity by promising
to do everything in our power to fulfil the commitments we
entered into at Lusaka. I should like to reiterate once again
the deep gratitude of the Government of the Republic of
Angola for the tireless efforts they have made on behalf of
peace and national reconciliation in Angola. I extend our
gratitude also to all those countries that have already
indicated their willingness to contribute men, mate'riel and
other support to UNAVEM. III. We hope that the adoption
at this meeting of the resolution establishing UNAVEM. III
will be a step towards the definitive establishment of lasting
peace in Angola.

(spoke in French)

Lastly, we should like to express our concern with
regard to some paragraphs - specifically, paragraphs 6,
8 and 12 - in the draft resolution that is soon to be put
to the Council for adoption. Indeed, this concern was the
reason for our late arrival today. At the appropriate
moment, we shall put forward specific proposals to
improve the text. These will reflect a number of concerns
that we had already submitted for the consideration of the
President of our Republic, who called us this morning to
convey his concern in respect of the paragraphs I
mentioned just now.

