Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to first of all congratulate France for taking the
initiative to organize this meeting on the plight of
children in armed conflict, a theme specifically centred
on child victims of non-State armed groups. I welcome
the remarks of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which
highlight the nature and the extent of the phenomenon,
the efforts by the United Nations and its future work
on the issue. I pay tribute to Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Director General of UNICEF, whose
remarks commanded our full attention. I welcome the
representatives of civil society organizations, including
Ms. Julie Bodin, and the highly moving testimony by
Mr. Junior Nzita.

Benin aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the African Union.

The United Nations and the international community
are moving towards the celebration, in July 2015, of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), through which the Security Council
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism and
a Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We will mark, in March, the first anniversary of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. We will assess the
level of commitment of the various stakeholders and the
progress made and explore new avenues for work that is
as efficient as possible.

Benin, which in 2005 introduced and participated
in the negotiations on resolution 1612 (2005), is
delighted to have been able to promote a mechanism that
continues to prove its effectiveness. We hope that this
trend will continue and be strengthened so as to enable
us to achieve the lofty goals that our Organization
has set, namely eradicating the phenomenon of child
soldiers. Significant progress has been made since then.
However, 10 years after the resolution's adoption, the
phenomenon of child soldiers unfortunately persists.
I salute the commitment of people of good will who
have worked to strengthen the mechanism, to expand
its jurisdiction and to support the work of the Council's
Working Group.

The nature of armed conflict and the tactics used
by combatants have changed dramatically. I would note
in particular the lack of clearly defined battlefields,
the increased diversity of parties to the conflict, and
the fact that places such as schools and hospitals,
which traditionally were shelters, are now deliberately
targeted. Children and students are kidnapped, enlisted
and indoctrinated. For example, there is extremist sect
Boko Haram's standard procedure of using children
as suicide bombs to carry out terrorist attacks. That
extremist sect massacres children on a daily basis by
destroying schools, health centres and entire villages
and carries out massive abductions of girls in order to
force them into marriage, slavery or to carry explosives.
My country believes that, in order for the fight
against the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict to be effective, it must incorporate
both universal adherence to relevant international
instruments and scrupulous respect for them, as stated
so clearly in the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups,
which Benin fully supports.

States should also place particular emphasis on
strengthening national mechanisms for resilience and
the protection of children and should raise further
awareness about the harmful effects of the practice.
It is important to firmly combat extremist movements
such as Boko Haram. Military action must continue
to go hand in hand with diplomatic efforts to secure
the release, recovery and rehabilitation of children
affected by armed conflict. The United Nations must
continue to explore the most appropriate channels to
make contact with non-State armed groups so as to lead
them to commit to sparing children from recruitment
and violent action. In this regard, we strongly support
the ongoing work by the United Nations and civil
society to increase the number of non-State groups and
Governments concerned that are signing agreements
and action plans to put an end violence against children
and negotiate the release of those already enlisted.

We must work to find suitable formulas and
mechanisms for the sustainable reintegration of
demobilized children. To that end, it is important
that the United Nations ensure that peace agreements
contain firm commitments to children in the context
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes so as to ensure that they are integrated
into normal working life in a rewarding manner and
able to obtain the resources necessary to sustain their
existence and achieve their full development.

The recognition of the recruitment and use of
children in conflict as a crime against humanity opens
the way for prosecution. We must work to strengthen
legal action, through advanced legal cooperation aimed
at depriving criminals any sanctuary and bringing them
before international criminal courts. The International
Criminal Court should be encouraged to seize itself
of such cases and prosecute the perpetrators of such
crimes. In this respect, it is important to welcome the
judgement of the International Criminal Court against
Thomas Lubanga for conscripting, enlisting and using
child soldiers. That judgement is, without a doubt,
a very strong message that shows the determination
of the international community to put an end to this
shameful practice.
On 3 August 1990, the Government of Benin
ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which was adopted in New York on 20 November 1989,
and later ratified its 2000 Optional Protocol on the sale
of children, child prostitution and child pornography.
Benin has also has a legal code for children that
protects them against any practice that could endanger
their physical and moral integrity, including their
involvement in armed conflict.

