Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to start,
ifI may, on a different topic. I would like to join the
Secretary-General in expressing our deep sadness at
the passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. I would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Amano's tireless work in the
pursuit of peace, and we send our deepest condolences
to Japan and his family and friends.

Turning to today's debate, I would like to begin,
as others have done, by talking about the recent Peace
to Prosperity conference that was held in Bahrain at
the end of June. The United States efforts to support
the development of the Palestinian economy are very
welcome. It is crucial that we improve the daily life and
prospects of Palestinians across East Jerusalem, the
West Bank and Gaza.

For the United Kingdom, we are doubling the United
Kingdom's aid to the occupied Palestinian territories
between 2018 and 2023. We are helping to address
restrictions on movement and access and improving
water and energy supply, particularly in Gaza. We also
support efforts that complement that work.

As others have noted, it is, of course, essential that
political progress be made in order to unlock economic
opportunities, and we encourage the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to engage in work
with the international community to foster solutions
that actively improve the situation on the ground.
What Mr. Greenblatt said on the political aspect of the
proposals was a welcome assurance.

For the record, the United Kingdom's position
on the two-State solution remains unchanged. But
in the interim until there is political progress, I just
wanted to stress that steps need to be taken to address
the constraints imposed on the Palestinian economy
by the Israeli occupation. We want to see increasing
external trade opportunities for the Palestinians, a
reduction in internal movement and access restrictions
and sustainable investments in water and energy
infrastructure. We also want the financial sustainability
of the Palestinian Authority to be realized.

Looking towards fresh negotiations, it is obviously
essential to build a conducive environment, which
means that we need genuine and committed engagement
from both parties, including the end of actions that
undermine trust and threaten the viability of the two-
State solution.

We therefore urge the Palestinian Authority
to address allegations of incitement, including in
the education curriculum, and to make reforms to
prisoner payments, ensuring that those are needs
based, transparent and affordable. We remain deeply
concerned, as also reflected in the statements of
other speakers today, about the ongoing advance of
Israeli settlements, including the more than 200 units
established in Gilo on 10 July, and about the retroactive
approvals of unauthorized settlement outposts.
Settlements are illegal and they undermine the physical
viability of a future Palestinian State. Settler violence,
the demolition of Palestinian property and evictions of
Palestinians from their homes should be opposed and
condemned wholeheartedly.

The demolition since Sunday of a number of
Palestinian properties in the Sur Baher area ofJerusalem
governorate are particularly egregious, in part because
much of the area lies in Palestinian Authority-controlled
areas. We also condemn the eviction of the Siam family
in Silwan on 10 July. The Israeli authorities have a
responsibility to provide appropriate protection to
the Palestinian civilian population. We remain deeply
concerned by suggestions that any parts ofthe occupied
Palestinian territories should be annexed. Such a move
would be country to international law, destructive to
peace efforts and could not pass unchallenged.

Let me be clear about our views on terrorism.
We equally condemn in the strongest terms Hamas
terrorism and that of other militant groups in Gaza.
Since the start of the Great March of Return in 2018,
there have been nearly 2,000 rockets and mortar shells
fired from the Gaza Strip into Israel. That is completely
unacceptable and we call on Hamas and other militant
groups to cease such attacks immediately.

We recognize Israel's legitimate security needs.
However, we do have concerns about the excessive use
of force by the Israel Defense Forces. Measures used
need to be appropriate and in line with international
law. Accountability needs to be sought through
swift transparent investigations and we welcome the
investigations currently being pursued by Israel, under
the Military Advocate General.

I would like to join others in expressing the United
Kingdom's gratitude to the United Nations and Egypt
for their efforts to mediate between the parties. Echoing
what the Under-Secretary-General said, we also
encourage those involved in the reconciliation process
to allow the Palestinian Authority to fully resume its
Government functions in Gaza.

We believe that it is essential that the international
community continue work to support Palestinian
refugees. Their status needs to be agreed on as part of
wider peace negotiations, but until that time, the United
Kingdom remains firmly committed to supporting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and refugees
across the Middle East. We also welcome the successful
outcome of the pledging conference on 25 June, for
which we were able to include an additional $25 million
of United Kingdom funding, increasing our 2019-2020
support to over $70 million.

Ijust wanted to pick up on something the German
representative said about international law. We share
his View that the Security Council is responsible for
maintaining international peace and security and we
all agree that the Arab-Israeli conflict is a threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore right that
we have adopted resolutions on that topic. We are bound
by those resolutions and we all have a responsibility to
implement them, just as we do to implement resolutions
on other topics. Indeed, that is the very basis of the
Council's work.

I was also asked by the Israeli representative about
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. So, although
I did not want to talk about Iran today, let me just
address that point, if I may. Together with France and
Germany, the United Kingdom is urging Iran not to take
further steps away from the agreement and to return to
compliance. The agreement itself allows for that.

On the general point, we are clear that the nuclear
agreement is still the best option and in the interests of
both Iranian and global security. It is critical that Iran
does not develop nuclear weapons and that agreement
makes the world a safer place by taking the prospect
of a nuclear-armed Iran off the table. Indeed, military
representatives in some of the countries that criticized
the agreement have confirmed its role in national and
international security. I alluded earlier to the sad passing
away of Mr. Amano, the International Atomic Energy
Agency plays a critical part in looking at compliance
with the agreement.

Let me return to the Middle East peace process, if
I may. As I said, our position remains unchanged. We
support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.

