Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I wish to associate my
delegation fully with the statement to be made later in
the debate by the Permanent Representative of Spain
on behalf of the European Union.

My authorities are deeply disturbed at the failure
to implement resolution 1402 (2002) and resolution
1403 (2002). They are especially disturbed at Israel's
failure to withdraw its troops from Palestinian cities,
including Ramallah, in defiance of its obligations under
Security Council resolutions.

When resolution 1403 (2002) demanded the
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002) without
delay, the Council did not mean that it should be
implemented when Israel declared that its current
military operations had ended. It meant that there
should be no delay in Israel's turning its tanks around
and in withdrawing the troops from the A areas. The
demand of the Council, therefore, was not for
withdrawal when circumstances permitted, or on any
incremental basis. It meant Israeli withdrawal now -
now meaning 4 April. Instead, and on the contrary, the
Israeli authorities have extended their military
operations in Palestinian cities.

By Israel's own count, the current operation has
now resulted in more than 200 deaths among
Palestinians. Of course, many of these were innocent
civilians. There have also been very grave violations of
international humanitarian law accompanying Israeli
military actions. This is utterly unacceptable.

We have not been told how many of those killed
had been engaged in the planning and execution of
suicide bombings, who, according to Israel, are the
targets of its current military campaign. One thing,
however, is certain. The current operation, instead, may
well have created many more militants, and will have
recruited many more young people for extreme
political movements. The task of the Palestinian
Authority in exercising control and combating
terrorism in the A areas has been made still more
difficult through the destruction of still more of its
infrastructure. The Israeli actions are, by any standards,
in conflict with the vision set out by the Council in
resolution 1397 (2002), in the declaration of the Beirut
Summit, by President Bush, by the European Union
and by many others.

My delegation has said many times in this
Chamber that Israel is entitled to take measures to
defend itself against the terrorists who engage in
suicide bombings. In doing so, however, it is not
entitled to violate international humanitarian law. It is
also not entitled to suppress the economic and social
life of an entire population. It is not entitled to restrict
the movement of humanitarian aid or to put people's
lives at risk through preventing the movement of
ambulances. Recklessly endangering the lives of
civilians is criminal and counter-productive.

Irrespective of the outcome of the current Israeli
military campaign, the essential problem remains that
the legitimate rights and aspirations of the Palestinian
people have been frustrated for far too long. We have
said many times in this Chamber that the interests of
Israeli security are not served by holding the entire
Palestinian people in a state of subjection. They are
best served by engaging in a meaningful political
process leading to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace.

Resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), of
course, make demands on both sides. Ireland also calls
on the Palestinian Authority, for its part, to respond
positively and fully to the call for a ceasefire.

My authorities greatly welcome the impending
mission of Secretary of State Powell to the region, and
we hope that his efforts, together with those of the
"quartet" and others, will achieve a ceasefire and a
return to negotiations towards a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. These efforts, if they are to
succeed, must address concerns on all sides. The
mediators must also bear in mind that the Palestinian
people have the same right as the Israeli people to live
in peace and in dignity. They have the same right as the
Israeli people to choose their leaders. Treating them
with the necessary respect and dignity also means
treating their chosen leaders with respect, dignity and
impartiality. Equally, Israel has an absolute right to the
necessary security assurances.

My authorities also are seriously concerned at the
increase in tension along the Blue Line, and at the
violations of it that have taken place. I would recall
that the Security Council has endorsed the work of the
United Nations in establishing the Blue Line, and has
also endorsed the Secretary-General's conclusion that
Israel has withdrawn its forces from Lebanon in
accordance with resolution 425 (1978). This resolution,
as well as resolution 1310 (2000), and all other
Security Council resolutions, must be respected in all
its parts. The unacceptable attack that took place on
unarmed United Nations military observers last
Thursday and the attacks that led to the injury of
several Israeli soldiers and civilians are to be
condemned unreservedly.

Making a desert, whether militarily, politically or
economically, and calling it peace is hardly wise
policy. This is something that should be especially
pondered by Israel. Both sides know what must be
done for the sake of their peoples. Let this be done
without any further delay.

