Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway is a founding
member of the International Contact Group on Somalia
and we chair the Group of Friends here in New York.

The Djibouti process is a Somali process. It is
owned and driven by Somalis. The Transitional Federal
Institutions should be driving the process and should
do so with a unified approach. Norway applauded the
agreement between the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a in
March. We also commended the new agreement
between the TFG and Puntland. We are watching a
political transition in Somalia. It is important that the
door remain open to others. However, implementing
agreements is even more important than signing them,
and the TFG should be urged to address this with
seriousness.
Taking into account the approaching end of the
transition period in August 2011, efforts have to be
redoubled with regard to improving the security
situation, giving impetus to the political process, and
improving the lives of children, women and men in
Somalia. We recognize that the TFG is facing very
serious constraints and challenges, and we also realize
that the international community may not have been as
forthcoming with support and assistance as expected
by the TFG.

Norway has recently and for the first time
transferred a small amount of our support to the TFG
directly through the Central Bank of Somalia. This is
basically a test case to see if it works in a way that
satisfies the rules and regulations that we must observe
when disbursing public funds. In other words, we wish
to see this money create improved services in the city
of Mogadishu. If we do, we will give more.

Although the main aim is to bring an end to the
perennial humanitarian crisis in Somalia, Norway shall
continue to be a major partner with regard to
humanitarian assistance to Somalia. We want to
commend the United Nations for taking steps to
address the allegations in the latest report of the

sanctions Committee's Monitoring Group on Somalia
(S/2010/91).

We shall also continue our active support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
implementation of the Djibouti process, and the peace
and reconciliation efforts in general, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, as well as with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.

Realizing the paramount importance of the
security issue in Somalia, we commend the efforts and
sacrifices of the African Union and others, particularly
the countries contributing troops and police to the
African Union Mission in Somalia - Uganda and
Burundi - in assisting the attempts of the TFG to
stabilize the situation in the country, and we urge other
countries that are in a position to do so to follow their
lead. Peace and stability in Somalia are important not
only to the Somalis themselves, but also to the entire
Horn of Africa and far beyond.

Norway has also been very active in countering
piracy off the coast of Somalia. We have deployed a
frigate to the region and chaired the last meeting of the
Contact Group. Norway is also a substantial donor to
the Trust Fund established here at the United Nations.
Encouraging progress has been made and we look
forward to continuing to work with other States and
regional organizations on this matter.

