Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
his comprehensive briefing.

Once again, Poland would like to strongly emphasize
the utmost importance of providing sustained and
uninterrupted access for all humanitarian actors in the
whole of Syria. We call upon all parties to the conflict
to implement the ceasefire and ensure humanitarian
access and medical evacuations as unanimously agreed
in resolution 2401 (2018).

We remain deeply concerned about the situations
in Idlib governorate, which is struggling with the
influx of new internally displaced persons, and in
Aleppo province. In this context, we believe that
military operations in north-western Syria have
further complicated the situation and led to significant
displacement of the local population, which is another
source of our grave concern.

We would like to reiterate our strong call on all
parties affecting the situation on the ground, especially
the Russian Federation and Iran, to take all actions
necessary to arrive at the full cessation of hostilities
across the entire territory of Syria. We insist that
all parties in Syria comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Some small
positive steps involving some eight convoys were
taken in mid-March, which shows that it is possible
to make progress even though much more is needed.
Unfortunately, we have not yet seen any significant
changes in that area. In that connection, we call on
Russia, Iran and Turkey to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities as Astana guarantors.

Like many others, we would like to underline
the importance of the upcoming second Brussels
conference. It will address the tragic humanitarian
situation in Syria and reiterate the international
community's support to those in need in Syria, as well
as in neighbouring countries.

We would like also to take this opportunity to
reiterate our opinion that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict. We have always
supported efforts to end the war in Syria.

In conclusion, let me once again underline that a
political agreement remains the only way to achieve
a sustainable solution to this conflict, including the
lasting eradication of violent extremism. That requires
a genuine political transition in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) negotiated by the Syrian
parties within the United Nations-led Geneva process.
In that regard, Poland commends the tireless efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
to facilitate the implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions.

