Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank your delegation,
Madam President, for your initiative to convene this
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. John Holmes and Ms. Pillay for their
dynamic leadership on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

The topic that brings us together today lies at the
very heart of the Organization's mission, namely, to
promote peace, security, the well-being of civilian
populations and respect for human rights. However, we
must note that, despite the strengthening of the legal
regime in the area of the protection of civilians,
including resolution 1894 (2009), the number of
civilian victims of violence in armed conflict remains,
unfortunately, too high.

In approaching today's debate, we must keep in
mind the suffering and deep distress experienced by
millions of people, in particular women, children, the
disabled and the elderly, whose lives are brutally
plunged into horror on a daily basis. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission has
compiled figures proving the recruitment of 848
children in 2009. In Somalia, 110,000 people were
displaced during the first quarter of 2010. Finally, in
Afghanistan, over 2,150 communities are directly
affected, with an average of 42 persons killed or
injured by landmines and explosive devices every
month.

Ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict remains a complex and multidimensional
endeavour. It involves all aspects of the Security
Council's work in the areas of maintaining
international peace and security, humanitarian affairs,
the rule of law and matters pertaining to international
criminal law. I welcome the fact that today's debate is
taking place directly after the Security Council
examined consecutively, under Mexico's presidency,
the issues of international criminal tribunals and of
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

My delegation would like to address two essential
aspects related to our debate, namely, strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and the
responsibility of the perpetrators of violence.

Concerning the first point, my delegation remains
convinced that the protection of civilians in armed
conflict falls primarily to States themselves. The
Council therefore cannot consider an effective response
to this scourge without the full cooperation of the
relevant State.
Gabon would like to commend the progress
achieved in the past few years by the Council, in
particular with regard to incorporating into the
mandates of peacekeeping operations the urgent need
to protect civilian victims of armed conflict. Recently
adopted resolutions - including resolution 1933
(2010) on the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire, resolution 1925 (2010) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and resolution 1919 (2010) on
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan - illustrate
this well. Indeed, the mandates of these peacekeeping
operations are unique in that they adopt a
comprehensive and integrated approach based on
realities on the ground and are adapted to the crucial
security needs of the populations concerned.

Such an approach enables us to better guarantee
the security of displaced persons and refugees, to
prevent sexual violence and to better protect children.
The success of such an approach presupposes that
peacekeeping operations have the necessary
operational, technical, financial and human resources.
Furthermore, it would be wise to improve the
information exchange mechanisms between the various
parties to, and stakeholders in, conflicts.

In that connection, my country welcomes the
measures advocated by the Secretariat in the
elaboration of the so-called New Horizon Initiative. In
that regard, special focus should be placed on the need
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations.

In addition, the recommendations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations aimed at
forging a genuine partnership to improve the planning,
deployment and management of peacekeeping
operations, inter alia in Africa, must remain at the very
forefront of our concerns.

With respect to the second point, my delegation
notes that the strengthening of peacekeeping operations
will bear full fruit only if the Security Council
continues to devote all the necessary attention to the
issue of the criminal liability of the perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity, crimes of genocide
and all serious violence against civilian populations.

I am compelled to stress the need to pursue
awareness-raising work on this issue with non-State
armed groups, which too often undertake actions
beyond the pale of the law and believe that they can
escape justice. This issue is closely related to our
previous debate on the Security Council's action to end
impunity. This allows us better to understand the link
between the protection of civilians and the need for a
strong State capable of upholding all the attributes of
sovereignty. Our previous debates have also
underscored the link between the need for justice and
peacebuilding. This is the right place and time to recall
the critical role played by national tribunals, ad hoc
tribunals and the International Criminal Court in the
fight against impunity.

In conclusion, I pay a personal tribute to United
Nations personnel and all humanitarian organizations
for their dedication to the worthy cause of the victims
of armed conflict. Their activities in very difficult and
dangerous circumstances have averted terrible
humanitarian disasters and assisted those in distress. I
hope it can be agreed that a more effective fight against
violence against civilians in armed conflict requires
vigorous and concerted global action to prevent
conflicts.

