Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States was pleased to sponsor this important
resolution on persons with disabilities in armed
conflict (resolution 2475 (2019)). We thank Poland
and the United Kingdom for their tremendous and
tireless efforts to conduct a thorough and transparent
negotiation process.

This ground-breaking resolution is a significant
step forward in mainstreaming the rights of persons
with disabilities across the United Nations by bringing
the issue here, an area of the United Nations where we
have not done enough on the topic. Our delegation knows
first-hand the challenges we face in mainstreaming
disability rights across the United Nations system,
including physical access here at Headquarters. We are
therefore pleased to see a reference in the text to the
United Nations disability inclusion strategy.

Persons with disabilities are already marginalized
in times of peace; their vulnerability and further
marginalization increase drastically in armed conflict.
Persons with disabilities are disproportionately affected
by armed conflict and other situations of violence as
compared to persons without disabilities. Support
mechanisms for accessing basic services - such as
water, sanitation, food, shelter and health care - might
be disrupted as well, and existing environmental,
communication and attitudinal barriers in accessing
services could be further exacerbated. Moreover,
humanitarian services are often not adapted to ensure
that persons with disabilities can access them. As a
result, people with disabilities are too often left out
and left behind. This short but effective resolution
addresses the challenges that persons with disabilities
face, as well as concrete actions that the Council and the
international community can take to address them. The
United States especially welcomes the paragraphs on
data collection, capacity-building and the meaningful
participation and leadership ofpersons with disabilities
during every stage of a conflict. We also look forward
to more regular briefings by people with disabilities
and their representative organizations, as well as
humanitarian organizations and other stakeholders. Our
hope is that this becomes a regular part of the Council's
work in the way that we address other related issues.

