Mr. IpO (Cfite d'IVOire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Ms. Ursula Mueller
on her very comprehensive and informative briefing on
the latest developments in the humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with concern the continuing
deterioration of the already alarming humanitarian
situation in Syria, particularly in Idlib. Despite the
agreement between Russia and Turkey, signed in Sochi
on 17 September 2018, which created a demilitarized
zone in Idlib governorate, the latter is facing an
unprecedented military escalation. The escalating
violence has resulted in many deaths, thousands of
wounded and massive population displacements. The
destruction of hospital and school infrastructure, as well
as attacks on internally displaced persons camps, further
aggravate an already worrying humanitarian situation.

Given the situation, Cote d'Ivoire calls on all parties
to respect the demilitarized zone, which should ensure a
cessation of hostilities in that area. My country remains
convinced that the cessation of fighting will create
the necessary conditions for the voluntary return of
refugees and pave the way for creating a climate of trust
in support of an ongoing and inclusive political process.
My delegation also urges the parties to the conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, including by
removing all obstacles to the provision of assistance to
refugees and displaced persons, including women and
children, and by protecting humanitarian personnel.

It therefore rightly welcomes the unilateral
ceasefire declared on 31 August by the Russian
Federation and Government forces in Idlib province. It
calls on the parties to respect that ceasefire in order to
allow humanitarian aid to be delivered to those in need.
My country also welcomes the commitments made by
the guarantors ofthe Astana process at the fifth summit
on Syria, held in Ankara on 16 September. It welcomes
in particular news of an agreement reached on the
establishment of entities to draft a new constitution for
the Syrian Arab Republic. We believe that that initiative
would be another important and effective step towards
lasting peace in the country.

My delegations also welcomes the dispatch, on the
same day, of a mission with 22 trucks of humanitarian
aid to Syria to provide assistance to suffering people
in Idlib and its surrounding villages. We also welcome
the resolve of Russia and Turkey to implement all
agreements reached on Idlib and take concrete steps to
ensure the protection of civilians.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the
international community to pursue its humanitarian
assistance efforts in Syria and reiterates its support for
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in his firm
commitment to creating the conditions for a peaceful
and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

