Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda): Since this is the first time
I have addressed the Council during your presidency, Sir,
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Ambassador Li Zhaoxing, for the excellent
manner in which he directed the work of the Council last
month.

My delegation would also like to thank the sponsors
of the draft resolution before the Council for having taken
into account some of our concerns while drafting the text.

There is talk nowadays of apparent signs of
relaxation of tensions, and more and more peaceful ways
are being found to settle international problems. We feel
that a positive strategy is an effort to persuade States not
to threaten other nations, whereas a negative strategy aims
at increasing the cost of making such threats. Some
countries may try to change the environment by
enhancing their security and adjusting national conditions
and goals to strengthen their position. But in the long run,
this is useless if there are no security assurances on a
world-wide level.

My delegation feels that it is also important to
analyse the structure of today' s international environment.
Especially in the present context of adversarial
interdependence, some strategies may be more promising
than others. For example, approaches that proved useful
during the cold war or the detente era may be less
appropriate to the contemporary structure.

Any meaningful assessment of possible security
strategies requires prior specification of the defining
features of the international environment that is being
addressed. It cannot be assumed that all strategies meet
the challenge of various international settings equally
well. Furthermore, in a fluctuating security environment,
strategy analysis cannot be linked to discussion of the
probabilities of facing familiar threats. Rather, it is
important to identify the different types of threats and
possible combinations thereof. Strategic surprise not only
stems from inadequate risk assessment but also is often
related to unimaginative threat analysis.
Considering all these factors, my delegation fully
understands that the task was indeed not easy for the
drafters of this draft resolution, because of its high
complexity, involving a precise understanding of diverse
threats and their causes, and of national vulnerabilities.

 

My delegation is strongly convinced that moral and
strategic factors dictate the need to find new ways to
achieve mutual security without exposing mankind to the
terror of living under the threat of nuclear annihilation.
Even though the road is still long, my delegation feels that
it is up to all nations in the international structure to help
shape the international security environment, which affects
their future survival. It is in that same context that my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

