Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We would, first of all,
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
this morning, and I would like to say that we agree
with his statement.

In the statement that I made during the public
meeting of 19 February 2003, I pointed out that
resolution 1441 (2002), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council, reflected the will of the international
community to see Iraq rid itself of its weapons of mass
destruction. At that time, a last chance was offered to
Iraq to opt for full compliance with resolution 1441
(2002). Iraq's full cooperation was an essential element
in resolving the crisis. Had Iraq respected all its
obligations, as mandated by Security Council
resolutions, more particularly resolution 1441 (2002),
we would not have reached this situation and war
would have been avoided.

At the same time, it is recognized that Iraq had
made progress recently in its cooperation with the
United Nations inspectors, albeit under pressure. That
is why we have been of the view that war was
avoidable and more time should have been allowed to
the United Nations inspectors to complete their work.

Mauritius has also been of the view that any
military action against Iraq needed the sanction of the
Security Council. During the deliberations that took
place in the Security Council these past weeks,
Mauritius and many other countries of the region were
hopeful that the Security Council would remain united
on this issue. Regrettably, this has not been the case,
and we all know the sequence of events that followed,
thereby showing the inability of the Security Council to
avoid war.

War is always a catastrophe and leads to human
suffering. As the Secretary-General himself has pointed
out, the current situation is a sad moment for all the
Members of the United Nations.

In the face of this human tragedy, it is our hope
that the conflict should end as soon as possible, with
minimum casualties, especially at the level of civilians.
Mauritius calls for immediate action to be taken to
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi civilian population.
Furthermore, we believe that all prisoners of war on all
sides should be treated humanely, in accordance with
the Geneva Convention relative to the treatment of
prisoners of war.

Mauritius appeals to the Security Council to fully
assume its responsibility and to do its utmost to deal
with the crisis in a manner that will restore its
credibility and uphold its dignity.

In conclusion, we would like to say that the
Government of Mauritius stands ready to participate in
its very modest way to the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of Iraq, and in that connection, it has set
up a solidarity fund for the Iraqi people, the proceeds
of which will be channelled through the United
Nations.

