Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling
today's debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for his statement. I
would also like to thank Mr. Jim Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing, as well as the Secretary-
General for his latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2012/133).

It is now more than a decade since the
international community came together to assist
Afghanistan with the shared goal of eliminating
terrorism and the safe havens and sanctuaries from
where it is emanating, right from the source, and to set
the country firmly on the path to security, recovery,
reconstruction and development. The progress made
since then cannot be underestimated. However, the
journey is far from over and much more needs to be
done.

The past few months have witnessed important
high-level regional and international engagements on
Afghanistan. The Istanbul Conference provided a new
impetus to regional cooperation. The outcome of the
Bonn Conference, as embodied in the Bonn Conference
conclusions, was an expression of the international
community's determination and political commitment
to sustained long-term engagement with Afghanistan.
The upcoming conferences in 2012, including the
NATO Chicago summit in May on security, the follow-
up ministerial conference in Kabul in June on regional
cooperation, and the Tokyo conference in July on
development, will be instrumental in working out
clearly defined and tangible commitments in the
critical areas of security, governance, trade promotion,
investment, development and regional cooperation.
Afghanistan today confronts major challenges in those
areas and will need considerable assistance for a long
time, even beyond the transition period, to address
those challenges.

First and foremost, concerns on the security front
continue to remain paramount. The security gains
achieved during the past decade are still tenuous and
fragile. Terrorist violence shows no sign of receding
and civilian casualties attributed to anti-Government
elements have continued to rise over the past five
years, reaching a peak in 2011. Terrorism continues to
find sustenance and support from a dangerous osmosis
of ideologies, ambitions, training and operations
among the syndicate of terrorism in the region, with
suicide terrorism as its main technique and targets not
limited to Afghanistan. We need concerted action to
isolate and root out this syndicate of terrorism, which
includes elements of the Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar-e-
Taiba and other terrorist and extremist groups
operating mainly from outside Afghanistan's borders.

Afghanistan needs assistance and support to build
its capacity to tackle the critical challenges of
terrorism, including suicide terrorism, the religious
extremism that fuels it and the drug trafficking that
sustains it. We must ensure that Afghanistan's security
is ensured through non-interference in its internal
affairs. As Afghanistan moves ahead with the transition
process, we must take into account the conditions on
the ground and the capacity of Afghanistan's security
forces to preserve the sovereignty, independence and
territorial unity and integrity of its nation. We support
all efforts for the strengthening of the Afghan national
security forces, which must go hand-in-hand with the
strengthening of their training and equipping and the
financing and development of their capabilities beyond
the transition period.

India fully supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned inclusive and transparent process of
reconciliation, as opposed to an internationally led
process, accompanied by an inclusive political process
and intra-Afghan dialogue that should include a
renunciation of violence, a cutting of ties to terrorist
groups, and abiding by the Afghan Constitution, with
its protections for human rights, including the rights of
women. It is important that any political settlement not
jeopardize the hard-won gains of the past 10 years and
be acceptable to all constituents of the Afghan nation.
It is also important that the ongoing transition remain
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, be multi-faceted and
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans and lead to the strengthening of
the Afghan State and its institutions.

With the gradual drawing down of international
forces from their combat role, there are already signs
of a transition recession. We need to find ways and
means to ensure that Afghanistan does not feel
abandoned by a withdrawal of assistance, at least in
terms of the quantity, if not the quality, of the
international assistance required post-2014.
Afghanistan needs a comprehensive strategy for its
national development that takes into account its least-
developed-country status, its landlocked situation,
three decades of conflict and a continued existential
threat to its future from terrorism. Such a strategy
should include security cooperation, official
development assistance, capacity-building and
education, trade access, and foreign investment
commensurate with its needs. I am happy to state that
India is contributing in each of those areas. That is also
the approach that we advocate for the Chicago, Kabul
and Tokyo conferences. We also need greater
coherence, coordination and further streamlining of the
international community's development-related efforts,
including the aligning of assistance with the Afghan
national priorities.

In that context, we are appreciative of the
comprehensive review of UNAMA's mandated
activities, the support of the United Nations in
Afghanistan and the intention of the United Nations
Development Programme to channel 80 per cent of its
assistance through on-budget support. India appreciates
and supports the work of UNAMA.

India has age-old historical, cultural,
civilizational and economic ties with our neighbour
Afghanistan. During the last decade, our relationship
has been renewed and consolidated by our partnership
in the rebuilding and reconstruction of Afghanistan.
India has pledged up to $2 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance. India signed a comprehensive
strategic partnership agreement with Afghanistan last
October, looking to 2014 and beyond. The agreement
creates an institutional framework for our multifaceted
relationship in the fields of political and security
cooperation, trade and economic cooperation, capacity-
building and education, and social, cultural, civil
society and people-to-people relations. In November
2011, we eliminated baseline customs duties on
virtually all imports from Afghanistan, and in
December a consortium of seven Indian public and
private-sector companies were awarded the bid for
three blocks of the Hajigak iron-ore reserves.

We are happy to note the enhanced focus on
regional cooperation. Today our investments in
Afghanistan require a framework of regional
collaboration for their success. The South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, of which
Afghanistan is a full member, is an important vehicle
for regional economic cooperation within the South
Asian region. Cooperation linking our region with
Central Asia through Afghanistan could be a critical
confidence-building measure.

We firmly believe that Afghanistan's growth
strategy has to be built upon its comparative advantage
of abundant natural resources and its strategic
geographical location. Those would have to be the
building blocks of our vision for Afghanistan as a hub
linking the Middle East and West Asia with Central and
South Asia through trade and transit routes, railways
and highways, energy pipelines and electricity
networks, economic projects and cross-investments.
Such cooperation should not be only between
Governments, but have civil society and business as
stakeholders. In that context, we are prepared to make
long-term investments in Afghanistan, as we have done
with Hajigak.

In conclusion, India believes in a strong,
independent, sovereign, stable, united, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan at lasting peace with itself and
its neighbours. We look forward to a future for
Afghanistan where the Afghan people can live in peace
and security and decide their future themselves,
without outside interference, coercion or intimidation.
We must continue to work together with renewed
vigour and unity of purpose towards strengthening the
efforts of the Afghan Government in seeking solutions
that are inclusive and led by the Afghan people
themselves. It is in that spirit that India will remain
engaged with the international community's efforts in
Afghanistan.

