Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic ofVenezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Allow us to express our gratitude to the delegation
of the People's Republic of China for having convened
this debate on such an important subject, especially
in the light of the current international situation and
the crossroads at which multilateralism seems to find
itself. Similarly, we recognize the professionalism
with which the delegation of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, a State member of our Movement, conducted
the activities of this body last month.

The Movement is committed to the promotion of
multilateralism and reaffirms that the United Nations,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of

international law continue to be indispensable tools
in the preservation and maintenance of international
peace and security. Moreover, the Movement views the
United Nations, the only global body with universal
membership and indisputable legitimacy, as the central
multilateral forum for addressing global issues and
the most pressing challenges facing States today,
including those relating to international cooperation
for economic development, social progress, peace,
security, the peaceful settlement of disputes, human
rights, the rule of law, cooperation and consensus-
building among States.

In that context, the member States of the Movement
reiterate their concern at the growing tendency of some
States to resort to the imposition of unilateral measures
that undermine the Charter of the United Nations
and international law as a whole, and reiterate their
opposition to the use and threat of use of force and to
the use pressure and coercive measures as a means of
achieving national policy objectives.

The promotion and advocacy of multilateral
organizations, including the United Nations, as the
appropriate areas for solving problems affecting
humankind through dialogue and cooperation form
part of the guiding principles of the Movement. And,
as stated in the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex)
prepared for this open debate, we are of the opinion that
all of the challenges we face today in an increasingly
interconnected world must be collectively addressed in
a fair and equitable manner by the entire international
community and on an equal footing. Such is our
commitment to those efforts that we are currently
promoting the adoption of a General Assembly
draft resolution to establish the international day of
multilateralism and diplomacy for peace.

On the other hand, we express our concern for the
victims of and innocent civilians caught in situations
involving the use of force or the imposition of sanctions,
including those authorized by the Security Council. In
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, we call
upon all States to promote the principle of the non-use
of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes as the
means of achieving collective security, and not the threat
of force or the use of force, bearing in mind that armed
force is not to be used save in the common interest, as
stipulated in the Charter of our Organization.

In that regard, we urge the Security Council to make
greater use of the International Court of Justice - the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations - which
has played an important role precisely in promoting
the peaceful settlement of disputes and as a source of
advisory opinions and interpretations on the relevant
norms of international law and on controversial issues,
with a view to ensuring the adherence of States in
their actions to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

In conclusion, the Movement, faithful to its
commitment to strengthening its role as an anti-war and
peace-loving force, today reaffirms its determination to
work for the establishment of a peaceful and prosperous
world and a just and equitable world order. We also
renew our determination to work for a multipolar
world, through the strengthening of the United Nations
and multilateral processes, which are indispensable to
our efforts to promote the interests of our nations and
humankind as a whole.

