Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Jan Kubis, and thank him for his briefing. We also
welcome Ambassador Zahir Tanin and thank him for
his statement.

Chile welcomes the holding of the presidential and
provincial council elections on 5 April. Preparations
are on track, with an existing electoral framework, a
final list of presidential candidates and a functional
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission.

We must stress that the efforts to promote and
strengthen women's participation as voters, candidates
and observers will provide a gauge of how representative
the process is. The elections will be a fundamental
and legitimate political transition in Afghanistan's
stability. In that respect, the process must be credible,
transparent, inclusive and entirely in line with the
country's legal and constitutional norms.

It is important that the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) continue at all levels so as to ensure that
women can participate in decision-making processes
and that their needs are adequately met. The inclusion
of women in the police and security forces is important
and should remain a priority for the new authorities.

Chile reiterates the need to strengthen the
protection of civilians and condemns the use of force
against unarmed civilians, including women and
children, whether by pro- or anti-Government forces.
The authorities' primary responsibilty is to ensure the
protection of civilians.

In addition, progress in the area of human rights is
a crucial element for the stability of the country, which
remains fragile. We agree with the Secretary-General
in his call on the authorities to adopt any measures
necessary to support the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission in its crucial role.

Food insecurity, the situation of internally
displaced persons and the ongoing vulnerability to
natural disasters, against the backdrop of a conflict
that has lasted for decades, are humanitarian challenges
that need to be faced in a coordinated manner by the
international community and the new authorities. That
will not be possible without ensuring full, prompt and
unhindered access for humanitarian personnel.

In that regard, the United Nations should continue
its presence on the ground through the work of
UNAMA, in the same way that the country team
does in the area of development. Initiatives such as
World Health Organization support to the efforts of
local authorities in the fight against polio must be
maintained. The conditions to achieve a transition
from relief to development must also be created. The
international community must provide its cooperation
in such efforts.

We regret that terrorism, in all its various forms and
manifestations, continues to intensify in some regions.
The number of events and victims has continued to grow
and is at its worst level since 2011. We condemn the
terrorist attack on a restaurant in Kabul on 17 January,
which took the lives of four United Nations officials and
17 Afghan civilians, and we express our condolences to
the families of the victims.

Given the withdrawal of the International Security
Assistance Force at the end of 2014, Chile believes
the capabilities of the Afghan security forces to deal
with the threats and challenges on the horizon should
continue to be strengthened. That will mean mitigating
the current uncertainty prevailing in Afghanistan. A
concrete example in this general area is the approval
by the consultative Loya Jirga of the bilateral security
agreement with the United States. It is important that
the agreement be signed to ensure that such assistance
is provided and maintained and a transition to stability
is achieved.

It is essential that the next Government have
the stability needed for an orderly transition to be
carried out. Given the uncertainty that has prevailed
in Afghanistan during the last year of the transition, it
is important that UNAMA's mandate be extended for

12 months, and we welcome that extension. Equally
important is the need to provide the Mission with
the necessary priority measures to fully discharge its
duties.

In conclusion, I would like to express the support
of Chile for the efforts of the Afghan people to build
a democratic State based on the rule of law and the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
which are essential for its stability and development as
well as for the sustainability and development of the
region of which it is a part.

