Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): I am thankful to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his very
comprehensive briefing on the latest events in Kosovo
and on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) during
the period under review.

Since my country's position and assessment of
different aspects of the current situation in Kosovo
have been presented at our previous meetings and
basically remain unchanged, I will comment only on
some of the latest events in Kosovo in the context of
UNMIK's activities.

The past month saw both positive tendencies
towards a general improvement of the situation in
Kosovo and some worrying developments in terms of
security in and around the province. My country fully
recognizes the constructive role played by UNMIK and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in facing these new
challenges and in fostering further progress in
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) under very
difficult conditions.

We reconfirm our support for the priorities for
UNMIK's activities outlined by Mr. Haekkerup and for
the first steps made towards their implementation. The
proper elaboration of a legal framework for Kosovo-
wide general elections is of particular importance for
the future of Kosovo. Therefore, we share the view that
it would not be prudent to speed up the election process
unless all of its aspects are clearly defined and the
security situation in the region is stable enough. My
delegation still believes that the Council should be
briefed on the results of this work before UNMIK
proceeds further with the holding ofthe elections.

We also find it important to implement the other
priority actions set out by Mr. Haekkerup -
specifically, improving the security situation in Kosovo
and fighting crime through more effective law
enforcement measures. In this context, we believe that
recent UNMIK police actions carried out across the
province against drug dealers aimed at seizing drugs
and illegal weapons have proved effective and should
continue. It is also noteworthy that during the past
month, the regulation signed into law by the head of
UNMIK in January on criminal punishment for human
trafficking has started to show its first results, as the
first guilty verdict for trafficking in women was issued
a week ago in Kosovo.

My country is of the view that the establishment
of a proper dialogue and close cooperation between
UNMIK and the Yugoslav authorities is a necessary
prerequisite for furthering the peace process in Kosovo.
Therefore we encourage the head of UNMIK to do his
utmost in this regard to ensure the earliest possible
opening of UNMIK's office in Belgrade.

While noting positive trends, we still remain
concerned at the security situation in and around
Kosovo. We were deeply alarmed at the new flare-up
of violence which took place in Mitrovica and joined
the call made to local communities to exercise restraint
and tolerance in relation to each other and to
international personnel. In its assessment of the recent
upsurge in violence in that town, Ukraine associated
itself with the European Union's declaration of 2
February. We also welcome the joint declaration signed
on 1 February by UNMIK, KFOR and Kosovo
Albanian leaders on the situation in that town.

At the same time, my delegation pays tribute to
the courage and professionalism demonstrated by
KFOR peacekeepers in easing tensions in Mitrovica
and laments the injuries they sustained. It is our firm
belief that any acts of violence or threats directed
against international military, police or civilian
personnel in Kosovo are absolutely inadmissible and
should not be tolerated.

During the past month, the security situation in
Kosovo and in the whole region was seriously
challenged by the spreading violence in the ground
safety zone, which continued to claim human lives. On
30 January, my delegation joined in the statement made
to the press by the President of the Security Council
condemning the ethnic attacks by Albanian extremist
groups against Serbian police, calling for the
dissolution of these groups and their immediate
withdrawal from the area. Concern in relation to those
events was also expressed in the statement by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine of 30 January.

In our view, the situation in the Presevo Valley
has reached a critical stage and could not only
undermine the peace efforts in Kosovo but destabilize
the situation in the whole region. Therefore, in our
view, every effort should be made to end the continuing
Albanian insurgency in the Presevo Valley in order to
avoid the worst-case scenario. In this regard, we
acknowledge the readiness of the Serbian Government
to negotiate with the Presevo Albanian representatives
in order to find solutions to existing problems.

We also took note of the conclusions announced
at the beginning of February by experts from the World
Health Organization, and confirmed today by Mr.
Guehenno, that the threat to human health caused by
exposure to depleted uranium in Kosovo is minimal.
While we are satisfied with these conclusions,
nonetheless we look forward to hearing the final results
of the investigations carried out by other relevant
United Nations and international agencies.

We believe that the idea of sending a new
Security Council mission to Kosovo, to Belgrade and
possibly to the Presevo Valley to get firsthand
information on the situation on the ground, as proposed
today by the Russian Federation, deserves our full
support.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our view that the
preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is one of the
basic provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and one of
the key factors contributing to stability in the Balkans.
Therefore, this premise should remain a starting point
for further UNMIK and KFOR activities in Kosovo and
should be the basis for the Security Council's
assessment ofthese activities.

