Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking the presidency of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for convening today's
open debate and for the concept note on the subject
(S/2016/104, annex). I would also like to commend
Ambassadors Kamau, Skoog and Rosenthal for their
informative briefings.

Uruguay views the reform of our peacebuilding
architecture as an integral part of the broader review
process of the peace and security components of the
United Nations, and we believe it is essential that
we adapt its peace and security activities to the new
challenges presented by the international scene. In that
context, we support the other review efforts currently
under way concerning peacekeeping operations and
the women and peace and security agenda, since we
believe it is crucial to ensure that they are conducted in
concordance and coherently so as to optimize the use of
existing resources.

Peacebuilding is a complex process, in both the
medium and long terms, encompassing a very broad
spectrum of tasks and actors that have to be integrated
and coordinated with the Government of the country
concerned in the creation of dialogue and peace
processes that are inclusive and representative of society
as a whole. Respect for human rights, strengthening
the rule of law and creating economic development are
central to the work of peacebuilding. In that regard,
supporting the Government institutions that provide
essential services, reintegrating those returning to their
homes, creating jobs as quickly as possible, restoring
basic infrastructure and various aspects of economic
revitalization are all priorities without which sustained
peacebuilding is impossible. My country believes that
in such cases, developing national capacities should be
the focus of all international efforts from the earliest
stages of the process.

We should also emphasize the role of peacekeeping
staff in the early stages of peacebuilding in key areas
such as the provision of security and strengthening
of the rule of law; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security-sector reform and even
the expansion of State authority. Such support is
particularly crucial in the early stages, when a country
is transitioning to the consolidation phase or when the
tasks of both maintaining and building peace must be
carried out simultaneously.

Uruguay agrees with the view expressed in
Venezuela's concept note of the role that regional and
subregional organizations, along with international
financial institutions, should play in helping to create
an environment conducive to lasting peace in countries
emerging from conflict, and we emphasize the
importance of developing strategic alliances between
them and the United Nations.

Uruguay would like to stress the key role of women
in building and maintaining peace, to which end we
must ensure their recruitment to political leadership
roles in United Nations peacebuilding programmes and
strategies. In that regard, it is crucial to ensure that the
Peacebuilding Commission systematically incorporates
a gender perspective into all of its regulatory and
promotion activities, in collaboration with UN-Women.

The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, chaired by Ambassador Rosenthal,
includes highly relevant recommendations that have
been discussed and analysed in the context of the
negotiations being co-facilitated by the delegations
of Angola and Australia. Peacebuilding should be
addressed as an inherently political process that
requires the active participation of the State concerned
and a long-term commitment from the United Nations
system. In that context, we must respect the principle
of national ownership, in the belief that achieving long-
term sustainable peace depends largely on forging a
comprehensive partnership that includes national actors
from the country in question. Peacebuilding cannot be
limited to post-conflict situations as long as its goal
is to prevent the emergence of conflict as well as its
recurrence or continuation.

Within the peacebuilding architecture, the
Commission is a fundamental tool for ensuring timely
and sustained support to countries during critical
stages of their development, while recognizing their
specific needs and situations. The review process
is an opportunity to strengthen the Commission's
performance while improving its role as an adviser to
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
should make use of its advisory role to the Council more
often, especially in the case of States with situations on
the Council's agenda and those that have been assigned
country teams.

Uruguay considers the Peacebuilding Commission's
lack of predictable funding a major challenge. It should
be able to rely on sufficient resources, which is why
Uruguay supports the recommendation of the Advisory
Group that the Commission be assigned a symbolic 1 per
cent of the overall budget for peacekeeping operations.

So far, I have listed the areas that we think need
to be reformed if we are to make the peacebuilding
architecture more effective. But in all sincerity, I have
to say that it is impossible to contemplate this issue
without calling attention to the irresponsibility - for
that is what it is i of some of the rulers of some of
the countries that are either part of the Peacebuilding
Commission's programmes or the object of
peacekeeping operations. Most of their time is spent
playing sterile political games in their attempts to cling
to power, pure and simple, rather than facing up to the
immense challenges ahead of them with civic courage.

Some of us are tired. We are sick of seeing whole
societies suffering from hunger, insecurity, disease
and violations of their personal dignity and most basic
rights when they are not being persecuted, jailed or
killed, while their rulers fight to keep or seize power,
and in their quest for it cancel, postpone and manipulate
elections, change or attempt to change constitutions and
foment grotesque nationalisms or religious or ethnic
rivalries, shamelessly violating the solemn promises
they have made to their peoples or the international
community. The international community has given
some of those countries not only effort, material goods
and vast amounts of money but also, and far more
important, the lives of the servants of humanitarian
organizations and those deployed in peacekeeping
operations. The painful question that many of us must
ask is: have they died in vain?
