Mr. Skoog (Sweden): My report is slightly more
dry than the one we just heard, I am afraid.

In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution
1970 (2011), I have the duty to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
7 December 2016 to 19 April 2017, during which time
the Committee members dealt with various aspects of
the sanctions regime via the silence procedure.

First, with regard to the arms embargo, during the
period under review, the Committee approved a request
for an exemption from the arms embargo submitted
under paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011) by the
Netherlands. The Committee also received two post-
delivery notifications from the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and from Malta, respectively, the
latter having been submitted together with that of the
European Union delegation. Those notifications were
for items that have previously been exempted by the
Committee under paragraph 13 (b) of resolution 2009
(2011) and paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011).
The Committee further responded to three requests
from Tunisia, Turkey and Greece for guidance on the
scope and implementation of the arms embargo.

Concerning the assets freeze, the Committee
has not yet concluded its consideration of a request
by Switzerland for exemption, in accordance with
paragraph 19 (b) ofresolution 1970 (2011), in relation to
the assets ofthe Libya Africa Investment Portfolio. The
Committee had no objection to a notification submitted
by the United Kingdom, under paragraph 19 (a) of
resolution 1970 (2011), in relation to the same listed
identity. Regarding an exemption request received
from Canada, pertaining to an asset owned by a listed
individual, the Committee sought additional details
prior to further consideration of the matter.

On the travel ban, during the period under review,
the Committee approved an update to its fourth
implementation assistance notice, which relates to
the travel ban measure. Upon the request of Libya,
the Committee also approved the extension of a travel
ban waiver for a listed individual who is currently
undergoing medical treatment in Egypt until 23 August.

On the subject of communication with Libya,
I would also like to mention that the Committee has
sought information from the Permanent Mission of
Libya to the United Nations concerning the officials
authorized to sign off on documentation relating to
any future arms embargo exemption requests, pursuant
to paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014). That was
done as a follow-up to a recommendation made by the
Panel Of Experts established pursuant to paragraph
24 of resolution 1973 (2011) in its interim report. The
Committee has also shared with the Permanent Mission
details concerning all previous arms embargo and
assets freeze exemption requests considered by the
Committee. Lastly, the Committee has also consulted
with the Permanent Mission on the subject of oversight
of certain Libyan public and financial institutions, also
pursuant to a recommendation of the Panel.

Finally, the Committee received two letters from
Malta concerning the activities of two vessels that
reportedly were illicitly attempting to export petroleum
products and fuel from Libya to other destinations. The
Committee has not yet completed its consideration of
that matter.

