Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on the situation in Afghanistan
and for providing us with an opportunity on an issue that
forms a very important part of the peace and security
debate in the Security Council. We thank Ambassador
Yamamoto for his reflections on the current situation.

We were happy to hear the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan address the Council earlier today. We
welcomed Mr. Rabbani in Delhi earlier this month for
the second meeting of the India-Afghanistan Strategic
Partnership Council. For India, strategic partnership
and friendship with Afghanistan are an article of faith.
Ours is not just another relationship or engagement, but
a spiritual and. civilizational connect. As a friend of
Afghanistan, India supports Minister Rabbani's appeal
to the international community to support his country
in strengthening the gains made by the Afghan people
over the past 15 years.

On its part, India has just launched a new
development partnership with Afghanistan. We will
begin implementing high-impact projects all across
Afghanistan using the fresh development assistance
of $1 billion announced last year. We will focus on
building infrastructure for socioeconomic development,
enhancing the capacities and capabilities of institutions
of governance, and promoting the skills and capacities
of human resources. We welcome and support the
announcement by Minister Rabbani of Afghanistan's
candidature for the Human Rights Council elections to
be later this year. The worst violations of human rights
are caused by terrorism, and the people of Afghanistan
have endured that for too long.

We have taken note of the report (S/2017/696) of
the Secretary-General on the strategic review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We have also noted the reflections of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and welcome his findings, especially those on the
political aspect of the Mission in Afghanistan. Further,
we welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
to address the shortcomings in the functioning of
UNAMA, which remains the biggest special political
mission of the United Nations in any country. We hope
that it will strengthen the supportive role of the United
Nations so as to enhance its performance in all areas
of its mandate. This work must be implemented with
regular consultations with the Afghan Government. We
look forward to consulting with relevant actors in that
process and to assisting in it whenever required.

While undertaking our collective efforts here at
the United Nations or at other multilateral settings,
we must be mindful to support the strengthening of
Afghanistan's sovereignty and stability, which are the
two things that anti-Government terrorist elements are
trying to undermine from their safe havens across the
borders of Afghanistan. What Afghanistan needs is not
prescriptions but support for its efforts. The people of
Afghanistan should decide what they need and what
they want to do. Whether they relate to Afghanistan's
political and military engagement with its partners
or to the differences in its political establishment,
the solutions and the approach must be driven by the
Afghans and by Afghans alone.

The situation in Afghanistan has remained
particularly painful and disturbing, with the security
situation worsening and visible signs of that the gains
made by the international community and Afghan
people are being undermined. The incessant attacks on
hospitals, schools, funerals, international development
agencies and diplomatic missions are a matter of
serious concern. The multiple crises that have been
inflicted on Afghanistan have made Afghan territory
attractive for criminal and terrorist groups, which are
well connected to international terror and criminal
networks. These groups are stealing the resources of
Afghanistan, which ought to belong to the people of
the country. The international community's first and
foremost duty is to ensure that the forces of terrorism
and extremism do not find sanctuaries and safe havens
anywhere and at any level. We must not differentiate
between good and bad terrorists, or play one group off
against the other. The Taliban, the Haqqani Network,
Al-Qaida, Da'esh, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed
and others of their ilk are all terrorist organizations,
many of them proscribed by the United Nations. They
should be treated like terrorist organizations, with no
justifications offered for their activities.

We support Afghanistan's determination to
overcome its security challenges, and the willingness
of many in the international community to effectively
deal with the issue of safe havens enjoyed by the
terrorist organizations that pose a threat to the region
and beyond. For its part, the Security Council must
act on the funds that the terrorists in Afghanistan are
generating through their illicit activities. In that regard,
we would like the Council to consider how the sanctions
regime established under resolution 1988 (2011) can be
utilized also to leverage progress in the peace process.
These are significant instruments and must be utilized
to their full capacity.

We once again thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts and look forward to more such opportunities to
be able to help our Afghan friends in their endeavour to
find peace and stability in their land.

