I thank Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for his briefing. My delegation also takes note of the latest report of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation in Syria pursuant to relevant Security Council resolutions (S/2020/813). Recent reports suggest Syria is currently faced with a harrowing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation. As it stands, the pandemic is rising exponentially in a way that is threatening the most vulnerable and halting the smooth conduct of the much-needed, much-awaited work of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. Moreover, millions of Syrians are slipping into deep poverty and food insecurity as a result of the economic freefall, thereby making a dire humanitarian situation actually worse. We are deeply disturbed by the humanitarian and socioeconomic disaster in the making in Syria as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic fallout and economic collapse. It is therefore urgently necessary to address vulnerability, fragility and the drivers of instability in order to mitigate the worsening humanitarian crisis. Tunisia believes that focus should be placed on five key priorities: the ceasefire, humanitarian access, health care, food security and rehabilitation of critical public services. And I would like to further elaborate on these priorities. First, ending hostilities and restoring calm throughout Syria are both urgent prerequisites and long-term goals to effectively cope with the humanitarian emergency brought about by COVID-19 and put Syria on the path of sustainable and lasting peace. We remain deeply disturbed by the fragile security situation across Syria and the impact it has had on the physical integrity of civilians, including women and children, as well as on civilian infrastructure. In recent weeks, tensions and unrest have grown more tangible in several parts of northern and southern Syria. Furthermore, international humanitarian law and ceasefire violations have regrettably not abated, notwithstanding the appeal of Special Envoy Pedersen for a nationwide ceasefire and the understandings on the de-escalation zone in Idlib. We reiterate our call on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint, de-escalate tensions and protect civilians and civilian objects in all circumstances. The Syrian people cannot withstand a new wave of widespread hostilities. Ultimately, a political process that is firmly on track and enables a just, Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) would resolve the humanitarian crisis and bring peace and prosperity to the Syrian people. Secondly, I recall the importance of a needs-based, vulnerability-based, whole-of-Syria approach to humanitarian assistance using all access modalities. We welcome the resumption of cross-border operations from Bab Al-Hawa into north- west Syria in implementation of resolution 2533 (2020), as well as the scaling-up in overall humanitarian relief from Damascus in the first half of 2020, including into the north-east. We also take note of the progress in planning the cross-line mission to Atarib in north-western Syria. The challenges arising from the use of a single border crossing, pursuant to resolution 2533 (2020), highlight the need for commitment, cooperation and dialogue among the relevant parties in order to maintain safe, timely, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access into the north-west. Thirdly, a systematic focus on the underequipped and underresourced Syrian health-care system becomes ever-more necessary to avert a catastrophic spread of the disease. It is critical to step up efforts related to adequate funding, scaling up of testing capacity and provision of medical supplies, as well as support for humanitarian partners and protection of medical and humanitarian workers. Fourthly, the alarming rise in food insecurity, aggravated by inflation, massive poverty and unemployment, underscores the need for sustainable assistance for livelihoods, as well as for strengthening safety nets and building long-term resilience. We appreciate, in this respect, the scaled up assistance by the World Food Programme to millions in need throughout Syria, taking into account, in particular, the economic impact of COVID-19. Fifthly, there is a need to rehabilitate critical public services, such as hospitals, schools and water, electricity and sanitation supplies. Tunisia is deeply troubled by the recurring, yet unresolved, issue of disruption to clean water and electricity supplies as a result of hostilities, which is limiting access to such basic services for innocent Syrians and hindering core sanitation and hygiene measures against COVID-19. We stress that it is critical to rehabilitate electrical lines and water pipes as part of any sustainable solution to this issue, while reiterating our call on parties to respect their obligations under international humanitarian law. At the same time, the rehabilitation of shattered hospitals and schools, following nearly a decade of conflict, is a moral imperative in order to make the lives of children and other vulnerable Syrian populations modestly better and focus on the true battle of saving lives and future generations.
