The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Aboul
Gheit for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.

Allow me, first of all, to take this opportunity
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States, and to thank them for
their participation in today's meeting. We greatly
appreciate their important and valuable briefings and
their confirmation of the importance of strengthening
cooperation and partnership between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States.

As explained in the concept note we have distributed
(S/2019/455, annex), the State of Kuwait convened
today's meeting in order to consolidate the important
principle established in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of United Nations Charter. This principle encourages
regional organizations to address regional issues and
crises in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter, while utilizing the Security Council to
identify solutions capable of resolving these conflicts
and maintaining international peace and security. As
stipulated in paragraph 3 of Article 52 of the Charter,

"The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements or by such
regional agencies."

Resolution 1631 (2005), which encourages the
Security Council and regional organizations to advance
cooperation, stresses also that the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations must cooperate
in the maintenance international peace and security.
Today's meeting is the first ofits kind under this agenda
item and can be considered the beginning ofa new stage
in cooperation between these two organizations.

As the Council is well aware, the League of Arab
States, as a regional organization, was founded on
22 March 1945 - just before the United Nations was
founded on 25 October 1945. Relations between the
two organizations date back to the 1950s and are based
on General Assembly resolutions and the cooperation
agreements of 1960 and 1989, as well as the protocol
of amendment of 2016. Those documents make up
the framework for the relationship between the two
organizations and call on them to further deepen and
expand that cooperation.

In that context, we welcome the upcoming opening
of the United Nations liaison office to the League of
Arab States, pursuant to the agreement reached in the
protocol of amendment that I have just mentioned and
General Assembly resolution 73/267, adopted at its
seventy-third session, which affirms that the opening
of the liaison office will improve the effectiveness
of cooperation between the Secretariats of the two
organizations. It also emphasizes the importance of and
need for further strengthening cooperation between the
two organizations in order to achieve their common
objectives and goals.

There is a genuine mutual desire of the Secretaries-
General of the two organizations to advance the
cooperation and partnership between the organizations.
The participation of His Excellency the Secretary-
General of the United Nations in the work of the League
of Arab States at the summit level and the continued
participation of the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States in high-level meetings of the General
Assembly clearly demonstrate their commitment to
pursuing cooperation between the two organizations.

In its presidential statement S/PRST/20l2/20, the
Security Council recognized efforts by the League
of Arab States to contribute to collective endeavours
to settle conflicts in the Middle East peacefully
as well as to promoting international responses to
the transformations experienced in the region. The
presidential statement also recognized the importance
of strengthening cooperation on capacity-building
with the League of Arab States in the maintenance
of international peace and security and expressed the
determination of the Security Council to take effective
steps to further enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter.

However, the level of cooperation continues to
be below expectations and aspirations even after the
signing of the 2016 protocol of amendment between
the two organizations. Given the challenges and
major threats facing our region and the complex
political events, there have been nine Arab issues on
the Council's agenda. The Council has been seized of
some of them for many years, foremost of which is the
Palestinian question that is central for Arab countries
and represents the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Without achieving a lasting, just and comprehensive
solution to that conflict, tensions and instability will
persist in the region.

I support what the Secretaries-General of the two
organizations have said this morning, namely, that
we condemn the attacks on the oil tankers in the Gulf
of Oman. That is the most recent event in a series of
acts of sabotage that are threatening the security of
maritime corridors as well as the energy security of
the world. That is a threat to international peace and
security. The international community has called for
taking all necessary actions and measures to prevent
more tensions in this sensitive region of the world.

In considering various aspects of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, in line with the content of the presidential
statement, we would also like to highlight a number of
positive developments in those relations, namely, the
holding of the first consultative meeting at the level
of Security Council Permanent Representatives and
their counterparts of the League of Arab States on
21 May 2016. A number of issues of common interest
were discussed at that meeting, and we hope that such
consultative meetings will continue in the future given
their importance and role in terms of exchanging
views on addressing Arab issues. We hope to continue
the ongoing periodic consultations between the two
Secretariats at all levels to exchange information and
strengthen coordination and follow-up mechanisms,
particularly in political and security areas.

In that regard, we emphasize the crucial role of
coordination between the two organizations, especially
when it comes to Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General who deal with current issues in the
region, such as the crises in Syria, Libya, Yemen and
Somalia, in order to arrive at a more comprehensive
understanding of those crises and strengthen the
capacities of the two organizations to find effective
solutions to them through common action in many
areas such as conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, particularly in
post-conflict settings. We also need to focus on building
civilian capacities and humanitarian assistance as well
as ensuring human rights, addressing refugees and
migration issues and combating terrorism.

Strengthening cooperation between the two
organizations requires an institutional framework,
which would shape that relationship and provide it with
a legal basis. The State ofKuwait has made great efforts
in order to set up such a legal institutional framework,
which could lead to a new era of cooperation between
the two organizations. We hope to complete that task
before the end of our Security Council membership.

Developments in the region once again demonstrate
the importance of respecting the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, foremost of which
is respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, as well as non-interference in their domestic
affairs and not to use or threaten to use force against
them. That requires from us more cooperation and
work to bridge the gap between the resolutions adopted
by the Council and by regional organizations and the
implementation of those resolutions. We are convinced
that the League of Arab States can positively contribute
to the United Nations efforts to overcome the challenges
facing the States of our region.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the complete conviction
of the State of Kuwait that the most important
foundations for international peace and security are
respect for the principles of the Charter, the ability of
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities and
implementing the Council's resolutions. We believe
that the non-implementation of such resolutions is one
of the key reasons behind tensions and destabilization
regionally and internationally. At the same time, we
reaffirm our absolute conviction in the principle of
the pacific settlement of disputes through dialogue,
negotiation and mediation in accordance with Chapter
VI of the Charter. It would be remiss of me not to
thank States members of the Council for their support
and endorsement of the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of this meeting in order
to advance and strengthen the relations between our
two organizations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Poland.

