Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland aligns itself
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.

Afghanistan is going through three challenging
and intertwined processes: a security transition, political
reconciliation and the reintegration of ex-combatants. It
is crucial that improvements in human rights and gender
equality, which are guaranteed in the Afghan
Constitution, not be compromised in the reconciliation
process. Finland believes that women's meaningful
participation is a key component of a successful
transition. The full and equal participation of women at
all levels of society is a prerequisite for democracy and
human rights. Women are also the keystone of
sustainable development, economic success and social
stability.
Afghanistan has made remarkable gains since the
overthrow of the Taliban, such as improved access for
girls to basic education. However, women remain on
the margins of political decision-making and progress
on women's rights has not been sufficient. Today,
Afghan women still face insecurity in public spaces
and at home, including inadequate protection against
gender-based and sexual violence, as well as lack of
access to an unbiased justice system and legal
representation.

Since November 2010, Afghanistan and Finland
have been cooperating in the field of women, peace
and security through the establishment of a twinning
programme. We are guided by strong Afghan
ownership and leadership. Our aim is inclusive and
transparent coordination among the relevant ministries
and an Afghan national action plan on women, peace
and security. An Afghan 1325 National Steering
Committee has been established and meets regularly. In
January, the Committee visited Finland. That provided
new ideas on how to ensure better implementation of
Security Council resolutions and mandates.

Finland will increase its annual development
funding for Afghanistan by 50 per cent - from
€21 million this year to €30 million by 2014.
Afghanistan will remain a most important development
cooperation partner for Finland. In our cooperation, we
focus on three main sectors: first, good governance,
democracy and the rule of law; secondly, human rights
and gender, with a special focus on the education of
girls; and thirdly, the Afghan economy and its growth,
in particular in the mining sector.

We all must work harder to build up better
governance, better respect for human rights and a
viable economy in Afghanistan. People must see
positive changes in their daily lives and be able to trust
the authorities. The voices of civil society need to be
heard and the rights and security of human rights
defenders and journalists ensured.

The international community needs to do its part
and give full support to the Afghan Government
beyond the transition period. Finland remains
committed to do that.

