I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria. As we have heard today, the lingering effects of nine years of conflict on the health and social sectors in Syria, the deteriorating economic situation, the impact of sanctions and complications due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, have had a cumulative and detrimental impact on the humanitarian situation in Syria. That impact continues to severely affect the most vulnerable sectors of society. Women and children, in particular, endure the most devastating effects of the humanitarian situation. In the past six months, the number of food-insecure people has reached the highest level ever recorded in Syria, at 9.3 million. South Africa is deeply concerned that, due to the inability of many households to meet their most basic requirements, negative coping mechanisms are increasingly being adopted. In that regard, South Africa appreciates and commends the efforts of the United Nations and its personnel, implementing partners and agencies for their sterling efforts to provide the necessary aid and assistance in particularly challenging circumstances in one of the most insecure countries for aid workers. We therefore reiterate the importance of ensuring the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all those who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law and the need to ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers. Reports indicate that the delivery of this essential aid in the north-west of Syria has been further impacted by the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing in July. Additionally, while efforts have been made to scale up operations at the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point, challenges still remain to providing effective and efficient cross-border aid. In that regard, it is important for the authorities to work with the United Nations to streamline the approval processes for both cross-border and cross- line assistance throughout Syria, which should continue to be scaled up to meet the increasing demand. We welcome the recent interventions and developments that have led to the restoration of the water supply from the Allouk water station to Al-Hasakah. However, a long-term, sustainable solution to ensure the regular supply of water from the Allouk water station must be found and maintained. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the Secretary-General's call to waive all economic measures imposed on Syria, particularly in the light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we call on the Secretary-General to include, in his reports to the Council, an overview of the effects and impact of unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria. The situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiations and mediation. South Africa calls on all parties to make every effort to ensure the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). With regard to the comments of the Permanent Representative of Germany on the sanctions imposed by the European Union on the then apartheid regime in South Africa, we fail to see the correlation between the situation in apartheid South Africa and Syria, which are entirely different situations. Broad generalizations like these are disingenuous and try to mask the harm that sanctions do under the current situation, where the COVID-19 pandemic is having a devastating impact on humanitarian situations across the world. We will continue to support the appeal made by the Secretary-General for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures and sanctions that impact the ability of States to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
