I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons for her significant work and comprehensive briefing to the Council and wish her much success in her upcoming years ina challenging role as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to thank the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly, for her proficient presentation and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar for giving a bold and realistic explanation of the situation in Afghanistan. I would like to commend UNAMA on its activity and engagement under challenging conditions in support of the Government and the people of Afghanistan in several areas, in particular the women, peace and security agenda, transitional justice, the inclusion of civil society, as well as on its provision of coordination, advice and assistance to protect human rights during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. Estonia strongly supports these efforts and is always open to exploring ways in which the United Nations, including the Security Council, may further assist UNAMA's endeavours. We consider the political agreement between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah aS an important step in strengthening the republic and progressing towards reconciliation and sustainable peace. We expect the Government of Afghanistan to stay the course of accountable governance and to ensure the meaningful participation of a diverse and inclusive negotiating team for the intra-Afghan negotiation. We are therefore glad that the 21-member negotiating team comprises representatives from various political and social constituencies, including four women. This shows some progress and, to a degree, attests to women's participation in the peace process. And so we regret that the Taliban has questioned the inclusiveness of the team. We urge the Government and all Afghan actors and armed groups, particularly the Taliban, to seize the current historic opportunity for peace and reconciliation and to commit actively to an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process, while making sure that any effort pertaining to the peace process does not erode the human rights and fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution. The achievements of the past 19 years, for which Afghans and the international community, including Estonia, have made enormous sacrifices, must be retained and further enhanced. We are deeply concerned as the security situation on the ground remains violent and unpredictable. High-profile attacks by anti-Government elements have continued. According to the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/549), there were 3,422 armed clashes during the reporting period. The conflict remains one of the deadliest in the world, with 417 child casualties, including 152 killed and 265 maimed, in the first quarter of the year. We deplore in the strongest terms the attacks against children. We call on all parties to reduce violence immediately and establish a humanitarian ceasefire in order to protect all civilians, in particular women and children, and to focus efforts on tackling the COVID-19 pandemic, in which health- care personnel remain on the front line, risking their own lives to save others. There is absolutely no excuse for the deliberate attacks on health-care personnel and facilities by either the Taliban or the Afghan national security forces. We strongly condemn the attacks, including threats, abductions and the horrific attack on the Dasht-e-Barchi hospital in Kabul on 12 May. It is essential that crimes such as these are investigated and that perpetrators are held accountable. The spread of COVID-19 is having a devastating impact on women and girls owing to the increased level of domestic violence caused by lockdown measures. In this regard, we appreciate the European Union-United Nations Spotlight Initiative aiming to highlight the risks of increased domestic violence and to raise awareness of sexual and gender-based violence. In conclusion, I would like to stress that Afghanistan has come a long way with the help of the international community, including the United Nations, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and many nations around the world. Yet, serious challenges remain. Therefore, once again, we call on all sides to act swiftly, build confidence, start the intra-Afghan negotiations without delay and fulfil their commitments to working towards a long-term reduction in violence and the establishment of peace. We need to see a comprehensive peace agreement that ends the violence for good.
