Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting of the Security Council and for personally
presiding over it. I also wish to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as well as
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian National
Authority and the foreign ministers of Arab countries
for their participation. I also thank Ambassador Shalev
of Israel for her participation.

My delegation has followed with profound
concern the sharply escalating situation in the Gaza
Strip over the past few days, which has been taking a
lamentable toll in innocent lives and causing
widespread destruction to infrastructure and the private
property of innocent Palestinians since Israel launched
its military operations into Gaza.

We are gravely concerned about the worsening
humanitarian crisis faced by Palestinians in Gaza as a
result of the ongoing military actions, the continued
closure of border crossings, the obstruction of access to
humanitarian aid, including food and medicine, and the
reduction in fuel and electricity supplies.

Every passing day is another day we see the lives
of more innocent Palestinian civilians, many of them
women and children, lost or harmed and those of
innocent Israelis threatened. We are strongly convinced
that all indiscriminate attacks against civilians are
unjustifiable under any pretext and that there cannot be
a military solution to the current conflict.

My delegation calls upon the parties concerned to
exercise the maximum restraint, cease all military
activities and acts of violence and return to the
negotiating table to resolve outstanding issues by
peaceful means. We urge Israel to stop the excessive
and disproportionate use of force and its military
operations and immediately withdraw its forces from
Gaza.

While recalling both parties' mutual obligations
to comply with international humanitarian and human
rights laws, including the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, we
underline the urgent need to cease all restrictive
measures and open border crossings in order to
facilitate the delivery of food, medical aid, fuel and
other humanitarian supplies to the suffering people in
Gaza, the evacuation of the injured and the unhindered
access of humanitarian workers.

We pay tribute to the United Nations agencies, in
particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
other humanitarian organizations for their work under
challenging circumstances on the ground.

We call upon the international community to
extend further emergency and humanitarian assistance
to the civilian population in Gaza.

At this critical juncture, when every opportunity
to make peace and bring an immediate end to the
current crisis should be treasured, my delegation fully
supports the intensified and coordinated efforts of the
international community to establish an immediate,
permanent, effective and monitored ceasefire between
the parties concerned and thus ensure long-term peace,
security and stability in the region.

The Security Council, which is mandated to
maintain international peace and security, can and
should play its due role in finding a durable solution to
this crisis by adopting a resolution that will stop the
continued loss of civilian lives, prevent the recurrence
or further escalation on the situation and put the peace
process back on track. Along these lines, my delegation
is prepared to work constructively with other Council
members on the draft resolution proposed by Libya on
behalf of the League of Arab States with a view to
achieving consensus and its early adoption.

Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm Viet
Nam's steadfast support for the peaceful settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the realization of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Annapolis understanding and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).

