Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Jeremie, and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. We are happy
to see both of them with us today. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Kyrle, Vice Federal Minister for
European and International Affairs of Austria.

I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
informative and comprehensive briefing. We very
much appreciate his efforts. We are confident that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), as reconfigured, will continue to
cagy out the tasks entrusted to it and will, as in the
past, contribute to ensuring peace and stability in
Kosovo, in close cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

We are pleased to see that Kosovo is taking the
necessary steps to solidify its democratic institutions
and capabilities as a sovereign State. We fully support
these steps and remain ready to further contribute in
any way we can.

The municipal elections to be held on
15 November 15 will be the first in Kosovo since the
declaration of independence. Free, fair, transparent and
inclusive elections are decisive for Kosovo's progress
towards becoming a multi-ethnic society. The
participation of the Kosovo Serbs and other
communities in a multi-ethnic Kosovo is critical. We
are encouraged to see that the political entities that
have applied to take part in the elections come from the
whole spectrum of communities in Kosovo. In this
context, the integration of Kosovo Serb communities
into Kosovo's institutions and their participation in the
elections are particularly important.

We commend the Kosovo authorities for the work
done so far on decentralization. We urge them to
pursue these efforts to the end and devote the necessary
resources thereto. While challenging, success in this
area is critical to ensuring peace and stability and to
demonstrating that Serbs have a future in Kosovo. We
note the efforts of the Kosovo Government on the
reconstruction of cultural property and returns. We
hope to see further steps to advance the current
projects. Progress in these areas is important for the
formation of a diverse, multi-ethnic and multicultural
Kosovo.

Security and stability in the Balkans are one of
the key priorities for Turkey. We are committed to
working with all our partners towards ensuring a safe,
stable and prosperous future for the region. This being
the case, the support given to Kosovo in its efforts to
integrate with the international community and
institutions should be further intensified. We will do
our part in that regard.

At the same time, a democratic and prosperous
Serbia is crucial to regional stability and cooperation.
The international community should continue to
encourage and support Serbia in its efforts to integrate
with European and Euro-Atlantic structures. As for
Turkey, we are determined to carry forward our
friendly and mutually beneficial relations with Serbia.
