Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): First and foremost,
on behalf of the people and the Government of
Kazakhstan, I would like to offer our sincerest
condolences to Afghanistan and the United Kingdom
for the deadly attacks that occurred recently. We would
also like to extend our sympathies to the families of the
victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

My delegation warmly welcomes the distinguished
presence in New York of His Excellency Mr. Evo
Morales Ayma, President of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, and thanks him for his insightful remarks
on the relationship between preventive diplomacy and
transboundary waters. We also thank the Bolivian
presidency for its foresight and proactive action in
drawing attention to this important topic, which is
in line with the Secretary-General's priorities on
preventive diplomacy. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.

First, threats of transboundary water disputes
are very important, as shared water resources flow
through different countries. My country defined water
security as one of its priorities during its campaign
for the non-permanent seat it occupies on the Security
Council. Like armed conflicts, water-related conflicts
need early action and negotiations. In that regard, I refer
to President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev's policy address
entitled "Kazakhstan's Concept Vision on Sustaining
Global Partnership for a Secure, Just and Prosperous
World". The address sets forth numerous principles
applicable to averting water-related conflicts. History
has proved that there is a causal relationship between
water resources and conflict. Water diplomacy and
development can therefore save millions of lives. Water
is a critical part of Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 6, which drives all the other SDGs, which are so
necessary for peace and prosperity.

Second, water is vital for peace and progress in
the Central Asian region. In that regard, we welcome
the attention the Secretary-General is paying to the
problems of the Aral Sea and water-management issues
in general in Central Asia. I would like to remind the
Council that the area of the drain bottom of the Aral
Sea is around 6 million hectares. Annually, about
100 million tons of salt rise and are carried hundreds
or a thousand kilometres away. In that regard, we stand
ready to follow up on the outcome of the Secretary-
General's visit to the site of one of the largest
environmental disasters in the history of humankind,
which now directly affects the lives of over 30 million
people today and is a threat to the entire world.
As the largest landlocked country in the world,
Kazakhstan has never taken water security for granted,
and water resources management is high on our
agenda. We could experience serious water scarcity
in the medium to long term, with significant impacts
on our socioeconomic development, with a projected
50 per cent shortage by 2040. With our Central Asian
neighbours, we are working on water-related regional
arrangements and transboundary water-resources
management. We believe that immediate action has to
be taken to ensure that freshwater resources are not
negatively impacted by climate change, urbanization,
population growth and pollution.

We greatly appreciate the efforts of international
partners, including the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the World Bank, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Islamic Development Bank and individual
countries, aimed at assisting Central Asian nations to
find common ground on water security in the region.
We also commend the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia in that regard.

Kazakhstan has initiated the creation of a Central
Asian investment fund for water projects to co-finance
the construction and renovation of water facilities. We
have also proposed establishing a regional centre for
water security and jointly developing and signing a pact
on water and environmental security in Central Asia.

Third, water disputes need early resolution because
water flows across legal and political boundaries,
thereby increasing the number and categories of
potential stakeholders. Boundary-crossing also means
that various actors can take recourse in more drastic
alternatives with quick results, such as cutting off
water supplies, rather than undertaking negotiations.
Our third recommendation is therefore to harmonize
the interests of upstream and downstream stakeholders,
which may vary sharply.

Likewise, and fourth, approaches on water use
and effective management must be balanced. Water-
resource management should be an issue for discussion
and peaceful resolution and not devolve into hostilities.
We also require greater emphasis on water data and
policy innovations with regard to access to clean water
and sanitation.

Fifth, water negotiations must focus on substance
and result in mutually beneficial agreements at lower
cost and with timely implementation. They must
be fair, free, open and inclusive. They must engage
women, youth and vulnerable groups. They should be
conducted with mutual recognition and respect, leading
to joint problem-solving successes.

Sixth, cooperation in transboundary waters
should be used as effective confidence-building
measures at all levels, from small-scale community
and local Government projects to complex regional
and international collaborations carried out by
Governments, the private sector and civil society at
each level.

Seventh, neighbouring countries, regional and
subregional organizations and development banks can
assist in water disputes as they do in armed conflicts.
All national and international legal frameworks and
mutually agreed arrangements on international waters,
be they bilateral, regional or multilateral, must be
respected and implemented by all Member States.

Eighth, the United Nations Inter-Agency Mechanism
on All Freshwater Related Issues, Including Sanitation
needs to strengthen its capacities to render more
effective guidance to Member States, which in turn
must implement the recommendations of the High-
level Panel on Water. We believe that the global water
road map and the SDG 6 Fund need to be strengthened.
Member States should be empowered to assist least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States.

Finally, Kazakhstan will work towards a water-
secure world, on water-disaster risk reduction and
resilience and supports national action and regional
and global cooperation for changing the way the world
looks at water and how we manage it.

