Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): As
this is the first time this month that I am speaking
at a meeting of the Security Council, allow me to
congratulate your country, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for September.
I also thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.

As was confirmed in the report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2018/804), which was transmitted to the Security
Council by Secretary-General Guterres, all 27 declared
chemical weapons-production facilities in Syria have
been destroyed. We also note that, as we speak, the
OPCW is still studying the responses from the Syrian
Government in relation to some of the outstanding
questions concerning its initial chemical weapons
declaration. We hope that the OPCW will continue to
strengthen its communication and coordination with
the Syrian Government in an effort to duly resolve the
relevant issues.

The Chinese delegation notes some recent reports
that hint at possible chemical weapons attacks within
Syrian. I want to reiterate that China resolutely
opposes the use of chemical weapons by any country,
organization or individual in any circumstances or
for any purpose, and advocates severe punishment of
the perpetrators. At the same time, we believe that
all alleged chemical weapons incidents must undergo
comprehensive, objective and impartial investigations
so as to ensure that they are based on conclusive
evidence and that conclusions are in line with the facts
and can stand the test of time. Until then, we should not
predetermine the outcomes.

China consistently advocates respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and opposes the wilful use or threat of use of
force in international affairs. Syria's sovereignty and
territorial integrity must be fully respected.

The only way out ofthe Syrian impasse is through a
political settlement. We hope that all parties concerned
will, in a constructive spirit and through dialogue and
consultation, seek solutions that preserve the unity of
the Security Council and help to advance the political
process in Syria.

