Mr. Haysom: Recent avalanches and floods across
Afghanistan, which caused over 250 fatalities, serve to
remind us that the country is not only subject to the cost
of human conflict but is also vulnerable to the regular toll
exacted by natural disasters. The United Nations offers
its condolences to the affected families and commends
the response of the Government and humanitarian
rescue workers, who have worked in the harshest of
conditions to assist survivors and re-establish basic
services. As requested by the Government, the United
Nations humanitarian system has provided emergency
relief and stands ready to deliver further assistance for
longer-term reconstruction.

Since my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7347), a number of significant developments
have brought about renewed hope for an active peace
process in Afghanistan. In addition, the national
unity Government has started to take shape, with the
nomination and approval of a number of ministers.
And Afghanistan and Pakistan have conducted an
increasingly constructive dialogue focused on peace,
trade and security. Those positive developments are a
testament to the efforts of President Ashraf Ghani and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Their collaborative
leadership remains essential for any peace talks to
progress, for comprehensive electoral reforms to take
hold and for the implementation of the changes required
to reinvigorate the economy.

To that effect, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) once again urges
political leaders to conclude the appointment process of
senior Government officials. In particular, the Mission
highlights the need to appoint senior judicial officials
to strengthen recent efforts to reinforce the rule of law
and to fight against corruption. UNAMA continues to
stress that a diverse and professional Administration
with strong female representation will be necessary to
tackle the many challenges that lie ahead.

In past weeks, reports on possible peace talks
between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban
have been prevalent. It is UNAMA's assessment that
there is currently an alignment of circumstances that
could be conducive to fostering peace talks. However,
the parties need to be given sufficient space to build a
level of trust that will allow them to establish common
ground, to come to the realization that peace is the only
viable option for Afghanistan and that a military victory
is neither likely nor optimal for a lasting national social
compact. Peace processes are fragile and vulnerable
to external destabilization. They require patient
nurturing. International support should be coherent
and coordinated. Sustainable peace will require that
the process be inclusive and build upon the significant
gains made by Afghanistan in the past decade. In close
consultation with the Government, UNAMA will
continue to engage all parties to this conflict in order
to assist them find that common ground.

I can also confirm that UNAMA continues a frank
dialogue with the Taliban on humanitarian access and
on human rights, notably on the protection of civilians.
In that regard, the Mission notes that, as a result, access
for immunization teams in Helmand province has been
restored.

An integral component of the political agreement
that led to the formation of the national unity
Government is the pledge made to establish an electoral
reform commission. Comprehensive electoral reforms
will be essential to restoring the faith of the Afghan
people in the democratic process and in strengthening
political stability. UNAMA therefore welcomes
President Ghani's renewed commitment to establish the
Commission shortly. We strongly encourage Afghan
authorities to clarify the electoral calendar, improve
fraud-mitigation measures, enhance the sustainability
of elections and engage the Afghan people in a
transparent and consultative manner.

In the past months, I have undertaken a number
of visits to Afghanistan's neighbouring countries and
met with senior officials, inter alia from Iran, Pakistan
and Uzbekistan. I am pleased to report that, in each
of those meetings, many interlocutors recognized
the importance of enhancing regional collaboration.
They affirmed their readiness to play a constructive
role in Afghanistan and appreciated that stability and
economic cooperation were ultimately a matter of
mutual self-interest. In addition, a proper intra-Afghan
peace dialogue will require strong regional backing, in
full respect ofAfghanistan's sovereignty. In that regard,
we note the positive initiatives taken by the leaders of
Afghanistan and Pakistan in recent months.

The state of the Afghan economy remains of
significant concern. The Government's self-reliance
agenda, presented at the London Conference in
December, was rightly lauded for its Vision. It now
needs to be implemented to allow for the Government
to further mobilize its revenues, increase its capacity to
deliver services and create employment opportunities.
Although the rain and snowfall of the past weeks have
alleviated some of the concerns that Afghanistan could
be affected by a debilitating drought this summer,
preventive measures need to be put in place to assist the
most vulnerable.

UNAMA has repeatedly stated its persistent
concerns about the continued increase in civilian
casualties. UNAMA documented more than 10,000
civilian casualties in 2014 - the highest annual number
of civilian casualties recorded since UNAMA began
systematic monitoring, in 2009. The rise in civilian
casualties resulted mainly from increased ground
engagements in which Afghan forces and insurgents
use indirect fire in and on Civilian populated areas.
The parties to the conflict must understand the impact
of their actions, take responsibility for them, uphold
the values they claim to defend and make protecting
civilians their priority. We need to see concrete steps
towards a real reduction in civilian casualties in 2015.

In late February, together with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
UNAMA released its third report on torture and ill-
treatment of conflict-related detainees in Government
detention facilities. The report found that one third of
all detainees interviewed were ill-treated or tortured.
Although that shows a decrease from the 49 per cent
in incidence of torture during the previous reporting
period, more remains to be done to prevent torture,
which is still pervasive and systemic. We welcome
the new Administration's immediate commitment to
end those practices, including its announcement to
bring forward a national plan on the elimination of
torture. UNAMA calls on the Government to send a
clear message of zero tolerance for those practices by
prosecuting perpetrators, and thereby putting an end to
impunity.

Recent military operations in Helmand and Kunar
provinces are a demonstration that the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) have improved their planning
and operational capacity. They are now in a position
to conduct large-scale operations without direct combat
assistance from international military forces. That
development is encouraging, even though we expect
to see an intensification of combat in the upcoming
fighting season as insurgents seek to test the ANSF
capacity to hold ground on its own.

Recent reports have indicated that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has established a
foothold in Afghanistan. It is UNAMA's assessment
that the group's presence is of concern but that ISIL's
significance is not so much a function of its intrinsic
capacities in the area or the region, but of its potential
to offer an alternative flagpole around which otherwise
isolated insurgent splinter groups can rally.

Noting the continuation of the Mission's core
mandate, UNAMA will maintain its efforts, in a
manner consistent with Afghan sovereignty, to provide
good offices, promote human rights and promote
coherent support by the international community for
the priorities set by the Government of Afghanistan.
We stand ready to participate fully in the role of
UNAMA, donors and the international community as
Afghanistan enters the decade of transformation.

In less than a week, Afghans will celebrate Nowrooz,
the day that in the region marks the beginning of the
new year and that is widely recognized as an occasion
signifying hope and renewal. I therefore take this
opportunity to wish my colleague Ambassador Tanin
and all Afghans a peaceful 1395. It is my most sincere
hope that this will be the year that brings tangible
progress towards peace.

