Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia fully supports the
draft resolution on the review of Security Council
resolution 986 (1995) on the humanitarian programme for
Iraq. We commend the delegations that worked to prepare
the draft resolution and to make it possible for the
Council to adopt it.

Perhaps this is an occasion at which a thought of a
general character might be in order. Sanctions are
generally a blunt instrument that has many unintended
consequences. Imposing and implementing sanctions
against a country unfortunately carries with it
disproportionate suffering for innocent people. In this
context, let me refer to a recent document, General
Comment No. 8 adopted in December 1997 by the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights -
an expert body of the United Nations. In that document,
the Committee stated that sanctions

"often cause significant disruption in the distribution
of food, pharmaceuticals and sanitation supplies,

 

jeopardize the quality of food and the availability of
clean drinking water, severely interfere with the
functioning of basic health and education systems, and
undermine the right to work." (E/C.12/1997/8, para. 3)

In short, sanctions, according to the opinion of that expert
Committee, almost always have a dramatic impact on the
rights recognized in the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

In such situations the international community, and of
course the Security Council in particular, have a great
obligation to take steps to reduce disproportionate suffering,
especially suffering affecting the most vulnerable groups.
We share the view that decisions to reduce the suffering of
those groups can be taken without jeopardizing the policy
aim of sanctions themselves.

The Government concerned may not always be
sensitive to these problems, but the Security Council must,
and it must also demonstrate its ability to find solutions.

These are some of the main reasons for which we
fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General and of the
Security Council to improve the implementation of the
humanitarian programme for Iraq and to take such actions
over additional resources as needed to meet the priority
humanitarian requirements of the Iraqi people. We believe
that our common efforts fulfil the task of alleviating the
critical humanitarian situation in Iraq. We believe that the
draft resolution to be adopted today is comprehensive and
covers all of the aspects of the humanitarian crisis to which
the Secretary-General drew attention in his report of 1
February 1998. It approves a necessary substantive increase
in the export of oil from Iraq; it provides for an increase in
and an improvement in the quality of the food/nutrition
basket; it provides for additional and necessary medical
supplies; and last but not least, it expresses the Council's
readiness to approve the necessary infrastructural
refurbishment.

In conclusion, we would like to express our regret and
concern that the Government of Iraq did not cooperate fully
with the Secretary-General in the preparation of his report.
We therefore urge the Iraqi Government to extend its full
cooperation in the effective implementation of the present
draft resolution.

