Mr. Gadio (Senegal) (spoke in French): On
behalf of President Abdoulaye Wade of the Republic of
Senegal, whom it is my honour to represent, I should
like at the outset warmly to congratulate South Africa
and President Thabo Mbeki on having again this year
convened an open Security Council debate on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
should also like to commend the leadership of
President Kikwete of Tanzania, the acting Chairman of
the African Union.
The interest that all Member States have shown in
today's debate is justified by the complex nature of

conflict situations in Africa and throughout the world.
That complexity requires synergy and dynamic
interaction between the United Nations, which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and regional
organizations, which are a complementary tool to the
activities of the Organization. In that respect, Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter clearly sets out the
modalities for cooperation between the Security
Council and regional organizations.

In that regard, we should welcome the high
quality of the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations. That partnership is all the
more necessary given that Africa contributes almost
35 per cent of contingents and hosts almost half of all
peacekeeping operations, including the largest and
most complex. In that respect, at their 2006 summit,
the heads of State and Government of the African
Union called on the United Nations to consider, within
the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter, the
possibility of funding, through contributions by its
Member States, peacekeeping operations deployed by
the African Union or under its authority, with the
consent of the United Nations.

That invitation demonstrates the resolve of
African leaders to take responsibility for conflicts as
soon as they break out and to intervene relatively
quickly when the United Nations cannot do so. The
case of Darfur is a perfect illustration of that approach.
However, as all are aware, Africa does not always have
the necessary resources to assume such a burden, nor
does it always remain concretely engaged by
providing, quantitatively and qualitatively, the forces
necessary to the success of its interventions. The case
of Darfur also raises the issue of striking a balance
between the urgent need to act to stop atrocities and
due respect for the initiatives of such regional
organizations as the African Union.

African solutions for African problems represent
a noble and praiseworthy approach, but they should not
add to the unbearable suffering of the victims of
conflicts in Africa. In the face of the urgency that has
been recognized by the United Nations and the African
Union, action needs to be taken immediately.

The delicate issue of funding arose during the
operations in the three African missions in Burundi,
Somalia and Darfur. It should be considered in depth
so that we can find a solution. Any solution should,

however, take equal account of the start-up phase of
missions and their long-term viability.

There is a similar concern with regard to
implementing the key provision of the Dakar Accord
between Chad and the Sudan concerning the peace and
security force to monitor the long common border
between those brotherly countries. The Dakar
Accord- concluded on 13 March 2008 in the
presence of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairman of the African Union
Commission, and with the strong support of the
Secretary General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and all the States of the Islamic ummah -
needs important logistic and financial resources if it is
to be successful. Senegal therefore strongly supports
the proposal contained in paragraph 76 of the
Secretary-General's report of 7 April 2008 on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The greatest attention should be given to
strengthening African peacekeeping capacities,
particularly in terms of planning and managing training
operations for civilian, military and police personnel,
as well as logistical support. Regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, should have the ability to
be more alert to potential conflicts so as to be able to
avert them and to take all necessary measures, in close
collaboration with the United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council.

We need to make better use of preventive
diplomacy and strategic anticipation if we are to be
able to fulfil our commitments. The entire world is
listening to the African continent today, as for instance
with regard to the electoral processes in Zimbabwe
and, earlier, in Kenya. Unfortunately, we Africans have
answered only with a deafening silence that can be
heard everywhere. In establishing its council of elders,
the African Union has understood and recognized that
conflicts, be they dormant or active, can be resolved
only by political means - in other words, negotiation,
early warning and good offices.

In closing, I would insist on the need for the
international community to take urgent measures to
address the humanitarian crises sorely afflicting many
States in Africa and throughout the world, as reflected
in the brilliant plea made this morning by the leaders of
the African Union Commission.

