Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to have this interactive discussion
with the Force Commanders. Many thanks to them and
to Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.
Tomorrow is the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers, so I want to begin by paying tribute to all
of our Force Commanders for their bravery, service and
leadership, and to all of the men and women who work
for them in support of United Nations peace operations
around the world. It is United Nations peacekeepers
who turn the words of the Security Council into action
in the real world. They are literally on the front line
of bringing peace and security to the world, serving in
some of the most difficult environments imaginable,
and sometimes they have to put their own lives on the
line in order to protect the world's most vulnerable
people. Sadly, that dedication and determination on
occasion requires them to pay the ultimate price as two
peacekeepers from Chad did yesterday in Mali. We pay
tribute to their courage and to their ultimate sacrifice.

We should be proud of the service of all
United Nations peacekeepers. The employment of
peacekeepers is truly one of the greatest achievements
of the United Nations over its 72 years of history but,
like the rest of the United Nations, it needs to reform.
It needs to progress with the times and it needs to be
modernized. There is always more that can be done
to make United Nations peacekeeping more efficient
and more effective - better mission planning, more
pledges of troops and capabilities, and stronger mission
performance, not just in driving down all of the sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations down to zero, but in
other aspects of performance as well.

This afternoon we have heard of several of the
challenges facing peacekeeping missions, particular
those operating in high-threat environments. We heard
how missions are changing the ways, means and ends
of their operations. My overarching question is whether
that change is happening fast enough to keep up with
global changes. I would like to illustrate that question
with three more specific concerns.

My first point is about the use of intelligence and
technology in peacekeeping.There has been much
debate on that topic here in New York. Member States
have recently called for greater use of peacekeeping
intelligence in missions, and it is a part of what we
would consider to be the necessary modernization
of peacekeeping. It would be interesting to hear the
views of the Force Commanders on that issue and on
what progress has been made in improving situational
awareness in their missions.

My second point has to do with the role of women
in peacekeeping. At the United Nations Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial in London, many Member States
committed to increasing the number of women in
peacekeeping, specifically by deploying more female
military observers. Collectively, we are a long way from
meeting that commitment of doubling the number of
women in peacekeeping by 2020, and it would be very
helpful to hear suggestions from Force Commanders
about actions that could be taken to meet that very
ambitious target.

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, I would
ask a series of questions on how we can make sure
that missions are truly becoming more efficient and
effective. How can we get the right people with the
right skills, the right equipment and the right training
in the right place at the right time? We have been doing
a lot through the series of peacekeeping ministerials
and through force generation conferences in order to
increase the available pool of peacekeepers and thus,
the overall capabilities available. What difference
do the Force Commanders believe that those efforts
have made so far? Are we collectively generating
the capabilities that they need? Are the peacekeepers
reaching them more quickly than before?

I also have a question for the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in response
to his remarks. What is he doing as Force Commander
and what are his colleagues doing to ensure that all
of the troops under their command have the same
understanding of the basic principles of peacekeeping,
including on when the use of force is necessary
and appropriate?

Similarly, it was interesting to hear the points of the
commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic on how too much red tape is slowing down
decisions and making it harder for the more strategic
and robust approach to peacekeeping to be effective. I
would like to hear other ideas as to how we can get rid of
that red tape more broadly, and finally, what we all can
further do to continually drive up both the performance
of individual missions and the accountability between
each mission and the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to underline, once again,
that United Nations peacekeeping, in our view, is the
jewel in the crown of the Organization. It is the unique

selling point of the United Nations, and I encourage
everyone involved, including all of us, to keep up the
level of ambition, to ensure that the pace of change is
fast enough to allow peacekeeping to be modernized
and do its job in the twenty-first century ever more
effectively and efficiently so that it can really protect
the people who need that protection.

