Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eliasson, Mr. Maurer and Mr. Karokhail for their
briefings.

On World Humanitarian Day, France pays tribute to
the 22 members of the United Nations staff who lost their
lives during the attack on the Canal Hotel in Baghdad
in 2003. Eleven years later, unfortunately, this debate
is still relevant, as humanitarian actors are subject to
an increasing number of targeted and deliberate attacks
in the countries where they are present in order to save
lives.

France welcomes the commitment of humanitarian
actors, who provide assistance in increasingly difficult
conditions at the risk of their lives, in particular local
workers, who are the most affected, as Mr. Karokhail
has just underscored. France hopes that his message is
heard in this body, as well as by all States Members
of the United Nations, so that we can work together to
better protect lcoal staff.

Why do such attacks take place, since humanitarian
actors come to save lives, protect populations and
provide shelter to the most vulnerable? The reason is
because the strategy of repressive regimes seeks to
deprive people in rebel areas of all means of survival;
because a starving population who is terrorized and
abandoned is more likely to accept a dictatorship; and
because attacking humanitarian workers is an attempt
to scare away the international community in order to
oppress the population without being seen from outside
and with complete impunity.

In the Sudan yesterday and still today, humanitarian
organizations are being expelled. In Syria, in particular
in Aleppo, hospitals are the preferred targets of barrel
bombs launched by the regime's forces. In Iraq, the
Islamic State sows terror and threatens humanitarian
staff. In Somalia, as elsewhere, the insecurity of
humanitarian workers further hampers access to those
in need. That is why it is essential to ensure follow-up
to the attacks on humanitarian personnel in the context
of a database.

Attacking humanitarian workers deployed in
situations of international armed conflict is a war
crime that can be referred to the International Criminal
Court. In addition to the general rules for the protection
of civilians applicable to staff of humanitarian
organizations, including the fundamental principles
of distinguishing between combatants and civilians,
precaution and proportionality, there are the specific
rules of international humanitarian law.

It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
act in order to prevent and stop such acts. Every tool
at our disposal must be mobilized. The mandates
of peacekeeping operations must provide for the
establishment of an environment conducive to
humanitarian access. We did that in particular in the
cases ofMali and the Central African Republic. We must
continue to use the possibility of referring a situation
to the International Criminal Court, when necessary,
as we did for the Sudan and Libya, but unfortunately
failed to do for Syria. We must also impose sanctions
against those responsible for hampering humanitarian
access and for deliberate attacks against humanitarian
staff.

Finally, we must ensure an effective follow-up
of our own decisions. In that regard, on 14 July, the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2165 (2014),
on humanitarian access in Syria, in which we decided
that all the necessary steps should be taken by the
parties so as to ensure the safety and security of all
humanitarian actors. The Syrian regime and extremist
groups must immediately implement that resolution.

For all those reasons, as you, Mr. President,
proposed in your concept note (S/2014/571, annex), it
would be extremely relevant to update resolution 2165
(2014).

