Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing. The
Great Lakes region is located at the heart of the African
continent. It has abundant resources, vast territories and
huge development potential. The Great Lakes region
has long been plagued by discontent and conflict,
a difficult security situation, a lack of development
and a grim humanitarian outlook. Recently, thanks to
the joint efforts of the international community and
countries of the region, the Great Lakes region has
made many positive developments in its political and
security situation. We are encouraged by that.

The new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo smoothly completed its formation. Since
assuming office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has
actively sought to improve relations with countries in
the region, which has given new momentum to regional
cooperation. The situation in Burundi has remained
calm. Active preparations for the general elections in
May 2020 are under way.

The President of South Sudan, Mr. Kiir Mayardit,
recently met opposition leader Mr. Machar in Juba,
which laid the groundwork for accelerating the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. A new transitional Government was established
in August and is actively working to achieve economic
development and to relaunch the peace process.

Since the start ofhis term in April, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Huang Xia has actively carried
out good offices and made focused visits to countries
in the region, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, to call for
improved relations in the region and to strengthen
regional cooperation and integration process. He has
done a great deal of work to support the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
by the countries of the region. China commends such
work and will continue to support the Special Envoy
and his Office in performing their mandates.

China calls on the countries of the region to
seize the positive momentum that has now emerged
in the region by further consolidating mutual trust,
strengthening cooperation and striving for the early
attainment of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. The international community should provide
strong support to that end. China would like to make
three proposals.

First, resolving the humanitarian crisis in the Great
Lakes region is a top priority. Countries in the region,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, face a grave
humanitarian situation, with many displaced persons and
refugees and a serious food crisis. The Ebola epidemic
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been

effectively brought under control and risks spreading
to other countries in the region. At the same time, more
infectious diseases, such as measles and cholera, are also
raging in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
causing a death toll that is even higher than that of the
Ebola epidemic. The international community should
further increase its humanitarian assistance, effectively
honour its assistance commitments, narrow the funding
gap for humanitarian aid and help the countries of the
region to resettle and repatriate displaced persons and
refugees. The Office of the Special Envoy can play a
coordinating role in close cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR).

Secondly, continued efforts should be made to
strengthen cooperation between countries in the region.
Effective communication and cooperation among
the regional countries are the basis and guarantee for
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. China is pleased to see that, since
assuming office, the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
has been actively meeting the country's specific
commitments under the Framework and working
to enhance cooperation with other countries in the
region. With the assistance of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa
and the ICGLR secretariat, countries of the region have
improved their cooperation and mutual trust in the
security sector. China calls on the United Nations and
the ICGLR to continue to fully leverage their mediation
roles to promote greater coordination and cooperation
on such issues among the countries of the region in
order to achieve the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the illegal armed groups.

Thirdly, more input is required to achieve
socioeconomic development. Development is the
key to resolving all problems. In the Great Lakes
region, the root causes of such issues are poverty
and underdevelopment and the solution is sustainable
development. The international community should
increase its assistance and investment in countries of the
Great Lakes region in areas such as interconnectivity,
health and education and should help countries in the
region to create jobs and improve people's livelihoods.

The Office of the Special Envoy is assisting with
preparations for the Great Lakes Investment and
Trade Conference scheduled to be held in Rwanda
in November. We believe that it will help to attract
international investment and promote cross-border
trade. China welcomes such an initiative and hopes that
the Office will further promote economic cooperation
among countries in the Great Lakes region, increase
interconnectivity and other infrastructure areas,
promote integration, achieve sustainable economic and
social development and bring about lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region.

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community in our continued effort
to contribute to achieving peace, stability and
development in the region as soon as possible. China
will remain committed to strengthening peacebuilding
in the region, actively participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the region, providing
military assistance and supporting countries of the
region in advancing their peace processes. China will
remain committed to strengthening capacity-building
for regional development and providing, as best it can,
assistance in infrastructure, agriculture and health care
to promote peace through development. China will
remain committed to promoting the forging of regional
partnerships to help countries in the region strengthen
people-to-people and cultural exchanges. It will build
partnerships that are based on mutual confidence and
collaboration in order to promote peace through culture.

