Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
this Council and express how pleased we are at seeing
you preside over this meeting. We also thank you for
convening this meeting and for inviting the larger
membership of the United Nations to participate in this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question on Palestine. My delegation also
wishes to align itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Egypt and Syria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively.

The situation in the Middle East, particularly in
the occupied Palestinian territory, is perilous and
precarious. Urgent, decisive action is needed,
particularly by this Council, to stabilize the situation
and to restart the peace process, leading to a
comprehensive and just solution.

The war unleashed by Israel on Gaza in late
December 2008 further exacerbated the situation. It has
been almost a year now since the establishment of the
fragile ceasefire and since this Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1860 (2009), which, among other
things, called for free access of humanitarian aid and
other essential and commercial supplies, as well as
necessary construction materials to and from Gaza, to
alleviate the suffering of the people there. Yet this is
far from happening, and nothing has been done to
ensure its implementation. The people in Gaza,
particularly women, children and the elderly, continue
to suffer from Israeli actions to prevent much-needed
essentials from reaching them. Does this not warrant
any action from this Council to ensure the
implementation of its own unanimously adopted
resolution?

At the same time, the Board of Inquiry set up by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict established by
the Human Rights Council have found Israel
responsible for the death and destruction in Gaza and
for material breaches of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

We fully support the findings and
recommendations of both the Board of Inquiry and the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48), especially on the
need for full investigation by relevant authorities in
pursuing possible charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity. On this note, too, we wonder why
the Council has been silent on the Board of Inquiry's
report, despite its having been presented to the Council
several months ago. Does it not warrant any action
from the Council, or is the Council waiting for the
Goldstone report to further substantiate the Board of
Inquiry's findings?

We are alarmed by the increasing incidents of
violence and attacks against Palestinians by Israeli
illegal settlers. We are dismayed by the reluctance of
the Israeli authorities to prevent such acts, which have
further worsened the already volatile situation in the
occupied territories, particularly occupied East
Jerusalem. We urge the Council to take decisive action
to compel Israel to cease all provocative actions,
including those aimed at altering the demographic and
geographic characteristics and the status of East
Jerusalem and the occupied Palestinian territory.

We need to seriously focus our energy and efforts
on restoring to the Palestinians their inalienable rights,
including their right to an independent State. All
parties must act in earnest and with sincerity to attain
the objective of a just and lasting solution to the
problem in the Middle East. We again urge the Security
Council to take the actions necessary to restore peace
and stability to the Middle East.
