Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by welcoming
you, Mr. President, to the Chamber and thanking you for
presiding over a meeting on this very important issue.
I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his important
update on the situation on the ground. Indonesia shares
his concern about the rising spectre of violence in the
West Bank and Gaza. This is an issue that really must
be addressed.

At a debate on this issue last week, we discussed
at length peace and security in the Middle East (see S/PV.8600). It is important to point out that, during the
debate, there was a general consensus that the long-
standing Israel-Palestine problem is the core issue of
conflict in the region, and that arriving at a durable
solution on this issue requires our commitment to
multilateralism and the rule of law. With that in mind, I
wish to highlight some pertinent points.
First, violence and provocations must stop. We
are appalled at the continuing provocative actions
by the occupying Power, in breach of international
law and various United Nations resolutions. In Gaza,
violence against Palestinian civilians persists, with
no accountability. In East Jerusalem, the storming of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound by Israeli occupation
forces on the morning of Eid Al-Adha two weeks ago is
a serious act of provocation that gave rise to religious
and political tension. We need to make sure that such
reckless action against the holy site never happens
again in order to avoid creating further instability in
a region already experiencing unprecedented turmoil.
These cycles of violence and provocation must stop.
The Government of Israel must adhere to international
law, particularly international humanitarian law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, the root cause of the conflict must be
addressed. We must never forget the elephant in the
room, which is the illegal occupation of Palestinian land
by Israel. Israel's persistent illegal settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories is a clear sign
of it effective ongoing occupation of Palestine. This
illegal action is designed to alter the demography,
characteristics and geographic realities of the occupied
Palestinian territories, thereby making a solution to the
protracted conflict more difficult to attain. This is the
root cause of the problem that requires the Council's
utmost attention. It is quite unfortunate that this organ
has failed to respond to such illegal actions, regardless
of the various attempts that have been made. In other
words, multilateralism is under constant threat.

Thirdly, humanitarian assistance must be sustained.
Since 2018, there has been a sharp deterioration
in the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. In
the West Bank, the coercive environment, which
is intensified by the ongoing demolitions, forced
evictions, discriminatory planning, access restrictions,
settlement expansion and settler violence, is increasing
the vulnerability of the Palestinian population. In
addition, Palestinian refugees are experiencing
increased suffering due to the lack of funding for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Indonesia shares
the view that improving UNRWA management is
crucial but, at the same time, UNRWA should not be
defunded or shut down. The role of UNRWA is vital
not only as a lifeline, but also as a safeguard of the
Palestinian right of return against all the Powers that
want to do away with it.

Regarding the reference by the Special Coordinator
to the Israeli drone crash in Lebanon, Indonesia
strongly condemns that attack as well as the daily
violation of Lebanese sovereignty by Israel, which
constitutes a clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006).
Indonesia believes that the Council needs to take these
daily violations seriously as a potential trigger of
renewed conflict.

To conclude, Indonesia wishes to reiterate the need
for the members of the Council to unite in greater
commitment to the ever-increasing challenge of the
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
guided by multilateralism and international law. As
stated during my intervention last week, overcoming
the violence and atrocious humanitarian conditions
in Palestine and achieving a durable solution to the
conflict will come down to the ability and willingness
of the Council to act courageously to realize a two-
State solution.

