Mr. J agne (Gambia): My delegation is grateful to the
Prosecutor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte, for her comprehensive
briefing and for the amount of work she has done so far
since taking office. We anxiously look forward to her Visit
to Rwanda, and we will reserve our comments on the work
of the Rwanda Tribunal until she has the opportunity to
Visit that country.

We are tempted, though, to commend a number of
African countries for their cooperation with the Rwanda
Tribunal. It is as a result of such cooperation that during
previous briefings the relative success of the Rwanda
Tribunal was mentioned.

What do we learn from this? The answer is simple.
The cooperation of States is indispensable. Otherwise,
there is very little that these Tribunals can do to bring
these criminals to justice. This is why we believe that,
with regard to the Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the
States concerned should cooperate with the Prosecutor by
arresting without further delay the war criminals who
have been indicted. If safe havens continue to be provided
for those on the run, our collective endeavour to promote
international criminal law will be seriously undermined,
and, indeed, the powerful mechanisms for the
enforcement of international humanitarian law, which
these two Tribunals are meant to embody, would end up
devoid of any raison d'etre.

We note with satisfaction that the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) is cooperating with the Office of the Prosecutor,
but we deplore the fact that some indictees are beyond the
reach of SFOR because they are being given protection
by some States. The forensic and other evidence gathered
so far is compelling enough to convince those States that
are swimming against the tide to change their minds and
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor. If not, this
Council should assume its responsibility fully.

We can understand why the Prosecutor emphasized
that her Office is not seeking the Council's support
lightly. We hope that the Council's support will not be
found wanting. Let us not let her down. We cannot afford
to let her down.

We hope that the Prosecutor's appeal will not fall on
deaf ears this time. We wish Ms. Del Ponte success in
her endeavour.

