Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the Chairs of the three Committees - the
Permanent Representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan and
Bolivia - for sharing the activities of their Committees
with us, as well as for their excellent work as Chairs.

Today we are facing terrorist attacks all over the
world. Numerous foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq
and Syria are returning to their countries of origin or
relocating to other regions, including South-East Asia.
Their tactics are evolving, including through the use
of "broken travel" techniques with forged passports.
As the Chairs have indicated, we have countered these
developments by fully implementing all the recent
counter-terrorism resolutions, including on aviation
security, international judicial cooperation, and
protection of critical infrastructure (resolution 2341 (2017)). The adoption of those resolutions is important,
but their implementation is equally vital.

I would like to note one concrete action item.
Resolution 2178 (2014) and the subsequent presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23) respectively encourage
Member States to utilize advance passenger
information (API) and Passenger Name Records (PNR)
systems. API contains passport and flight information,
while PNR contains passengers' booking information,
including itineraries, names of travelling companions
and payment methods. This information helps the
authorities analyse and detect possible foreign terrorist
fighters before they arrive at airports. However, to my
knowledge, only 56 out of 193 Member States have
introduced the API system, and only 15 use the PNR
system. I urge all Member States to implement these
systems as soon as possible.

The use of API and PNR is just one example of
implementation measures made pursuant to resolution
2178 (2014). Many others are also required to stem the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters with forged passports,
such as using biometric tools and INTERPOL's Stolen
and Lost Travel Documents Database. We must enhance
our own capabilities and extend assistance to those in
need in order to effectively implement the resolutions.

With regard to resolution 2178 (2014), in March
2017, Japan provided $1.1 million to the Capacity-
building Implementation Plan for Countering the
Flow of Foreign Terrorist Fighters set up pursuant to
the recommendation made in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/11. However, this plan has so far acquired
only 23 per cent of the funding it needs. I encourage
Member States to contribute to this comprehensive plan
to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, which
would focus not only on countering such fighters and
foreign terrorist fighter returnees but also on preventing
violent extremism as well. Japan will continue to
support and actively engage in the discussion on the
United Nations counter-terrorism architecture to
ensure that the new office of counter-terrorism can
most effectively coordinate relevant bodies on counter-
terrorism and on preventing violent extremism.

I would like to return to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). North
Korea continues to conduct ballistic-missile launches
and nuclear tests in blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions. Chemical weapons have been used
in Syria, including by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. These striking examples demonstrate that the
threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction are very real.

It is therefore the responsibility of every State
to protect itself and its people by strengthening
international and domestic non-proliferation measures.
Proliferation activities must be prevented whenever
and wherever they are undertaken or attempted.
Implementing measures related to paragraph 3 of
resolution 1540 (2004), including the development of
national control lists, is increasingly important. The
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts can assist
States wishing to strengthen their domestic measures.

Japan therefore attaches high importance to direct
interaction between Member States and the Committee.
Joint visits to States by the Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate are particularly
valuable in that regard.

Japan disbursed $1 million to the Trust Fund this
year to support the work of the 1540 Committee. A
significant portion will be used to finance those types
of direct interaction. Japan urges interested States to
contact the Committee. As the coordinator of Working
Group I for monitoring and national implementation,
my delegation would also be happy to relay any message
to the Committee.

