Mr. Kim Sook (Republic ofKorea): I thank Special
Coordinator Serry for his comprehensive briefing. I also
thank Foreign Minister Malki and Ambassador Prosor
for their warm words extended to the five new members
of the Security Council, including my country.

The relationship between Israel and Palestine
is still at the crux of security issues in the Middle
East. However, the ongoing situation between Israel
and Palestine is much worse than a simple stalemate.
During the past few years, regardless of the reason,
the two sides have continued to step away from
implementing agreements. The violence witnessed in
Gaza and in southern Israel in November 2012 was but
a manifestation of that persistent feud. My delegation
strongly urges both Israel and Palestine to resume
direct negotiations as soon as possible. They need
to sit down together to talk now. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the recent import of construction
materials to the Gaza Strip through the Kerem Shalom
checkpoint for the first time in five years. It serves to
improve the living conditions of the people in Gaza.
That also means that the ceasefire negotiations behind
the scenes are making slow but steady progress. The
negotiation process involving Egypt should contribute
to building confidence between Israel and the new
Egyptian Government, which is necessary to maintain
their peace treaty.

On the other hand, increasing tensions and clashes
in the West Bank are a worrying sign. It is of serious
concern that Israeli-Palestinian security cooperation in
the West Bank has continually debilitated since late last
year.

My delegation watched the result of yesterday's
general election in Israel with great interest. We expect
that the new Israeli Government will place its priority
on making progress in the Middle East talks and
make sincere and serious efforts for the resumption of
talks with Palestine. Also, my delegation took note of
President Abbas's recent visit to Cairo and hopes that
the Palestinian Authority and Hamas will work together
towards reconciliation, with a view to creating an
environment conducive to peace talks. Unless and until
the vision of two States living peacefully side by side
is embraced by all of Palestine, our common aspiration
to see the State of Palestine thriving in reality will
continue to remain elusive.

The Republic of Korea supports the mediation
efforts by the Quartet. It was disappointing to have
witnessed that little progress was made until, and
even after, the deadline set by the Quartet to finalize
an agreement. However, the failure to meet the time
limit should not be interpreted as an indictment of the
Quartet, the role of which should continue to be an
integral part of the process. My delegation encourages
the Quartet to renew its activities soon, and both Israel
and Palestine to fully cooperate with the process.

The Republic of Korea shares with the international
community its strong concerns over Israeli settlement
activity. Israel, since its announcement to build 3,000
dwellings on the West Bank, including in the E-l area,
has continued to reaffirm its intention to construct
additional settlements in Ramat Shlomo and Givat
Hamatos. We are deeply concerned that settlements in
the area between Jerusalem and Ma'ale Adumim would

jeopardize the negotiation process for a two-State
solution.

In Syria the bloodshed has now entered its twenty-
second month. More than 60,000 people have been
killed. There are more than 650,000 refugees and an
estimated 4 million people in urgent need of assistance.
The Syrian authorities and the opposition groups must
stop atrocities against innocent civilians. My delegation
reiterates its call for all parties' cooperation for safe,
unimpeded and timely humanitarian access to the
people in need of help. Those who violate international
humanitarian and human rights laws must be brought to
justice. In that context, the Republic of Korea supports
the referral of the Syrian situation to the International
Criminal Court.

Edmund Burke once said that all that was necessary
for the triumph of evil was that good men do nothing.
Continued inaction will not only result in the increase in
the tragic statistics, but also fundamentally undermine
peace and stability in the whole Middle East region. The
deeper the grudges and grievances of Syrians against
Syrians grow, the longer bloody vengeance will prevail,
even after President Al-Assad steps down. Extremists
are the only group that benefits from the prolongation
of the conflict.

The increasingly sectarian nature of the Syrian
conflict risks spreading beyond its borders. In particular,
the domestic politics of Lebanon are seriously affected
by the spillover from the Syrian situation. The growing
number of refugees is already causing instability in the
neighbouring countries. We compliment the efforts of
Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to continue to open
their borders to accommodate Syrian refugees in spite
of immense difficulties. In that regard, we hope for a
successful donors conference to be held in Kuwait next
week.

My delegation firmly supports the mediation efforts
of Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, and strongly urges all parties to cooperate
fully with Mr. Brahimi.
Lastly, we warn the Syrian regime to not use
chemical weapons on any occasion. The use ofweapons
of mass destruction will be the kiss of death for the
Syrian regime. Last month at Marrakech, the Republic
of Korea recognized the Syrian National Coalition as
the legitimate representative of the Syrian people. We
hope that the Syrian National Coalition will begin an
inclusive process of political transition with a view to
winning the hearts and minds of all Syrian people. The
Republic of Korea will cooperate with other members
of the Security Council to overcome its current division
so that the Council can translate its Charter obligations
into action and restore lasting peace in Syria.

