Mr. Morales (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the initiative of holding this
debate and commends the delegation of the Russian
Federation for the excellent work that it has been doing
throughout the month of September while holding
the Security Council presidency. I also appreciate the
briefing of the Secretary-General, which sets forth the
urgency of resolving conflicts, especially those waged
in the Middle East and North Africa.

It is disconcerting to see how a region that was
no ennobled by a series of social movements that
recently sought democratic changes is now dominated
by instability and conflict. The consequences of the
violence in the region have been disastrous for the
civilian population. Sadly, we have witnessed how
the continuing acts of violence, fundamentalism,
intolerance, exclusion and the renting of the social
fabric have become the daily life of the peoples of the
region. We believe that we must all redouble our efforts
to find viable political solutions to change those trends
in the context in which human rights are respected and
where we can bring about a better future.

Guatemala has had an opportunity to see at first-
hand how often the Security Council has failed in
how to address the roots of conflict. Many times that
was due to the political sensitivities of its members.
However, we have also been able to observe situations
where it was possible to find enough political will
among its members to make the necessary structural
changes and thereby counteract many of the scourges
that have given rise to conflicts.

Clearly, we have reached a point where we must
muster the political will to address in a comprehensive
manner the thorny issues that help foster the terrorist
threat, such as socioeconomic exclusion, the availability
of weapons and violations of basic human rights. It is
these kinds of problems that, taken together, have been
exploited in order to advance the interests of those
groups that promote violent extremism and threaten
peace and security.

In Guatemala's View, it is essential that the
international community, particularly the members of
the Security Council, overcome its differences and use
the mechanisms at its disposal to bring together the
parties to conflicts in order to find new ways to reduce
violence, alleviate the people's suffering and build
confidence for a resumption of political negotiations.
We are aware that the Council can have a strong
influence on the course of events on the ground, but
ultimately peace can be preserved or restored only by
the actual parties to the conflict. In matters of war and
peace, the international community can play a critical
role, but it is only the internal actors who can be the
masters of their own destiny.

The effectiveness of our efforts in combating
terrorism is linked to our ability to successfully tackle
the conditions that fuel the problem. In that regard, we
believe we now have a number of multidimensional
and operational tools enabling us to address the issue
and cooperate effectively, while taking into account
the needs and peculiarities of each region. However,
we should remember that it is not possible to fight
terrorism with military force alone. It is vital that the
actions of the United Nations and its Member States be
seen to be legitimate, as is ensuring the accountability
of those who execute them.

Finally, circumstances change and trends are often
not linear, and both can be changed, by individuals or
institutions. By ensuring a judicious mix of policies,
the Council can prevent a conflict or interrupt a trend.
Indeed, that is the reason for having a Security Council
that is called on to act and to seek a lasting peace built
on solid foundations.

