Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I also welcome this opportunity to
participate in this open debate, given its timeliness, on
issues related to new trends in peacekeeping operations.

The evolving nature of conflicts, which have
become increasingly complex and destabilizing, has
led the Council in recent years to adapt peacekeeping
operations with a view to improving efficiency in
the implementation of operations to make or restore
peace. That new orientation has resulted in granting
more robust mandates to peacekeeping operations
that have become multidimensional, and in the use
of new surveillance technologies and inter-mission
cooperation. Such new trends are the result of deep-
seated changes that have arisen to grapple with the
appearance of multiple threats to international peace
and security.

Indeed, resurgent drug trafficking, human
trafficking, terrorism and piracy at sea constitute factors
for instability in many regions of the world. Moreover,
conventional wars between States have largely given
way to internal conflicts based on asymmetrical attacks
that have a considerable impact on civilian populations.
Operations have therefore shifted their focus from
interposition towards intervention and the protection of
civilians. This situation has led to an ongoing evolution
in peacekeeping operations in a context where the ideals
on which the United Nations was founded - peace,

security, human rights and development - are more

relevant than ever.

It is, however, the responsibility of the Council to
carefully monitor the intended impact of peacekeeping
practices and the results obtained over the course of
their evolution. Considered in the light of mandates
that are increasingly multidimensional and/or robust,
peacekeeping operations seem to be more in line with
the reality of the theatres of operation. The links among
security, human rights, international humanitarian law
and the political process of peacebuilding all demand
the deployment of missions that are broadly prepared
to prevent the resurgence of violence that often arises
in pre- or post-electoral situations, in the aftermath of
judicial procedures related to the settling of accounts,
or from failed efforts at national reconciliation.

Moreover, priorities need to be ordered based on a
long-term approach, along with a system ofcoordination
capable of ensuring the established goals. Although
that departs from the principle of neutrality that was
considered important during the Cold War, granting
a robust mandate can contribute fundamentally to the
protection of civilian populations and to the restoration
of the territorial integrity of States. Such mandates,
however, are not without risk because they give United
Nations forces a stakeholder role, which requires
enhanced measures to ensure their safety.

The complexity of threats to peace and security
has also led to the use of new technologies such as
unarmed drones. Such reconnaissance and surveillance
devices help to identify armed groups, prevent threats
and facilitate a rapid response. In that regard, unarmed
aerial vehicles are indispensable. However, it is
important to preserve their exclusively military role
through rigorous management of their acquisition and
use and the information they generate. It is therefore
necessary, within the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional organizations, to
ensure the transfer of technology capable of improving
their ability to intervene.

Inter-mission cooperation is also a crucial question
insofar as it touches on the overall effectiveness of
contemporary peacekeeping operations. Indeed, it has
the advantage of contributing to the strengthening of
the operational skills of troops involved in establishing
new missions, and of compensating for deficits in
contingents that have already been deployed. In the
same vein, I take this opportunity to call on Member
States to ensure payment of their assessed contributions
on time and without preconditions, and for regular
reimbursement for material and troops in order to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations raise the hopes of entire
populations, reassure host Governments, facilitate the
mission of humanitarian workers and contribute to the
recovery of countries affected by conflict. It is therefore
clear that respect for the sovereignty of States must
prevail more than ever and be constantly reaffirmed.
As we said during the open debate on security sector
reform (see S/PV.7161), States affected by crises must be
at the heart of the process of conceptualizing, preparing
and deploying peacekeeping operations. Their very
legitimacy and effectiveness depend on it.

To conclude, I would like to reaffirm the need
to pursue the development of rapid and effective
intervention capabilities. Senegal therefore calls for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in order to implement the significant
recommendation of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
concerning the use of standby forces and the capabilities
of the United Nations.

