Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I am sorry for
taking the floor again; I will be brief. I have been quite
alarmed by what we have just heard in the last closing
interventions. I would therefore like to be very clear
about a number of things.

First, I would like the record to show that I did not
get the commitments that I was seeking. I want to be
very clear that the Sky News crew is not a legitimate
target. The targeting ofjournalists is not permissible,
and I again call on the Syrian representative to pass
that message on to his Government and give us a
commitment that they will not be targeted, unlike the
late Marie Colvin.

Secondly, I want to repudiate the slander against the
White Helmets. I have said many times in this Chamber
that it is a humanitarian organization doing good work
to help the suffering civilians in Syria.

Thirdly, I want to say that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
does not do the bidding of the United Kingdom and
the United States in the manner in which the Syrian
representative implied. OCHA, like all the United
Nations, is impartial. It does the best job that it can,
in terrible circumstances, for the people of Syria, and
it would be better if the Syrian authorities supported
OCHA in that work, rather than attack it.

Lastly, there are more babies in Idlib than there are
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters. Rather than talk about
responding to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham provocations - no
one is taking issue with the question of whether to
respond to those provocations - the question is: How
they are responded to? How do Russia and the Syrian
regime respond to Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham? They say
that they want to protect the 3 million civilians in Idlib,
but massive aerial bombardments of civilian areas
and the bombing of hospitals, schools and civilian
infrastructure are not necessary and are certainly not
proportionate. That is the absolutely critical thing about
international humanitarian law. There needs to be a
distinction between civilian and military targets, and
there needs to be proportionality. That is what we are
not seeing, and that is why the Council is so worried
about that.

