Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for
his presentation of the quarterly report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and his
entire team for the excellent work they have been doing
for nearly a year.

The Vienna agreement of 14 July and the Council's
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) marked a historic
step on the road to establishing confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. For 12 years, the international community
worried about Iran's alarming expansion of its nuclear
programme. Today, after long and difficult negotiations,
a path has opened towards a lasting solution to the
issue. The July agreement between Iran and the E3+3
meets the traditional and essential requirements
for non-proliferation that we outlined during the
negotiations. In order to ensure Iran's compliance with
its commitments, we have established a robust and
detailed verification regime. The Vienna agreement
is now our collective road map. We will monitor it to
ensure that the timetable and measures defined in the
agreement and in resolution 2231 (2015) are rigorously
and comprehensively implemented.

Positive progress has been made since July. On
18 October, following the completion of the national
investigation process, the Vienna agreement went into
effect, and just today the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency took important
decisions aimed at re-establishing the relationship
between the Agency and Iran on new foundations.

Having endorsed the Vienna agreement through
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the Council
must now shoulder the responsibility of implementing
it. I would like to recall in that regard that both the
agreement and the resolution establish that until
the start of implementation, all existing Security
Council measures, including sanctions, remain in full
effect. In that context, we were disturbed to learn the
conclusions of the latest incident report from the Panel
of Experts concerning the ballistic missile launched
by Iran on 10 October. According to the report, the
Panel's rigorous independent inquiry concluded quite
unambiguously that the missile launch constituted a
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). That violation must
receive an appropriate response from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The
Panel of Experts also mentions a possible ballistic
missile launch on 21 November. That information
should receive our full attention, and if it is confirmed
we should also respond to it.

In a second report concerning an attempt to transfer
titanium bars under embargo, the conclusions in the
Panel of Experts are no more reassuring. If the transfer
had been successful, it would also have constituted a
violation of resolution 1737 (2006). Such violations,
coming so soon after the July agreement, do not augur
well. They demonstrate just how vigilant we must
continue to be.

The Vienna agreement on the Iranian nuclear
programme will be a victory for international
diplomacy only to the extent that it is fully and
rigorously applied. In that regard, we will remain
engaged in its implementation in good faith but in a
spirit of watchfulness that can ensure the credibility
of the agreement and that the solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue will be a lasting one.

