Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
We especially appreciate the report of the
Secretary-General on the issue. It is a document that
provides updated information on the implementation of
resolution 1674 (2006) and on the strengthening of the
legal framework for the protection of civilians.

My delegation also expresses its gratitude to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Sir John Holmes, for
his presentation to the Council.

Argentina attaches great importance to the
question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. It is a priority that represents a human,
political and judicial imperative that recognizes the
dignity and value inherent in all human beings. In that
sense, my country had the honour to be a member of
the Security Council when resolutions 1265 (1999),
1296 (2000) and 1674 (2006) were negotiated and
adopted, providing the legal foundation for the subject
on which this Council recommends ever increasing
support activities for the protection of civilians to
peacekeeping operations.

However, we observe with great concern the
current reality that, both in internal and in international
conflicts, civilians continue to die and be mutilated,
violated or displaced, and are prevented from meeting
their basic necessities. There has also been an increase
in the number of journalists and media technicians who
die or suffer injuries while reporting from conflict
zones. We must also include the elderly and the
disabled in that unfortunate scenario. We therefore
consider it of utmost importance that States ratify the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
since that norm requires all States parties to adopt all
measures necessary to guarantee the security and
protection of the disabled in conflict situations.

Argentina strongly condemns all atrocities
committed against civilians and reiterates once again
that no national security consideration can prevail over
the primary obligation of States and parties to an armed
conflict of observing the rules of international
humanitarian law contained in the Hague and Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols.

As the Secretary-General informs us, progress
has been made in the fight against impunity in the
work of the International Criminal Court. We therefore
deem it very important that all Member States
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and other international mechanisms that fight against
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

At the same time, my delegation appreciates and
praises the work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and of the agencies of the system
in the field of the protection of civilians, including
refugees and the internally displaced, as well as
women, children and other vulnerable groups in the
framework of armed conflicts.

It is the responsibility of all States to protect their
populations, and those of this Organization must adopt
measures to prevent or alleviate the suffering of
civilians in conflict zones.

Argentina reiterates the importance of ensuring
that the mandates of peacekeeping, political and
peacebuilding missions include provisions that address
issues regarding the protection of civilians. Along these
lines, regional organizations should assume a more
relevant role, such as that indicated recently in the
debate that took place in this Council on the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Lastly, we would be remiss if we did not point
out that, in our opinion, the recent report of the
Secretary-General offers a possibility to the Security
Council and Member States to take full stock of the
global situation in this area and to move forward with
our normative work. We believe that the challenges
involved therein are of particular importance, and the
actions and measures proposed are geared towards
guaranteeing more systematic and vigorous responses.
These measures should contemplate and secure access,
a fundamental requirement for the intervention and
protection of the humanitarian sphere, and must also
tackle sexual violence inflicted against women, boys
and girls during conflict. Likewise, we should consider
questions related to housing, land and property, which
are inextricably linked with the establishment and
strengthening of durable peace and the prevention of
future acts of violence.

In conclusion, therefore, I would like to
underscore the need for concerted action to put an end
to the use of cluster munitions, whose humanitarian
consequences, even after the conflict is over, cause
unacceptable harm to the civil population.

