Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by commending the Egyptian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this open debate, as
well as for the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) that was
circulated in order to provide input for this discussion.
I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve' Ladsous; the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Mr. Te'te Antonio; the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the African Union, Mr. Haile
Menkerios; and the Permanent Representative of Kenya
and Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Mr. Macharia Kamau, for their briefings.

I also take this opportunity to highlight today's
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security.

The growing number and complexity of current
conflicts presents aseries ofchallenges. Thatis evidenced
by the continued increase in demand for peacekeeping
operations. In recent years, the number of Blue Helmets
deployed has reached an unprecedented level. The
great majority of peacekeeping operations - almost
90 per cent of uniformed personnel - are deployed in
Africa and, as Mr. Ladsous pointed out minutes ago,
over 80 per cent of the annual peacekeeping budget is
used there, often in situations where there is no peace
to keep and where there are a number of asymmetrical
threats posed by non-State actors whose relationships
with transnational criminal organizations have made it
very difficult to isolate and address problems.
These growing threats to international peace
and security are developing in a context in which the
financial resources of the United Nations in general,
and of Member States in particular, add another layer
of difficulty, requiring the greatest possible efficiency
in the use of those resources. Therefore, the need to
efficiently address the complexity of these threats and
to find solutions make partnerships with international
actors, in particular regional and subregional
organizations, increasingly important.

New threats to international peace and security, and
grave existing humanitarian crises require, now more
than ever before, the development of close regional and
global alliances that will make more effective responses
possible. Such alliances should respect the competencies
of each organization, maximize synergies and promote
complementarity. That is why we agree that now is the
time to discuss and agree on a clearer framework for
such cooperation, which is particularly urgent for our
ties with the African Union.

It is no coincidence that the recent reviews of the
United Nations peace and security architecture have
reached the same conclusion - that the challenges of
the twenty-first century are too broad and complex to be
addressed solely within the scope of the United Nations.
That is why it is necessary to revitalize the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
in order to more effectively guarantee international
peace and security. The review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture highlights the importance
of cooperation with regional structures. That includes
cooperation with the African Union as, nowadays,
all of the countries for which the Peacebuilding
Commission has country-specific configurations are
African countries.

In addition, at the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations it has been recognized that,
among other things, regional organizations have the
potential to offset the United Nations deficit in rapid-
response capacity. Similarly, the forces of the region
have on many occasions proved to be essential in
initially responding to crises and bringing to bear
important understandings of local realities. They also
provide a direct link in terms ofinfluence and regional
political authority.

Nevertheless, we always need to ensure that there is
strict respect for the principle of impartiality. That has
at times been somewhat of a challenge given that, in the
close relationships that exist between different regional
entities, there can sometimes be a clash between the
national interests of the countries of the region.

The idea presented in the concept note for this
debate to take up the recommendations of the Panel
with regard to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations is very timely, in particular
when it comes to strengthening the strategic alliance
between the United Nations and the African Union.
In that regard, my delegation views favourably the
Panel's recommendation to ensure that the formulation
of peace-operation mandates should involve closer
collaboration. To that end, the Security Council and the
Secretariat should make a commitment to ensuring that
more dialogue and closer coordination takes place with
the relevant regional organizations before a mandate is
authorized. That is particularly true when a regional
operation has been deployed, or is about to be deployed.
In that contex, the Security Council should turn more
frequently to the advice and experience of regional
partners.

It would also be timely to assess the possibility
of gradually harmonizing the policies and norms that
regulate United Nations peacekeeping operations with
the norms applicable to other peace operations mandated
by the Security Council, especially with regard to the
protection of civilians. The relationship between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union should be further strengthened
through increased interaction and consultation so as to
make it possible to develop a common understanding of
conflicts and to formulate commons strategies.

The Ramos Horta report (see S/2015/446) indicates
that one of the major weaknesses of the current system
is related to the status of the financing of the strategic
alliance. Therefore, the United Nations and the African
Union should join forces to undertake joint efforts in
order to establish sustainable, predictable and flexible
mechanisms that are capable of supporting African
Union peace operations. It is also worth recalling that the
Report of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture (see/2015/490),
entitled "The Challenge of Sustaining Peace", also
highlights that efforts in peacebuilding need to be
supported through the allocation of predictable and
sustained resources.

I would like to express support for the principles of
cooperation that the High-level Panel proposed. Those
principles are the basis for a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
can also serve as a benchmark for future collaboration
between the United Nations and other regional
organizations. They include the process of adopting
decisions through consultation and a common strategy;
a division of labour based on respective comparative
advantages; analysis, planning, monitoring and joint
evaluation; an integrated response to the conflict cycle,
including prevention; and transparency, accountability
and respect for international norms.

Bearing in mind the significant existing challenges
that we face, actions aimed at strengthening regional
alliances should not undermine the participation and
contribution of non-regional actors to peacekeeping
operations deployed in Africa.

I would also like to highlight that the new African
Peace and Security Architecture road map for the
period 2016-2020 is an excellent tool that clarifies the
role of each actor involved in the peace and security
architecture on the continent. It establishes indicators
and specific objectives in five priority areas, namley,
conflict prevention, crisis and conflict management,
post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding,
strategic security and coordination and partnerships.

In conclusion, Uruguay would like to reiterate
its commitment to the process for the review of
peacekeeping operations. We are convinced of the need
for the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations to be fully discussed as soon
as possible. The United Nations peacekeeping system
is still far from being prepared to deal effectively with
today's complex and changing international scenario,
and it is our obligation to take urgent measures in
that regard.

