Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I have
requested the floor in the understanding that these
informational briefings for the members of the Security
Council could also benefit from members expressing
their opinions, without prejudice to the consultations
that will follow, where we can address issues that
require greater confidentiality.

Since this is the first time I am taking the floor under
the your presidency, Sir, I congratulate you on having
taken up this new responsibility. I also pledge the full
support of my delegation. At the same time, I would like
to thank Ambassador Gerard van Bohemen, Permanent
Representative of New Zealand, and his entire team for
the excellent work they did during their presidency in
the month of September. It was a particularly difficult
month, not only in terms of logistics, but also in terms
of the various developments that took place.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Herve' Ladsous
for his introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/812). In my brief comments, I shall refer to three
points: the political process, the humanitarian situation
and the restrictions on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
humanitarian actors.

Uruguay welcomes the various steps forward
mentioned by Mr. Ladsous that have taken place since
the signing of the road map agreement last August 8
by various movements, including the Sudan Call, the
Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minnawi, and others. The agreement the
new signatories joined, which was facilitated by the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
had already been signed by the Government of the
Sudan, has the objectives of paving the way to putting
an end to the conflict in Darfur and the Two Areas
and of addressing urgent humanitarian needs and the
underlying causes of conflict. Unfortunately, as was
also pointed out by Mr. Ladsous, we have not obtained
entirely positive results and we are particularly
concerned about the absence from the negotiating table
of certain groups, including, and more recently, the
Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid, which continues
to reject any type of dialogue.

With respect to the humanitarian situation,
Uruguay reiterates its concern for the more than
2.5 million people who have been displaced, and we
are encouraged by the reference in the Secretary-
General's report to the fact that open hostilities have
generally diminished in Darfur in recent months. In
accordance with the information provided by the United
Nations humanitarian team, more than 80,000 people,
particularly women and children, have allegedly been
displaced in Darfur since the beginning of the year,
especially due to the clashes in the Jebel Marra area.

Against this backdrop, it is crucial that UNAMID
personnel comply fully with the provisions of its
mandate and that humanitarian actors have the necessary
conditions to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people affected by the conflict. It is also crucial that
the Government of the Sudan guarantee without delay
unhindered access for UNAMID and the humanitarian

partners to the communities affected by the conflict
with a view to carrying out monitoring and verification
missions as well as to deliver humanitarian assistance.

Furthermore, while we note that there has been
a relative improvement in the issuance of visas
for UNAMID personnel and the dispatching of
rations containers for the troops, we reiterate that in
accordance with its obligations under the Status of
Forces Agreement, the Government of the Sudan must
take urgent measures to eliminate all bureaucratic
obstacles and ensure that UNAMID enjoys the
conditions necessary to full compliance with its
mandate. As we have pointed out on several occasions
in relation to operations in other areas, my delegation
attaches particularly importance to the issue of States'
compliance with their obligations in relation to United
Nations operations in their territories.

In conclusion, I would like to express Uruguay's
gratitude to all of UNAMID's personnel and the United
Nations humanitarian country team and its partners,
who continue to work tirelessly, often in difficult
conditions, to achieve a sustainable peace in Darfur.

