Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your briefing as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). I also thank Ambassador Meza-
Cuadra for his briefing as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

We welcome the good cooperation among the
Committees, which is reflected in the joint visits,
joint meetings and exchanges of views. We also
welcome the collaboration between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Monitoring Team, as well as their quarterly
coordination meetings. Such cooperation among the
three Committees can indeed strengthen the One United
Nations approach towards Member States and ensure
better implementation of the relevant resolutions.

We share the assessment of the three Committees:
the terrorist threat from Da'esh has not disappeared
but has evolved. Indeed, the destruction of Da'esh as
a terrorist organization with a territorial base does
not mean the end of the threat it represents. Da'esh
continues to act as an international spoiler through its
influence on individuals and groups around the world.
We saw that once again in the 21 April attacks in Sri
Lanka, with more than 250 regrettable deaths. And that
is without forgetting that Al-Qaida and its affiliated
groups are also maintaining their position, in particular
in the Sahel. We must therefore remain vigilant, and
we therefore strongly encourage the work carried out
by the three Committees in recent months. In that
regard, we welcome the open briefing on the addendum
to the Madrid Guiding Principles. We believe it to be
an important first step towards the implementation
of that addendum, making it possible to strengthen
Member States' understanding and knowledge of the
Principles and thereby promoting the implementation
of resolution 2396 (2017).

CTED, the 1267 Monitoring Team and the Expert
Group of the 1540 Committee have a crucial role as
international entities in the fight against terrorism.
We are committed to giving our full support to
their respective mandates. We welcome the fact that
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March, requests
CTED and the Monitoring Team to prepare a report
on actions taken by Member States in the fight against
terrorist financing.

Belgium welcomes the fact that the threat stemming
from the entire spectrum of violent extremism,
including extreme right-wing terrorism, is now on the
Security Council's agenda. The increasing polarization
within and between our countries strengthens the
growth of such phenomena, which seem to encourage
individual actions. In addition, we face growing
internationalization in terms of financial and tactical
support. However, we recognize that in particular
the issue of the extreme right remains difficult.
Member States have very different approaches and the
phenomenon is complicated to define and demarcate.
We encourage CTED to continue to study and to
define the phenomenon and to report on that to the
1373 Committee.

Belgium also appreciated and supported the 26 April
joint meeting ofthe 1988, 1267 and 1373 Committees on
the link between terrorism and organized crime. With
regard to that link, Belgium supports the holding of the
debate and advocates a better exchange of information
and good practices.

Belgium also welcomes the work of the 1267
Committee's Ombudsperson and reiterates its full
support for his work. The establishment ofthe Office of
the Ombudspersonin2009 was animportant steptowards
improving transparency and strengthening respect for
the procedural safeguards necessary for effective and
legitimate sanctions in the 1267 Committee.

In conclusion, aware that the terrorist threat has
not diminished and that terrorists seem to be constantly
adapting to the new realities, let us remain vigilant and
pursue international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. Belgium will continue to support the work
of the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees and its support
structures. We remain committed to multilateral efforts
to combat the global terrorist threat.

