Mr. Morales Lepez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I join the previous delegations that have congratulated
you, Mr. President, on your work in the Security
Council this month and on your leadership as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
their briefings.
Following the concept note for today's debate, I
will focus on sharing practical, concrete measures from
my country's experience, with a view to facilitating
and improving States' implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). For Colombia, national legislation is
a key element in addressing the threat posed by
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors. However, efforts aimed at adopting
national legal norms must be accompanied by efforts
aimed at strengthening cooperation between States
and institutions and addressing the issue from the
perspective of prevention.

Beyond strengthening legal norms and the capacity
to respond, Colombia has repeatedly suggested in
different forums improving particular aspects, such
as safety and chemical, nuclear and radiological
protective measures in order to prevent the diversion of
hazardous materials into the hands of non-State actors,
while also ensuring their security and protection at all
stages of their life cycle, from research, development
and manufacturing to transport through the supply
chain, storage and waste disposal. The strengthening
of security measures and chemical, nuclear and
radiological protection will prevent non-State actors
from acquiring these types of materials.

The OPCW and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, through their verification activities and
safeguards systems, respectively, have played a leading
role in monitoring the peaceful uses of chemistry and
nuclear energy. These systems of control have guaranteed
that all legally constituted actors within States comply
with the established controls. Accordingly, these
industries ensure adequate monitoring of hazardous
materials when they are on their radar. However, the
importance of strengthening the identification and
tracking of end users, both within States and abroad,
has been emphasized. Similarly, importance has been
given to strengthening border controls to prevent
illegal trafficking in hazardous materials, controls
in ports and airports to prevent the diversion of such
materials, and oversight on the import, export, transit,
transhipment and re-export of chemical, radiological
and nuclear products.

On the international scene today, the emergence of
new threats and irregular wars have served to highlight
the imperative need to ensure that weapons and their
components, as well as the technology and processes
for manufacturing them, are not likely to fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups. For
this reason, strategic trade control has become an
irreversible trend at the international level.

Customs is a crucial link for strategic trade control.
Colombia therefore considers it essential to make strides
in the implementation of modern standards stipulated
by the World Customs Organization in order to meet
the challenges required by both resolution 1540 (2004)
and an increasingly interconnected and globalized
world, thereby improving the foreign trade processes
related to imports, transit, transhipment and exports.
That is why my country is seeking to make progress in
learning and awareness-raising in its institutions with
respect to working on strategic trade issues, given their
direct implications for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

Proof of the foregoing is the country's recent
participation in the first regional conference in Latin
America of the Wiesbaden Industry Process, entitled
"Private sector engagement in strategic trade controls
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)",
which took place in Mexico City at the beginning of this
month and where the need to strengthen ties between
the public and private sector and to work jointly to
fulfil our country's commitment to resolution 1540
(2004) and strategic trade control of strategic trade was
made evident.

Finally, in order to make further progress in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), at the end
of July, Chile and Colombia will carry out the first
on-site peer-review visit to assess the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and share experiences,
procedures and best practices at the national level. This
exercise was made possible thanks to the support of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the 1540 Committee Group of Experts and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism.

