Mr. Shkourko (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia is gravely concerned at the most
alarming situation in Burundi. Information from that
country indicates that Burundi is becoming ever more
bogged down in a quagmire of bloody violence and
chaos; this could lead to a full-scale civil war fraught
with ruinous consequences for the people of Burundi and
for the region as a whole.

In the view of the Russian delegation, the tragic
situation taking shape in Burundi dictates that the
international community urgently draw up a set of agreed
measures to stop the further escalation of violence and to
get the parties to the conflict in Burundi to resume a
broad political dialogue in the interests of stability and
national reconciliation. We consider it to be of the
greatest importance that, as these measures are
implemented, African countries and the peace-keeping
machinery of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
should play an authoritative role, with appropriate support
from the United Nations.

The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution
1040 (1996), just adopted by the Security Council
unanimously, for we believe that the resolution sends a
crystal-clear signal to all the parties in Burundi that the
international community cannot stand by and watch
extremist forces in that country, through their

 

irresponsible actions, push the people onto the path of
national suicide. The resolution sternly warns extremists of
all stripes that, should they continue to block dialogue and
the peace process in Burundi, the Security Council will be
obliged to enact selective, preventive enforcement
measures. We assume that this warning will prove adequate
to the current situation.

We urgently call on all parties to the conflict in
Burundi to show common sense, to stop the violence
immediately and to sit down at the negotiating table in
order to speedily achieve a mutually acceptable settlement
that will be in the interests of restoring lasting peace,
stability and development. For its part, the international
community will be prepared to provide the necessary
assistance and support in that endeavour.

