Mr. Jenca: Today's meeting on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is timely and again demonstrates that it is not just
nuclear issues that deserve the attention and action
of the international community. While it is difficult
to obtain up-to-date and comprehensive information
about human rights developments in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the information gathered
reveals a continuing pattern of serious human rights
Violations and a lack of progress on issues such as
family reunification and abductions. There are no
indications that the situation has significantly improved
since the 2014 report of the Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea (A/HRC/25/CRP.1), which revealed that crimes
against humanity had been and were being committed
in the country.

In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
is responsible for protecting its population from
crimes that are considered to be the most serious
under international law. In addition, the international
community has the collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea if the State does not protect its own citizens, and
to consider the wider implications of the reported grave
human rights situation for stability in the region.

During the past year, the security environment
has had a negative impact on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The country's
continued nuclear and ballistic missile activities have
led to its further isolation from its neighbours and the
international community. The country has imposed
severe restrictions on the freedom of movement, both
within the country and on the border with China. People
pay a heftier price and take riskier routes to leave the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and women
continue to be the primary targets of human traffickers,
who help them escape if they agree to be sold into the
sex industry.

The plight of prisoners and foreign detainees
continues to be a cause for concern, with reports of
abject detention conditions in holding centres and
labour camps throughout the country. In June, student
Otto Warmbier died a few days after he was released
from detention in Pyongyang and repatriated to the
United States. His case highlighted the situation of
foreign detainees who risk being cut off from the outside
world and are unable to enjoy basic entitlements, such
as access to medical treatment and consular assistance.
Three citizens of the United States and six citizens of
the Republic of Korea remain in custody today. We
continue to advocate for their release.

The past year witnessed a surge in the forced
repatriation of nationals of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in China, in particular in the months
ofDecember 2016 and April, July and November of2017.
Reports of escapees being sent back to the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea are regularly received by the
United Nations and civil society groups. Many of those
escapees are women victims of human trafficking who
leave their children in China. As we speak, dozens of
nationals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
remain detained in China and scheduled for refoulement
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, where
they are at risk of torture and ill-treatment.

The United Nations has taken a number of steps
this year to address the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Special
Rapporteur presented his report (see A/72/394) to the
General Assembly in September and the Secretary-
General issued his report (A/72/279) in August. The
Third Committee has agreed on a draft resolution
(A/C.3/72/L.40) that is to be adopted by the General
Assembly this month. In response, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has maintained its
strong objections to country-specific resolutions and
mandates, although it is open to non-country specific
cooperation on human rights.

The pursuit of accountability continues to be an
urgent priority on the human rights agenda for the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In 2016, the
Human Rights Council appointed a group of independent
experts on accountability who recommended, in their
report to the Council in March, that steps be taken to
strengthen the current monitoring and analysis efforts
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, including through the recruitment of
additional staff and setting up a central repository to be
used in any future accountability mechanism.

While emphasis is placed on the political and
security situation, the crisis in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has been forgotten on the
global humanitarian agenda. An estimated 18 million
people - 70 per cent of the population - are suffering
from food insecurity, and 10.5 million people i 41 per
cent of the population - are undernourished. The
situation is even more critical given the current lack
of funding.

In response to the accelerated nuclear and ballistic-
missile testing, the Security Council has strengthened
its sanctions regime on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea with three additional resolutions
since the previous meeting. In his latest report, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
alerted us to the possibility that sanctions may have a
detrimental impact on livelihoods and medical care, and
requested that human rights be given due consideration
when drafting and assessing sanctions resolutions.
Humanitarian partners operating in the country have
reported increasing operational challenges, including
custom clearances for life-saving items, the procurement
of humanitarian supplies, the transport of goods and
rising food prices, which have risen by 160 per cent
since April. In addition, the banking channel for the
international organizations working in the country has
broken down for the third time in the past seven years.

In its latest resolution - specifically, in
paragraph 26 of resolution 2375 (2017) - the Security
Council reaffirms that the measures imposed by the
relevant resolutions are not intended to have adverse
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea or to
negatively affect or restrict the activities and work of
international and non-governmental organizations that
are carrying out assistance and relief activities for the
benefit of the civilian population in the country. I take
note ofthe communication of8 December to all Member
States from the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), offering clarifications on that
point and highlighting mechanisms to seek exemptions
for humanitarian activities. With that in mind, I would
like to make four requests.

First, I encourage all international and non- governmental
organizations that are facing operational challenges
to use the established process to inform or seek the
necessary guidance or exemption from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). Doing
so helps to remove ambiguity and provides reassurance
for the relevant entities and partners to facilitate the
work of such organizations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Secondly, I urge the 1718 Committee to continue
to expeditiously review those requests to ensure that
the already fragile humanitarian situation does not
deteriorate further.

Thirdly, I urge all Member States to support the
life-saving activities in the country. Funding for relief
activities is essential. Approximately $114 million are
required to address the critical humanitarian needs in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I echo the
1718 Committee's communication to Member States,
which emphasizes the obligation of each Member State
to comply with sanctions obligations and exemptions,
including by clarifying to public and private-sector
entities that humanitarian activities should not be
unduly restricted.

Finally, I call on financial institutions to exercise
their corporate and social responsibility by providing
life-saving banking services to the humanitarian
organizations in the country. The channel would be
sent to the Security Council for approval.

The United Nations remains committed to
contributing to further efforts to reach a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the outstanding issues, and to
ensuring genuine and meaningful improvement to
the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The United
Nations system is ready to assist the call of the General
Assembly on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to

"engage constructively with international interlocutors
with a View to promoting concrete improvements in
the human rights situation on the ground, including
through human rights dialogues, official Visits
to the country that include adequate access to
fully assess human rights conditions, cooperation
initiatives and more people-to-people contact as a
matter of priority" (A/C.3/72/L.40, para. 20).

To conclude, let us use all the tools at our
disposal - the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the United Nations
system and other international entities - to take action
to build a better future for the people of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

