The President: I thank the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda
for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement as President of the
Security Council.
It is my honour to welcome to the Security
Council the members of the Regional Peace Initiative
on Burundi. I extend a cordial welcome on behalf of
the members of the Security Council to the ministers
and representatives of Uganda, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South
Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia,
as well as to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and
Chairman of the Implementation Monitoring
Committee and to the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity.

Let me in the first instance express appreciation
to Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France, whose
idea it was to convene such a dialogue, which was
unable to be held as planned due to the events of 11
September.

The meeting of the Regional Peace Initiative on
Burundi with the Security Council today is a
momentous one. On 1 November, the Transitional
Government of National Unity in Burundi was
inaugurated. This is indeed a defining period in the
history of Burundi and its long suffering people. To all
of us, the establishment of the Transitional Government
is a significant milestone, as it ushers in a new political
dispensation within the country. We would like to
congratulate President Buyoya, Vice-President
Domitien Ndayizeye and all other members of the
Transitional Government and wish them every success
in charting a new path for the Burundian people.

We pay special tribute to the facilitator, Madiba
Nelson Mandela, the regional leaders and the
Burundian parties for their untiring efforts in making
the Transitional Government a reality. They may rest
assured that the Security Council remains committed to
the process of peace in Burundi and will remain
actively engaged to ensure that the momentum gained
so far will not be lost. Every effort must be made by
the international community and the Security Council
to ensure that what has been achieved so far is not
eroded.

The main purpose of today's meeting is to have
an exchange of views on the implementation of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. The
Security Council on its part has endeavoured to and
will maintain a spirit of partnership with the Burundian
peace process. The dialogue between the Security
Council and the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi
attests to the will of the Council to remain actively
engaged in the process.

We recall that, at our last meeting during the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region,
there were fruitful deliberations which ensued and
which we hope to continue today. It is our hope that,
emanating from our discussions today, we can ascertain
how the United Nations can help in the post-transition
period as the new Burundian Government addresses the
many challenges which lie ahead. The most critical
priority is the cessation of hostilities and for the armed
groups to involve themselves in the political life of the
country through dialogue and negotiations. We reiterate
our call to the armed groups to cooperate with the
Transitional Government in order to ensure its
representation in the broad-based Government which is
envisaged.

The Security Council is also fully supportive of
the regional special protection force, which is aimed at
protecting the returning political exiles. On October 29,
the Security Council adopted resolution 1375 (2001)
expressing its support for this initiative. It is therefore
imperative that all parties cooperate to ensure that
normalcy is returned to the country. We commend the
Government of South Africa, which has taken the first
step in deploying troops, and look forward to the
subsequent deployment of troops from Senegal,
Nigeria and Ghana.

The success of the transitional institutions is the
only guarantee of durable peace and stability in
Burundi. Failure, on the other hand, could result in
chaos and continuing crisis in the Great Lakes region.
Consequently, the support of the international
community is critical.

Now that the Transitional Government is in place,
attention must be paid to the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation in that country. Every effort
must be made to revive the economic well-being of the
people of Burundi by improving their socio-economic

condition. The international community, including the
Security Council stands, ready to assist in this regard.

We look forward to a more detailed discussion in
the private meeting which follows.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
our prior consultations, I shall now adjourn this
meeting and invite the Council members and all
invitees to attend the private meeting within the next
five minutes.

May I invite the non-Council members to leave
this Chamber so that we can proceed with our private
meeting.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.
