The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Council for the month of February
2012, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Baso Sangqu, Permanent Representative of South
Africa, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of January 2012. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Sangqu and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait,
Libya, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2012/77, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Bahrain, Colombia, Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Morocco,
Oman, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Azerbaijan, Colombia, France, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Morocco, Pakistan, Portugal,
South Africa, Togo, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
2
Against:
China, Russian Federation


The President (spoke in French): There were 13
votes in favour and two against. The draft resolution
has not been adopted, owing to the negative vote of
two permanent members of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


