Mr. Silva (Portugal) (Spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): It is with great
pleasure that for the first time I address the Security
Council on behalf of Portugal in this timely initiative of
the Angolan presidency. I welcome the tireless efforts
of the Secretary-General and of his Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region to support the stability, peace,
security and development of the countries in the region.
In that connection, we welcome the United Nations
Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017.
We acknowledge with satisfaction the establishment of
a road map of priorities by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, as well as the six pillars of action
selected, all corresponding to areas we recognize to
be crucial for adequately tackling the most important
challenges in the region.

Portugal, both nationally and as member of the
European Union, has supported and will continue to
support the efforts of the countries in the Great Lakes
region in their processes of national reconciliation,
democratic consolidation, social and economic
sustainable development and the promotion of respect
for human rights, in accordance with the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, agreed in Addis
Ababa in 2013.

We have been following the situation in Burundi
with particular attention and concern. We commend
the efforts of the East African Community, the African
Union and the United Nations to promote an inclusive
dialogue. We believe that is the only valid path to avoid

an escalation of the conflict and further deterioration of
the human rights situation in the country.

The Arusha Agreement, which is still in force, is
a good example of an African solution to an African
problem. We hope that the current conflict will be solved
through inclusive political dialogue. The deployment
of 200 military experts and observers of the African
Union to the field is an important positive step.

There has been progress on security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, progress
in the implementation of the Nairobi Declarations
has been slow, with the persistence of tension and
the presence of armed groups in the country. In that
context, we commend the recent agreement that enables
joint operations of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo/United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) against the Forces democratiques
de liberation du Rwanda. It is therefore crucial to ensure
strong support for MONUSCO and to promote its closer
collaboration with the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We highlight the importance
of the strategic dialogue between the United Nations
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with regard to the MONUSCO exit strategy,
which, in our View, should be a gradual process based
on progress on the ground.

It is urgent to ensure the inclusiveness and
representativeness of the national political dialogue
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Any
changes in the constitutional framework that do not
garner the necessary political consensus represent a
risk factor for the country's stability, with potential
negative repercussions for the entire continent.

The repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement
and the tragic human rights situation in South Sudan are
very concerning. All parties must commit with urgency
to fulfilling the terms of the Peace Agreement and to
establishing the planned transitional Government.
It is also urgent to ensure that humanitarian aid
reaches those in need throughout the whole region.
We therefore call for the unreserved cooperation of all
States in the establishment of the conditions required for
access so that we can lessen the suffering of refugees,
internally displaced people and populations in urgent
need of humanitarian aid.

Africa holds a special place in Portuguese foreign
policy. Portugal is also firmly committed to effective
multilateralism that is based on the primacy of the
United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Our motivation is to constantly be
a solid partner in solidarity, both bilaterally and within
the European Union. We shall continue along that path,
in full respect for the principle of State ownership and
while recognizing the specific responsibility and role
of regional organizations.

We will continue to participate in the efforts
being undertaken by the international community
aimed at promoting dialogue with the countries of
the region, notably through regional and subregional
organizations, including the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the East African Community and the Southern African
Development Community.

We will promote and support training initiatives on
good governance, anti-corruption efforts, the equitable
distribution of resources, the empowerment of women
and the right to education. We stand ready to develop
cooperation in the area of capacity-building, notably on
the reform of the security and justice sectors. We will
encourage private-sector and civil-society participation
in the implementation of projects that promote peace
and development.

I take this opportunity to commend the work of
Angola in its presidency of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, in which it has promoted
efforts for the peaceful resolution of conflicts and the
development of the region.

Aside from the great challenges in the Great Lakes
region, there is great potential for development. Only
peace and security can foster the basic conditions
for development. Only peace can make it possible to
avoid the exploitation of natural resources by warlords
and rebel factions. Only good governance and solid
institutions will enable transparency in the extractive
industries and the implementation of policies to ensure
that economic development translates into human
development, tangible to all segments of the population.
No one should be left behind.

The consolidation of a democratic culture requires
stability. I do not mean stability at any price, but rather
stability built on strict fulfilment of the constitutional
order, the rule of law, transparency and free and fair
electoral processes, as well as State institutions that
safeguard the interests of the entire population.

In concluding, I reaffirm Portugal's commitment
to collaborate with the countries of the Great Lakes
region, in the wish that Nelson Mandela's dream of an
Africa at peace with itself will become a reality.

