Mr. Amum: I am very grateful for the
opportunity once again to address the Security Council
and to put forward the views of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the Government of
Southern Sudan. I also want to thank you, Madam
President, and the United States of America for calling
this meeting. This is an indication of the Council's
continued support for the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and of its
determination to maintain peace and stability in the
Sudan.

Since my last visit to the Council, we have
witnessed the peaceful completion of the voter
registration process for the Southern Sudan
referendum. Over 3.6 million people registered in
Southern Sudan, the North and among the diaspora,
although registration in the North was disappointingly
low, owing to the concerns and anxiety of Southern
Sudanese living in Northern Sudan. Nonetheless, the
completion of the registration process is an important
step, and it could not have been done without the
support of the United Nations and the international
community.

We reiterate our call for the referendum to be
conducted on time, on 9 January 2011, given that it is
now possible to do so. We also call for its results to be
respected and for the parties to the CPA - the National
Congress Party (NCP) and the SPLM. - to fully
cooperate to that end. The Government of Southern
Sudan will spare no effort to ensure that the
referendum takes place on time and in a peaceful
environment. We continue to contribute a
disproportionate share of the funds required by the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. In that
regard, we invite our partners in the Government of the
Sudan to contribute the amounts to which they
previously committed.

I wish to express the gratitude of the Government
of Southern Sudan to the Russian Federation for
supplying helicopters to the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) in order to support its capacity to
provide logistical support for the conduct of the
referendum. I must also reiterate our thanks to UNMIS,
other United Nations agencies and the international
community for the support they are continuing to
provide to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. We welcome their continued engagement
in that process. We call on the Council and on all
Member States to respect, recognize and implement the
choice of the people of Southern Sudan in the
referendum, as that will be the only basis for
maintaining peace.

In that context, we welcome the work of the
monitoring Panel, which is led by President Mkapa,
whose presence here today we appreciate. The work of
the Panel to monitor the process and authenticate the
referendums' results will ensure stability and a smooth
transition to the next phase of the process.

We also welcome recent statements by President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir. As the leader of the country
and of the National Congress Party, he has made a
commitment to accept the results of the referendum
whether the vote leads to secession or unity.

Of course, the referendum is only a milestone
along the road to our shared goal of lasting peace and
prosperity for all in the Sudan. We remain committed to
a peaceful, stable and prosperous future for the people
of the Sudan, whether as one country or as two separate
States. We therefore share Council members' concerns
about the ongoing lack of progress in, and the slow
process of, discussing post-referendum arrangements.

There is an urgent need to clearly define the
terms of the relationship between Northern and
Southern Sudan after the CPA interim period expires.
Regardless of the outcome of the referendum, we are
grateful for the continued support of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel, led by President
Thabo Mbeki, and welcome his efforts to finalize a
framework agreement that will lay out the general
principles that will govern the future relationship
between Southern and Northern Sudan as two
sovereign States, if the choice of the people of
Southern Sudan is separation. That will help guide
North-South relations through the referendum period
and set the stage for productive negotiations on all
outstanding issues. We remain prepared to engage in
negotiations at any time and in any location, and
recommit ourselves today to spare no effort to reach
agreement with our partners the NCP on all the matters
before us.

When we last appeared before the Council (see S/PV.6425), we were hopeful that soon thereafter the
parties would be able to reach agreement on the matter
of Abyei. Unfortunately, despite the best efforts of
President Mbeki and his team, we have been unable to
do so. We continue to see two possible options. The
first would be to hold a referendum in Abyei,
consistent with the terms of the CPA. It is still
technically feasible to hold a referendum, which we
believe could be organized relatively quickly given the
size of the Ngok Dinka community in Abyei, if our
NCP partners are willing to abide by the terms of the
CPA. As we have stated many times, the referendum
would be part of an arrangement giving clear
guarantees to the Misseriya and other nomads of their
right to graze and transit through the area. The second
option would be to transfer Abyei to Southern Sudan
by Sudanese presidential decree, just as it was
transferred in 1905 by administrative order. Again, this
would be done alongside an agreement on the rights of
the Misseriya.
Any agreement on Abyei must respect earlier
agreements, including the CPA and the tribunal ruling
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration of 2009, which
was accepted in its entirety by both parties. That ruling
has already granted a portion of the Ngok Dinka
territory to the Misseriya, going beyond what was
agreed under the process prescribed by the CPA itself.
At this stage, the issue is not territory, but rather how
to ensure that the needs of the Misseriya communities
are best addressed and the rights of the Ngok Dinka
people are respected.

We believe that it is possible to reach an
agreement that addresses all concerns. However, we
are worried that the Misseriya themselves may not yet
be fully aware of the extent to which their rights would
be protected, either following a referendum in which
the Ngok Dinka community would exercise its right to
decide whether to remain in the North or return to the
South, or under an arrangement whereby Abyei would
be transferred to the South. The Government of
Southern Sudan is committed to reaching agreement on
the question through negotiations. We stress the
urgency of doing this quickly, particularly given the
rapidly approaching referendum in Southern Sudan.

The Government of Southern Sudan shares the
Council's concern about the situation in Darfur and the
potential spillover effects on North-South relations of
renewed military action there. We fully support the
Darfur peace process and reiterate our call on all
parties to re-engage in negotiations. The Government
of Southern Sudan supports a comprehensive solution
to the Darfur question, which must involve an
inclusive, all-party process. An agreement between one
party only and the Government in Khartoum does not
promote this. Furthermore, there can be no military
solution in Darfur. A resolution can come about only
through political negotiations aimed at reaching a
comprehensive agreement that would lead the Sudan
into a democratic transformation. There can be no
stability through exclusion.

For its part, regardless of the outcome of the
referendum, the Government of Southern Sudan has a
clear interest in stability across the rest of the Sudan,
including Darfur. Given our socio-economic
interdependence with the North, we have an interest in
promoting peace and stability in both the South and the
North of the Sudan. We maintain contact with the
parties to the conflict in Darfur in order to encourage
them to negotiate an end to the war. We believe that all
parties in Darfur should return to negotiations with the
aim of establishing a comprehensive peace.

In this context, the Government of Southern
Sudan would also welcome discussions with its
partners in Khartoum to strengthen existing agreements
on the provision of mutual security guarantees. These
should include commitments that both sides shall
refrain from supporting military proxies or other armed
groups that promote instability in either region. On
behalf of the SPLM, I clearly state here that we have
no interest in supporting armed groups, and would
expect the National Congress Party to declare the same
in relation to proxy groups that it may be supporting in
the South. Given the high stakes of the coming period,
both parties must commit to the maintenance of
stability and peace.

I thank Council members for their ongoing
concern and interest at this critical time in our history.
I thank you sincerely, Madame President, for holding
this meeting and for your own personal interest in and
support for peace in the Sudan. I wish to conclude by
saying clearly to the Council that, although we have
made much progress, the outcome we all desire is still
not yet completely assured, but that, with the Council's
help and continued support, we can achieve sustainable
peace in the Sudan. The Security Council must remain
vigilant at this critical moment of our history.

