The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, Kenya, Somalia and
Uganda to participate in today's meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
today's meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, to participate in today's meeting.

I wish to welcome the participation at this
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Azerbaijan and Kenya, and the Minister of Defence of
Uganda.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/ 19, which contains a letter dated
9 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation
of the Republic of South Africa.

It gives me great pleasure to preside over this
important meeting on Somalia, at which we will
receive briefings of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, as well as the troop-
contributing countries to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). Today's meeting is a practical
demonstration of the close cooperation we seek to
enhance between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in matters related to
peace and security on the African continent. We are
convinced that the Security Council and the African
2

Union Peace and Security Council could benefit
significantly from such political engagement, which
would assist us in developing a greater strategic
approach to developments in Somalia.

Today's briefing on Somalia is taking place at a
time when a ray of hope is finally beginning to flicker
behind the dark clouds that have overshadowed the
country for too long. While the situation in Somalia
still involves significant challenges, the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), in the words of the
Secretary-General, "with determination and proper
support can begin to anchor itself across Somalia"
(5/2011/759, para.89).

Through our collective endeavours, the future of
Somalia can today be firmly placed on a trajectory of
progress and stability. Recent positive developments at
the political, military and humanitarian levels present
the international community, and the Somalis in
particular, with a window of opportunity to turn the
page and advance towards peace, security and
development.

We can all share the optimism of the Secretary-
General, who, during his historic visit to Mogadishu,
stated that a few years ago people tended to think of
Somalia only as a place of famine or bloodshed. It was
indeed a forgotten conflict. The Secretary-General
challenged all of us to change the way we see Somalia.

Somalia has been high on the list of priorities of
the Secretary-General. We wish to place on record our
gratitude for his continued efforts to assist Somalia as
it embarks on the road to recovery and stability.
Through his efforts and the active engagement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, successes have been recorded at several
levels.

The Kampala Accord of June 2011 and the
adoption of the political road map in September 2011
to end the transition by 23 August have been widely
supported by the Transitional Federal Institutions and
the international community. Most recently, at a Somali
national consultative conference held in Garowe from
21 to 23 December 2011, participants reached an
agreement on the size of the new constituent assembly
and the basis for representation therein, the finalization
of a federal constitution by April, and the creation of a
post-transition bicameral parliamentary structure
within defined timelines.
12-20465

Despite the fact that some deadlines have been
missed, I am encouraged by the progress made thus far
in the implementation of the road map. We Wish to
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to
utilize the existing window of opportunity to achieve
measurable results, such as the adoption of the national
security and stabilization plan by Parliament, the
finalization of the constitution and the reform of
Parliament.

We call on all other Somali stakeholders to
demonstrate the requisite political will and the
determination to implement the Kampala Accord and
the political road map of September 2011 so as to meet
the agreed deadlines. We also strongly urge the parties
to resolve the current crisis within the Transitional
Federal Parliament.

The Transitional Federal Government forces,
supported by AMISOM, have liberated Mogadishu
from Al-Shabaab control. Additionally, the armed
forces of Kenya, deployed in southern Somalia, and of
Ethiopia, near eastern Somalia, have placed
Al-Shabaab forces under severe pressure. We must use
the security space created by AMISOM. and at great
cost to Uganda and Burundi, which have valiantly
fought alongside TFG forces, to expand the TFG's
control over Mogadishu. Similarly, we must use the
opportunities being presented in eastern and southern
Somalia to extend the governance control of the TFG
over a larger territory of Somalia and establish security
in those newly liberated areas.

We note with concern, however, that AMISOM's
operational and deployment capabilities continue to be
hampered by resource gaps, including arrears in the
reimbursement for contingent-owned equipment and
the lack of force multipliers and force enablers to
AMISOM.

In that regard, we welcome the recently
completed African Union-United Nations joint
assessment mission, which was deployed to develop a
revised strategic concept. We also welcome the
5 January decision of the African Union Peace and
Security Council to endorse the enhancement of
AMISOM, including an increase in its mandated troop
strength from 12,000 to 17,731. We look forward to
working with all Council members in considering the
Secretary-General's recommendations for an enhanced
support package for AMISOM.
12-20465

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire. However, improvements are being made, with two
of the six famine-declared regions having recently
graduated to their pre-famine status. That is a welcome
development. We encourage the international
community to continue its efforts to save millions from
famine.

In conclusion, through our collective efforts, we
must also communicate a positive message to the
ordinary people of Somalia that they have not been
abandoned by the international community. We must
communicate the message that peace, stability and
development are not the privilege of some, but are to
be enjoyed by all humankind, irrespective of station or
geographical location. We must not fail Somalia and its
people.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

