Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express my profound gratitude to
you, Sir, for your kind words addressed to me on behalf
of my colleagues, the permanent representatives on the
Security Council.

As I prepare to leave my post, I wish to say that
my lO-month stay in New York as the Permanent
Representative of Guinea to the United Nations, and in
particular here in the Security Council, has allowed me
to find new horizons that have undoubtedly deepened
my knowledge of multilateralism and enriched my
experience. I must acknowledge that this has been
possible thanks to the inestimable cooperation and
constant, invaluable support that I have enjoyed from
each and every one of my colleagues, whose skills,
professionalism and experience I appreciate and
admire.

This is also an opportunity for me to express my
sincere thanks to the members of the Secretariat team
of the Council, whose friendship, accessibility and
dedication to their work allowed me, during the
sensitive period of the Guinean presidency of the
Council in March, to fulfil my obligations. My
participation in the work of the Security Council has
been a wonderful school for me in which I have been
able, in a relatively brief time, to gain a greater
understanding of the often complex arcana involved in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
These unforgettable experiences will forever be etched
into my memory and, quite obviously, a constant
source of satisfaction and encouragement to me.

I hope that the unity of the Council, which was
put to such a rude test during our presidency in March
and which was strengthened by the adoption of
resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1483 (2003), will be
further enhanced, allowing the Council to play its role
as guarantor of international security and to maintain
its full credibility. That is the only way, I believe, of
reviving the confidence of the international community
and of silencing the questions and criticisms launched
from all sides against the Security Council following
the outbreak of hostilities in Iraq.

I should like to assure the Council that, upon my
return to my own country, I shall spare no effort to
ensure that my Government, which has never shirked
its responsibilities, continues to play a growing role in
the search for peaceful solutions to the various crises,
the grave economic and humanitarian consequences of
which have afflicted West Africa for more than a
decade now.

I cannot fail to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan or to hail his courage, perspicacity and acute
sense of responsibility.

Finally, I wish to commend the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Under-Secretaries-General and the
members of the Office of the Secretary-General for
their accessibility, dedication and complete mastery of
their subjects.

As I wish all my colleagues all the best for the
future, I want once again to thank them for their
friendship, which I hope will be further strengthened
and resist the test of time.

