Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express to you, Mr. President, and
other members of the Council our sincere thanks for
promptly responding to the request to convene this
urgent meeting by the Group of Arab States, on whose
behalf I have the honour to make this statement.

I also express to you, Sir, our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We would be remiss if we failed to express
our appreciation to the Ambassador of Spain for his
valuable efforts last month during the Spanish
presidency of the Council.

This urgent meeting of the Council has been
convened to discuss the grave deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory as a
result of the ferocious attack by the Israeli occupation
authorities, which began six days ago in the Gaza Strip.
The campaign has so far killed or injured scores of
Palestinians, many of them children, in addition to
causing the widespread destruction of houses, schools,
businesses and other infrastructure, particularly in
northern Gaza, the Jabaliya refugee camp and Beit
Hanoun. The Israeli occupation authorities have used
every type of lethal weapon in an excessive and
arbitrary manner, and have obstructed relief operations
and assistance by humanitarian organizations. That
presages a humanitarian disaster. We strongly condemn
these practices, which constitute a flagrant violation of
international law and humanitarian norms.

We therefore call upon the international
community, the Quartet and all other stakeholders to
intervene immediately and decisively to urge Israel to
put an end to these actions, which pose a grave threat
to peace and security in the Middle East. Violence
begets only violence. The region will be caught in a
vicious circle from which it will have difficulty
extricating itself. Faced with the gravity of the
situation, the Arab Group in New York appeals to the
Council to move immediately to put an end to this
Israeli aggression against the defenceless Palestinian
people. We appeal to the Council to adopt the draft
resolution presented by the Arab Group, which calls
upon the Israeli Government to put an end to its
military operations and to withdraw from northern
Gaza. The draft resolution also calls upon Israel to
respect international humanitarian law, not to obstruct
humanitarian assistance to civilians and to respect the
inviolability of United Nations facilities, particularly
those of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).

The huge losses in terms of Palestinian property
and public facilities require a firm stand by the
international community to provide urgent assistance to
the Palestinian people who, given the dangerous
conditions in which they live, deserve international
protection in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
and other international norms.

This escalation comes at a time when Israel
continues to expand its colonial settlements and to
build the separation wall in the West Bank despite the
International Court of Justice's advisory opinion,
welcomed by the General Assembly. That opinion
defined a series of commitments for Israel and other
Member States, as well as for the United Nations. In
this context, we would like to recall that the
International Court of Justice requested the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, to adopt
additional measures to put an end to the illegal
situation resulting from the construction of the wall.

In conclusion, we would like to recall the
decisions of the recent Arab summit, held in Tunisia,
which confirmed Arab States' commitment to a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace as a strategic option.
We therefore call for the resumption of the negotiations
on the basis of international legitimacy and the road
map, so that peace, security and stability can prevail, in
the interest of the peoples of the region.

