Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank the
delegation of Panama for convening today's important
meeting. We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her impressive and compelling
statement today and for the excellent work she has
done since taking office two years ago. We would also
like to thank Ms. Ann Veneman, the Executive Director
of UNICEF, whose statement today illustrates the
importance of UNICEF for the issue of children and
armed conflict. We also welcome to this debate Ms. Jo
Becker from Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict, an organization whose rigorous and important
work is supported by Canada.

Today's debate is an opportunity once again to
bring to the attention of the Council the severity of acts
of violence against children in violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law. The Security
Council has a central role to play in protecting children
who suffer from the horrific effects of armed conflict
and in holding accountable those responsible for the
continuing atrocities committed against them. The
Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict is an important tool to understand how
violations against children constitute a threat to
international peace and security. The report
(S/2007/757) outlines clear recommendations for
future action.

Canada strongly supports and wishes to speak to
three areas in particular: first, the need for the Security
Council to give equal attention to children affected by
armed conflict, whether in situations on the agenda of
the Council or not; secondly, the necessity to give
equal weight to all categories of grave violations
described in the report, beyond simply the recruitment
and use of children; and finally, the need to implement
the monitoring and reporting mechanism within the
framework of resolution 1612 (2005) in all situations
of concern.

In July 2005, the Council adopted resolution 1612
(2005), which has proven to be an effective tool for
putting pressure on those who commit violations
against children. Canada commends the work of the
Security Council Working Group created by resolution
1612 (2005) and the strong support provided by the
Secretariat to the Working Group. It is also important
to underline the tremendous work in the field that has
been accomplished by UNICEF and by the various
non-governmental organizations and civil society
actors that contribute to the 1612 (2005) monitoring
and reporting mechanism. The work of all United
Nations personnel in the field, whether in peace
missions or in United Nations country teams, is
instrumental in making child protection a reality on the
ground. Without this joint effort, the impact of
resolution 1612 (2005) would fail to reach the children
in need.

Addressing the situation of children and armed
conflict can be difficult. The Secretary-General's report
shows this all too well. The protection framework
created by resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005) is
a complex web of instruments that can lead to concrete
actions to end violations, but only with the cooperation
of Member States. Those who criticize the complexity
of these instruments should not forget the important
successes that have been achieved. For example, the
de-listing of parties to the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire is a
significant achievement of the resolution 1612 (2005)
framework and offers lessons for future success. We
also note with satisfaction some progress in various
situations outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General which are clearly linked to the implementation
of resolution 1612 (2005).

While Canada is generally satisfied with the
current state of implementation of resolution 1612
(2005), there remain clear gaps. Several parties that
persistently commit grave violations against children in
conflict situations remain untouched by the resolution.
This cannot continue. In order to end this culture of
impunity, it is essential that the Council apply targeted
measures against these violators and work on their
referral to the relevant tribunals. In this regard, Canada
is pleased by the charges, trials and sentences over the
past year by the International Criminal Court and the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for crimes against
children. We urge the Working Group to continue its
efforts and we urge the Council to use this route while
also pursuing targeted measures through the specific
country mandates.

(spoke in French)

We think the time is right for the Council to
strengthen its protection framework for children,
particularly by allowing the existing resolution 1612
(2005) monitoring and reporting mechanism to be
triggered by all violations against children described
by the Secretary-General in his report. Specifically,
rape and other grave sexual violations must be
addressed. While we welcome the cooperation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), the
appalling situation in that country demonstrates why
this type of violation has been deemed a threat to
international peace and security.

Moreover, Canada believes that the Council
should adopt a new resolution to expand monitoring
and reporting, including strengthening the relevant
work of the Security Council Working Group, in order
to eradicate these heinous crimes committed against
children. These measures should be undertaken as soon
as possible.

At the end of the day, what matters is real and
visible protection for children. Furthermore, that
consideration underpins our support for strengthening
the framework of protection provided for in resolution
1612 (2005). In particular, we must eliminate sexual
violence in conflicts and make progress towards the
fulfilment of an ideal: freeing children from the
shackles of war. We all know that, if we are to improve
their living conditions, all efforts count, in all fields
and in all places, from war zones to the halls of
academia to United Nations conference rooms in New
York.

Finally, Canada believes that the Security Council
is on the right track in addressing this issue, thanks in
particular to France's leadership of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflicts. We are convinced
that the Council will continue to do its part, including
through its excellent work in this area.

