Ms. Okai (Japan): At the outset, let me say that
Japan also strongly condemns the violent attack on the
United Nations compound in Mogadishu today, and
expresses its heartfelt condolences to the families of
the victims.

I would like to thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for its timely initiative today.

If managed correctly, natural resources can serve
as a growth engine by increasing investment, State
revenue and employment opportunities. However,
weak management of such resources, particularly if it
permits the illegal exploitation and trading of extractive
resources, may trigger and perpetuate conflicts. The
international community must therefore engage with
the issue in a coherent and coordinated manner so as
to build the management capacity of resource-rich
countries that are affected by conflict.

Japan, as Chair of the Working Group on Lessons
Learned of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), has
addressed this topic. The meeting ofthe Working Group
on 8 July 2011 devoted to economic revitalization and
youth employment for peacebuilding generated some
useful lessons on natural-resource management that I
wish to share with the Council today.

First, resource management is handled by multiple
actors and has multiple aspects, including sanctions,
peace negotiations, law enforcement, regulatory
and transparency regimes and human rights and
environmental concerns. The international community
must do more in order to respond to the problem in a
coordinated fashion. In that regard, the PBC is capable
of taking the initiative in the area of peacebuilding
and helping to bring together all stakeholders in order
to develop a coherent approach. For example, it could
facilitate the integration of natural resource issues into
peacebuilding strategies, as well as in the context of
security and justice sector reforms.

Secondly, post-conflict populations should be
able to benefit from the peace dividends derived from
resources extracted from their own soil. Efforts aimed at
conflict prevention and effective resource management
should always include that perspective. Helping
industries to diversify can also serve this purpose. We
intend to explore that theme further in the meeting of
the Working Group on Lessons Learned scheduled for
10 July. As part of our discussion of domestic-resource
mobilization, we intend to shed light on the important
links between revenue raised and actual service
delivery on the ground and the impact that can have on
helping to avoid the recurrence of conflict.

Third, voluntary initiatives such as the Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the
Kimberly Process certification scheme are vital.
Compliance with them can help to enhance the
governance of resource-rich countries and the corporate
values of the private sector. In addition, the Working
Group meeting highlighted the role of civil society and
the Internet in improving transparency.

Japan has also contributed to improving
management of natural resources in its national
capacity. First, considering that improving the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes is critical to
restricting the flow of illicit resources, the Japanese
Permanent Mission has been co-hosting a series of
round tables aimed at enhancing understanding of such
regimes and strengthening non-proliferation efforts.
Secondly, Japan has been supporting the improvement
of people's livelihoods and welfare in conflict-affected
mining areas, including through a project for peace
consolidation in North Kivu, in the eastern region
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on
the concept of human security. A fair and balanced
distribution of peace dividends in conflict-torn areas
can enhance national reconciliation efforts.

Thirdly, Japan has supported the expansion of
various international initiatives such as the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development's Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of
Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas
and the EITI, through contributions to the latter's
multi-donor trust fund. A wider acceptance of such
initiatives is needed in order for them to take genuine
effect.

Lastly, the stated aim of the outcome document of
the Fifth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development is to promote the sustainable management
of all Africa's natural resources and conservation
of its biodiversity. Japan is committed to promoting
sustainable and resilient growth in Africa while helping
to maintain peace and stability.

In closing, I would like to emphasize Japan's
strong interest in this topic. We will continue to
remain engaged bilaterally as well as through different
multilateral forums.

