The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing. We emphasize Kuwait's
full support for his efforts and we look forward to
receiving at least two written reports annually on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), as is the
case with the various other items on the agenda of the
Security Council and in line with presidential note
S/2017/507.

We regret that what we heard today echoed
Mr. Mladenov's previous nine briefings in bringing
the message that Israel has made no progress in
implementing the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016)
and has not ceased its settlement activities. It continues
to build settlements and seize Palestinian territories,
in flagrant violation of the resolution. Today we would
therefore like to ask a number of important questions
with a view to reminding the Council of the importance
of implementing that resolution in order to achieve the
peace we all desire.

First, how can there be any real progress in the
peace process when Israel, the occupying Power,
is continuing its illegal and illegitimate settlement
activities, in complete violation of its commitments
stipulated in international resolutions, agreements and
treaties? They all affirm that Israel's establishment
of settlements in the Palestinian territory that it has
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of a two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. They also stress that ending
all Israeli settlement activities is essential if a two-
State solution is to be salvaged. We call on Israel to
immediately and completely cease all its settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory and fully
respect its legal obligations. It must also cease any
unilateral measures such as annexing land by force or
freezing parts of Palestinian tax revenues, and must pay
those tax revenues in full to the Palestinian Government.

Secondly, how can we see any true progress in the
peace process when acts of violence by settlers against
Palestinian civilians increase on a daily basis? It has
been painful to witness the ongoing Israeli attacks
even during the holy month of Ramadan, in addition
to threats, provocations and hate speech, in flagrant
violation of the international resolutions that call for
taking immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians, including acts of provocation and
destruction. We reiterate the importance of reviewing
the options mentioned in the Secretary-General's latest
report on the protection of Palestinian civilians.

Thirdly, how can we see genuine progress in the
peace process when the blockade of the Gaza Strip is
now in its twelfth year and is a direct cause of the dire
situation there that has left millions of civilians on the
brink of economic, medical and humanitarian collapse?
The Israeli forces have continued to target unarmed
civilians participating in the demonstrations of the
Great March of Return, and the death toll has reached
279 Palestinians, including 56 children.

Fourthly, how can we see genuine progress in
the peace process when Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to violate the sanctity of Christian and
Muslim holy sites by implementing measures and
policies aimed at changing the historic character of
Jerusalem - in violation of resolutions 476 (1980) and
478 (1980), which condemn any attempts to change
the demographic composition and character of the
Palestinian territory that has been occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem - as well as building or
expanding settlements, moving Israeli settlers, seizing
land, destroying homes and displacing Palestinian
civilians in violation of international humanitarian
law and the relevant resolutions. The Council will not
recognize any changes to the borders of 4 June 1967,
including those regarding Jerusalem, except when they
are agreed to by both parties, through negotiations.

Fifthly, how can we see real progress in the peace
process and the settlement of the conflict when the
Security Council fails to address all of these and
many other violations? The international community
cannot remain silent while the crimes continue to be
committed against the Palestinian people under Israeli
occupation. We must act to uphold our commitments
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law, as well as the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention, and
to guarantee protection of and respect for the civil rights
of those living under occupation, without exception.

In that context, we renew our support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and its role of
providing the necessary educational, health and social
services to the Palestinian refugee community. We look
forward to the donor conference for UNRWA, which
will be held next week in New York. It is our pleasure
to see the State of Kuwait is on the list of the Agency's
main partners. In the past four years alone, we have
provided the Agency with voluntary contributions of
$113 million.

It is more important than ever to implement all the
provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), which provides
a realistic mechanism for rebuilding trust between
parties and relaunching the negotiation process based
on resolutions of international legitimacy and agreed
international principles. That was reaffirmed at the
latest Arab Summit, held in Tunisia; the first Arab-
European Summit, held recently in Sharm El-Sheikh;
and the fourteenth Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Summit, held on 31 May in Mecca. Those summits
confirmed once again that Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories are illegal and that it is
important to remain committed to the two-State solution
in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions.
That is the only realistic way to end the occupation
that began in 1967, including of East Jerusalem, and to
reach a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between
Israelis and Palestinians.

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to peace
as a strategic choice and to resolving the Arab-Israeli
conflict in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy, international law and
all provisions of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative. The
Initiative stipulates that comprehensive peace and
normalized relations with Israel must be preceded by an
end to the occupation ofPalestinian and Arab territories
it has occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem.
Israel must recognize the State of Palestine and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their rights to self-determination; to establish their
independent State on their territories, with Jerusalem
as its capital; to return; to compensation for Palestinian
refugees; and a fair solution to their issue, based on
General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.05 pm.
