Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful
for the convening of this meeting and for the important
briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Mr. Ismail Wais and Ms. Grace John.

Peru welcomes the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. We would like to highlight the good offices
deployed for that purpose by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Governments
of the subregion.

However, we must recall the repeated violations
of the Ceasefire Agreement and other commitments
undertaken by the parties, which Clearly have
undermined their credibility. South Sudan is the most
violent country in terms of providing humanitarian
assistance, despite the status-of-forces agreement
signed by the Government in connection with the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS).

We would like to stress the importance of the
South Sudanese parties remaining committed to the
implementation of the new Peace Agreement. The
people of the country and the international community
need to see a substantive change in their actions in
order to be able to support sustainable peace.

In that regard, we express our regret with regard to
the high number of fatalities caused by clashes between
communities. The Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and UNMISS have documented the
magnitude of forced displacements, attacks against
civilians and the particular vulnerability of women and
children. Against that background, we would like to
highlight the important initiatives involving traditional
leaders that have been promoted by UNMISS in order
to promote social cohesion, dialogue and reconciliation,
as well as the efforts of UNMISS to protect civilians,
especially the most vulnerable.

We underscore the need for the Government of South
Sudan to develop capacities to investigate, prosecute
and punish serious allegations of violations and abuses
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
including sexual violence and the recruitment of
children for conflict.

The parties' commitment to building sustainable
peace must also lead to strengthening the cooperation
and national capacities required to meet the urgent
needs of the people and to promote the sustainable
development of the country, in particular in the areas
of health care, nutrition and education. To that end, we
believe that the recent visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the emphasis placed on the
participation of women in the political life of the country
are important, as is the need to take specific measures
to address sexual and gender-based violence. The
withdrawal of armed and security forces who are alleged
perpetrators of crimes is one of the recommendations
put forward by the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which will be important to
consider for the purposes of preventing and punishing
conflict-related sexual violence.

We also believe that it is necessary that the Council
remain united in its support for the South Sudanese
peace process and maintain close coordination with
the African Union and IGAD. We hope that the recent
Peace Agreement and the winds of change in the Horn
of Africa subregion will be the start ofa new era for the
people of South Sudan.

In conclusion, we would like to make mention of
the crucial role and efforts of Mr. Nicholas Haysom
as Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and
wish him every success in his new and sensitive post as
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia.

