Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Allow me to welcome
you, Sir, to the presidency and to assure you of the
Jamaican delegation's support as you guide the work of
the Council. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, His Excellency Moctar Ouane of Mali,
who presided so ably over the Council during the busy
month of September.

My delegation wishes to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open meeting of the
Council, which provides an opportunity for members
and non-members of the Council to express their views
on the tragic developments related to the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Jamaica regrets the recent outbreak of violence
that has erupted in Jerusalem and in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip and condemns the excessive use of force
against Palestinian civilians, which has unfortunately
resulted in the tragic loss of so many innocent lives.
We express our deep condolences to the families of the
deceased.

We urge the parties to refrain from the use of
force and provocative acts which could serve to
undermine the peace process. We appeal to them to
take immediate steps to create the necessary
environment for the restoration of peace and stability
and the continuation of talks leading to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement.

The Council has been seized of the situation in
the Middle East over the past 50 years, during which
the Council has continuously encouraged an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict through an active
negotiating process which takes into account the right
to security for all States in the region, including Israel,
as well as the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. Over the years there have been
several commendable initiatives aimed at achieving
this goal by the United Nations as well as by individual
States and regional organizations. The situation in the
region continues to require our collective action in
order to remove threats to international peace, to
prevent breaches of the peace and to bring about a
comprehensive settlement of the dispute. We subscribe
to the view that it is only through negotiation that a
lasting solution will be found.

The outbreak of violence comes at a time when
strenuous efforts are being made to bring peace to the
region and at a critical juncture when the leaders of
both Israel and Palestine are engaged in serious
negotiations. Recently the Council addressed the
situation in southern Lebanon, and my delegation
expressed the hope that the developments there would
serve as a stimulant to the peace process. Jamaica is
therefore very concerned about the destabilizing effects
that the recent developments may have on the Middle
East peace process as a whole. We would not like to
see the unravelling of the process, and therefore attach
importance to the efforts of the Secretary-General,
through his Personal Representative, Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, who is expected to hold talks with both parties.
We also welcome the forthcoming meetings to be held
in Paris on Wednesday, 4 October, between United
States Secretary of State Albright and Prime Minister
Barak and President Arafat, and in Cairo on the
following day under the auspices of President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt.
The negotiations for peace are complex and have
been dogged with periodic setbacks over the years.
Despite that, we must continue the search for peace. It
is my delegation's hope that these talks will lay the
foundation for progress and provide the necessary
environment for sustainable peace.

