Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed for her informative briefing on the situation
in the region of the Lake Chad basin. We also listened to
the other briefers" reports on the subject with interest.

For our part, we want to emphasize that the topic
of today's meeting appears to be "Peace and security
in Africa". It would therefore be logical to assume that
we in the Security Council, in accordance with our
mandate under the Charter of the United Nations and
in the context of our consideration of the situation in
the Lake Chad Basin region, will focus directly on the
deplorable security situation.

We are not arguing with the fact that there is a
whole range of diverse problems that are undoubtedly
exacerbating the overall situation in the region. The
climate and habitat naturally have a serious impact on
people's lives. However, there are other, more suitable,
forums for discussing these issues - the Second
Committee of the General Assembly, and the Economic
and Social Council. There is no need to disrupt the
existing division of responsibilities and overload the
Security Council's agenda. Any erosion of its mandate,
and the consequent diminution of its effectiveness,
must be guarded against.

By the way, we warned that this was potentially an
issue when we voted on resolution 2349 (2017) last year,
and we were not the only ones. We were not listened to
at the time and, unfortunately, the resolution did not
include the elements that would have helped to make
it an effective tool for international efforts to assist
the countries of the Lake Chad basin, particularly in
the area of counter-terrorism. I would like to stress
that what we are talking about is fighting terrorism,
not some conflict or other. In the relevant Security
Council resolution, Boko Haram is classified as a
terrorist organization.

So where are we today, a year after the adoption
of resolution 2349 (2017)? So far, Boko Haram still
seems to feel entirely untrammelled. It has continued
to commit terrorist acts and kidnap schoolgirls in the
region, with regard to which the Council very recently
issued another presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/3).
Thank heaven that today we were informed that a large
number of them have been released. Yet we were also
shocked by the news of the possible tragic fate of the
rest. We are grateful to the Nigerian authorities for their
counter-terrorism efforts in this regard.

Boko Haram's terrorist activity is a real threat to
the States of the region. It undermines people's settled
lives, forces them to move to less dangerous areas
and interferes with normal commercial and economic
activity. Only when this challenge to an entire region
is eliminated will it be possible to make significant
progress in resolving other pressing problems and to
undertake thorough efforts to prevent natural disasters
and do away with their consequences.

In this regard, I cannot help recalling the disastrous
extent of the destabilization in the region after the
collapse of the Libyan State. Far from normalizing
things in Libya, which we were discussing only
yesterday (see S/PV.8211), it has continued to have
a negative impact on the regional situation. I am not
saying that in order to irritate anyone on the Council.
It is a warning against undertaking such destructive
regional ventures in future. After 2011, terrorism
spread across the Sahel-Sahara region and West and
Central Africa like a cancer and, despite every effort,
it has continued to threaten the stability of countries
in that part of Africa and even beyond its borders.
Unfortunately, we will be forced to wrestle with the
consequences ofthe externally inflicted crisis in Libya,
which include uncontrolled and illegal flows of arms
and migrants and the spread of radical ideologies, for a
long time to come.

In that regard, we consider it important to continue
to provide all possible assistance to countries that are
fighting terrorists in strengthening their own national
potential and encouraging the development of solid
regional cooperation. In this area, what is needed is
cohesion, not competition, and a good example of
that is the activities of the Multinational Joint Task
Force of the States of the Lake Chad basin, which are
doing a great deal to curtail Boko Haram's activities.
We understand that security efforts should go hand in
hand with advancing policies aimed at strengthening
the institutions of State power and socioeconomic
development. We note the efforts in that regard of the
countries of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
holding ofa first conference on stabilizing the situation
in the countries of the region. Efforts to find answers
to the current problems based on the notion of African
solutions to African problems can only be welcomed.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia, as before, will continue to provide assistance
to the States of the region both through international
institutions and bilateral channels, without making our
help conditional on any politically loaded demands.

