Ms. Wilson (Australia): Let me begin by offering
our heartfelt condolences to the colleagues, family
and friends of Ambassador Churkin following his
sad and untimely passing. As many have noted,
Ambassador Churkin was an accomplished diplomat
and representative. We will greatly miss his presence
at the United Nations and particularly in the Security
Council, where he played such a strong and formative
role over many years.

While the Security Council spends much of its
time on situations in Africa, today's debate reminds us
that no region is immune from conflict. International
peace and security is something that we must work
towards collectively. The United Nations was created
over 70 years ago for this purpose, following the world
wars that started in Europe. And, since 1945, Europe
has shown an alternative is possible. It has shown
that negotiation is more effective than conflict, that
cooperation yields more than nationalism, that even
implacable opponents can talk, negotiate, cooperate
and unite if the political will is strong enough.

The international community cannot take for
granted the stability and prosperity Europe has enjoyed
for decades. We must work hard to protect these
achievements. We now face a period of instability, where
core principles of international law - the primacy
of State sovereignty and territorial integrity - are
under threat.

Australia remains deeply concerned that aggression
against Ukraine has resulted in the unlawful, purported
annexation of Crimea and conflict in eastern Ukraine,
which has already killed nearly 10,000 people,
including over 2,000 civilians. Implementation of the
Minsk Agreements remains an essential priority. Over
2 million people have fled the region since April 2014,
and over 1 million continue living in dire conditions
near the front line.

This conflict created the conditions that led to the
downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 in July
2014, which Australia felt first hand, along of with
several other countries. The international community
cannot forget this tragedy, and we must ensure that those
responsible are held to account. Australia continues to
work closely with the Joint Investigation Task Force
countries to achieve this end.

We remain concerned about threats to Georgia's
territorial integrity. It is critical that the Security
Council take action to respond to acts of aggression,
violations of territorial integrity and the failure to
settle disputes peacefully. The permanent members
of the Council have a particular obligation to lead by
example when upholding the United Nations Charter's
fundamental principles.

A threat to international peace and security in any
part of the world is a threat to the entire international
community. In this context, we welcome the new
Secretary-General's commitment to utilizing his powers
under Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also welcome continued cooperation between the
Security Council and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as well as other
regional organizations. The OSCE has provided critical
support in Ukraine and elsewhere, including helping to
negotiate ceasefires and facilitating investigator access
to the MH17 crash site.

Australia calls on the parties to Europe's conflicts
to reflect again on the founding principles of the
United Nations - peace and security, human rights,
social progress, respect for sovereignty, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and cooperation among States.
At its core lies a rules-based international order, the
primacy of which we reinforce the importance of
respecting. This is as much the case in Europe as it is
elsewhere in the world.

