Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to join my
colleagues in thanking Mr. Zarif for his comprehensive
briefing. I also wish to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zannier for his important work in
recent years.

As highlighted in the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514), the security situation
in Kosovo has generally remained calm. We welcome
the decrease in incidents of severe crime. However, we
deplore the increase in low-level incidents that have
affected minority communities, and we should not
close our eyes to ongoing problems, including
widespread organized crime. We also call on all
authorities to ensure that the strongest possible
measures are taken to ensure that no incidents affecting
international personnel take place.

At its most recent consultations on Kosovo at the
end of July, the Council discussed the latest incident in
northern Kosovo. That incident clearly showed that
issues related to the North must be a crucial element of
the European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. We continue to hold the view that the
independence and territorial integrity of Kosovo are
not up for negotiation.

At the moment, the situation in the North remains
generally calm. We call upon all parties to further
respect and implement the provisional solution
negotiated by the Commander of the Kosovo Force. All
parties concerned have to fully cooperate with the
international presences, including the European Union
(EU) and the EU Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).
The way forward towards improving the security
situation and alleviating tensions in the northern part of
Kosovo is to focus on practical solutions to outstanding
issues. We urge all sides to concentrate their efforts on
resolving the underlying issues through the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. The talks between Belgrade
and Pristina need to be conducted with a focus on
tangible issues and tangible results that improve the
lives of people in Serbia, Kosovo and the region. As a
matter of urgency, this dialogue is the only way
forward to solve the issues currently being negotiated,
including the issue of customs and trade.

It is crucial that the commitment of both sides to
facilitating freedom of movement, the preservation of
culture and religious heritage, and the mutual
acceptance of university and school diplomas be fully
implemented. We also very much welcome the positive
developments in terms of the rule of law. Germany sees
the resumption of the sessions of the Working Group
on Missing Persons as a positive development that
needs our further support. It is crucial to
reconstruction.

Furthermore, we welcome the progress made in
recent months by EULEX in its full investigation of the
allegations of despicable crimes committed against
Serbian nationals during and after the end of the armed
conflict in Kosovo. The task force has been
successfully built up, and we are confident that it will
fully accomplish its assignment. We welcome the
appointment of John Clint Williamson, an experienced
legal expert and former prosecutor in the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, as lead
prosecutor for the special investigative task force. The
unreserved commitment made by the Kosovo
authorities to cooperate with EULEX is a clear signal
that the allegations made can be fully investigated.

Kosovo has also made significant progress in the
reporting period. After successfully solving a series of
political crises within the constitutional framework, the
President, Government and Parliament of Kosovo have
taken up their work in order to further ensure political
stability and to meet the current economic and social
challenges in the country.

We therefore welcome the fact that the number of
countries recognizing Kosovo as an independent State
has increased yet again and this month reached the
threshold of 80 States. Those recognitions are a clear
sign that the region has gained stability and that the
international community is supportive of developments
in Kosovo. We call on States that have not yet done so
to recognize the Republic of Kosovo as a contribution
to peace and stability in the Western Balkans.

Let me conclude by underlining that Germany
will continue to pay great attention to developments in
Kosovo. As emphasized by Chancellor Angela Merkel
during her recent visit to Serbia and Kosovo, Germany
will continue to promote those countries' joint and

shared European future. Our objective is peace and
stability in the region with a clear European
perspective.

