Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this formal
meeting today to discuss the Secretary-General's latest
report, of 24 March 2000, on developments in Guinea-
Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS).
We also wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for
introducing the Secretary-General's report and for
updating us on the situation.

The report has made clear that the people of Guinea-
Bissau strongly desire peace and wish to put the traumatic
events of the civil strife behind them. We welcome the
fact that the process of normalization and the transition to
democracy is taking place in earnest following the
successful holding of the legislative and presidential
elections in that country. The successful completion of
those elections and the subsequent setting up of a new
Government has ushered in a new chapter for the people
of Guinea-Bissau, one full of the promise of a democratic
and peaceful political future. It also brings to a close the

 

transitional Government established in accordance with the
Abuja peace accord of 1 November 1998.

In this regard, we would like to congratulate President
Kumba Yala on his impressive mandate and wish him
every success as Guinea-Bissau completes the process of a
return to civilian rule. We support the President's intention
to fight corruption and to build a more just and democratic
society. The early identification by the Government of
post-electoral priorities for the short and medium term is
most heartening.

However, we note that, as Guinea-Bissau moves ahead
with its democratization process, the military has,
nevertheless, continued to maintain a high public posture.
We strongly urge the former military junta to fulfil its
earlier pledge that it would endeavour to stay out of politics
and would remain loyal to the newly elected President. We
are heartened to hear about the positive outcome of the
negotiations between the Government and the former
military junta to redefine the role of the military in
accordance with the rule of law and democracy. We pay
tribute to the Foreign Minister of the Gambia for the
commendable role he has played in this regard. For a
smooth transition to democracy in Guinea-Bissau, it is
important for the military to support the supremacy of
civilian institutions and the rule of law and to confine its
role to that of national defence.

Meanwhile, we continue to be concerned about the
wide circulation of small arms, which serves only to further
complicate the security situation. My delegation therefore
welcomes efforts to develop a package of incentives to
encourage civilians to turn in their weapons under the
coordination of UNOGBIS, with the active support of the
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. In addition, we must
underline the importance of the World Bank mission to the
country proposed for early next month in an effort to
promote the demobilization and reintegration of the military
into civilian life. Furthermore, we are pleased to note the
improvement in human rights, as well as the overall
humanitarian situation in the country, and the role that
UNOGBIS continues to play in the process. The continued
improvement in relations between Guinea-Bissau and its
neighbours has helped to facilitate the smooth and early
return of refugees to the country. We welcome this.

Guinea-Bissau requires our continuing attention and
assistance as it moves forward to consolidate peace and
stability in the country. Malaysia joins others in calling on
the international community to support the Government's
three-month transitional programme, pending the
organization of a new round-table conference. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the ability of the
Organization to fulfil its critical facilitation role in
Guinea-Bissau is very much dependent on the continued
and additional support of the international community.

In conclusion, Malaysia commends the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for their
important roles in facilitating the transitional process. We
also commend States Members of the Organization,
particularly France, the Netherlands and Cyprus, for their
contributions to the trust fund established in support of
the activities of UNOGBIS. We also wish to join others
in commending the Secretary-General's Representative,
Mr. Nana-Sinkam, UNOGBIS and the United Nations
country team in Bissau for their efforts thus far and for
their continued success in assisting Guinea-Bissau in its
peace-building efforts.

