Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The European Union and its member States very
much welcome the opportunity to continue the
discussion on this important topic here in the format of
an open debate.

The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this statement.

The rule of law has become a topic of discussion
in all relevant organs of the United Nations and is a
part of all United Nations activities. The rule of law is
a core principle for the internal legal and political order
of the European Union and for its external policy. The
importance of the rule of law in relation to the work of
the Security Council is no longer questioned. Rule of
law components are regularly incorporated into the
Council's work in various situation-specific contexts.
In the interest of a more coherent and systematic
approach, thematic debates such as these are important.

We are deeply committed to upholding and
developing an international order based on the rule of
law, where international law, including human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law, is fully
respected and implemented. International law and the
rule of law are the foundations of the international
system, with the United Nations at its core. We
therefore remain staunch supporters of the activities of
the Organization in this field.

We take note of the Secretary-General's recent
report (S/2011/634*) and of the progress made in
2

implementing the Secretary-General's recommendations
made in his 2004 report (S/2004/6l6). With regard to
conflict and post-conflict situations, we believe that the
promotion of the rule of law is also essential. Ensuring
the rule of law before, during and after open conflicts,
and in peacekeeping operations themselves, is the most
tangible way to shoulder the Council's responsibility in
upholding international standards. That is a task that
requires presence and resources over time.

In that regard, we support the recommendations
set out in the Secretary-General's latest report. In
particular, we fully support the idea of enhancing our
existing dialogue and cooperation. We encourage the
Secretary-General to pursue his efforts aimed at
approaching rule of law initiatives in a comprehensive
and multidimensional manner, recognizing the
importance of the economic and social rights
dimensions of conflict to ensuring long-term peace and
security.

The European Union and its member States
support the forthcoming convening of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law, to
be held at the beginning of its sixty-seventh session,
and looks forward to participating in that debate.

The rule of law is of critical importance for the
European Union's external policy. Respect for justice
and the rule of law is an essential condition for peace
and stability in the consolidation and support of
democracy and in the fight against impunity. For the
EU and its member States, respect for the rule of law is
essential to conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict reconstruction. It is inextricably linked to
the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and needs to be pursued at both the national
and international levels. We therefore strongly support
the role of the International Court of Justice as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, and call
on all States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance
with its Statute.

Furthermore, the European Union is a staunch
supporter of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
By referring the situations in Darfur and Libya to the
ICC, in resolutions 1593 (2005) and 1970 (2011), the
Security Council took decisive action in combating
impunity, furthering the rule of law and bringing
justice to the victims. The EU and its member States
call on all States Members of the United Nations that
12-21054
are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to ratify or
accede to it, call on all States parties that have not yet
done so to implement the Statute in their national legal
orders, and call on all States to cooperate fully with the
Court by enforcing its decisions, including through
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Rome
Statute serves as a prime example of the interplay
between international and national efforts in the area of
rule of law. The ICC is complementary to national
jurisdictions and is an important catalyst for the
development of domestic systems of justice. Security
Council support for national capacity-building for
justice is an important investment in peace and
security.

Special attention should be paid to giving women,
children and other vulnerable groups greater access to
justice. Specialized courts, for example family courts
or mobile courts, are tools to help to bring justice
closer to women and children.

With regard to the Secretary-General's initiatives
to support the creation of national judicial capacities to
prosecute perpetrators of serious international crimes,
we would like to make reference to the European
network of contact points in respect of persons
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, which was set up in 2002.

With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, we emphasize the need to bring about
greater quality, coordination and coherence in the
engagement of the United Nations and its Members.
The United Nations should devote special attention to
the strengthening of mediation activities; such
activities should duly factor in justice issues, including
the prosecution of the perpetrators of atrocities, and
reject amnesties and immunities for the most egregious
crimes. We also encourage the Secretary-General to
proceed in ensuring that the United Nations responds
to requests for assistance in constitution-making and
legislative reform processes.

Finally, through the Instrument for Stability,
developed in large part by supporting initiatives of
United Nations agencies, the European Union provides
assistance in the field of the rule of law to countries
going through or emerging from a crisis. Timely
support has been provided to support constitutional
processes in countries emerging from political turmoil
and moving towards re-establishing national unity and
a democratic future. Support has also been provided to
legislative processes key to the implementation of new
Constitutions, for example, in Bolivia, Zimbabwe and
Kyrgyzstan. Also, many of the civilian crisis
management operations carried out by the European
Union in the context of its Common Security and
Defence Policy focus on the rule of law.

The most prominent example is the EU's Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo under the general framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). More than 2,000 EU civilian
experts are assisting the Kosovo authorities, in
particular in the police, judiciary, customs and
correctional services, in all areas related to the rule of
law, in order to ensure the adoption of best practices.
Through the EU Integrated Rule of Law Mission for
Iraq, the European Union also contributes to the
establishment of a professional Iraqi criminal justice
system.

