The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Markram for
their briefings. Peru is deeply concerned about the
new reports of the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria, including minors, in the town of
Douma. In that regard, we note the urgent need for a
thorough investigation. Peru condemns any use of
chemical weapons wherever it may take place. We want
to point out that it is a heinous crime, a threat to the
maintenance of international peace and security and
a violation both of the non-proliferation regime and
international humanitarian law.

In the short term, we believe that the Syrian
Government and all parties to the conflict, including
countries with influence on the ground, should abide
by and implement the humanitarian ceasefire that
the Council provided for in resolution 2401 (2018),
and to cooperate with the Fact-finding Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. To that end, we
once again reiterate the importance of establishing an
independent and impartial accountability mechanism.
The investigations should result in the prosecution and
punishment of those responsible. The members of the
Council cannot permit impunity.

We must also remember that any response to the
conflict in Syria and the atrocities committed there
must be conducted in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. Peru opposes any use or threat of use
of force contrary to international law. We reiterate our
deep concern about the serious consequences that the
ongoing atrocities in the Syrian conflict may have for
the stability of the Middle East and for an international
order based on minimum standards of humanity and
coexistence. In that regard, I would like to conclude by
calling on the members ofthe Council to restore a sense
of unity and the common good to our discharge of our
high responsibilities. In the case of Syria, that means
implementing the ceasefire and ensuring the effective
protection of civilians, investigating and punishing
atrocity crimes and resuming a serious process of
political dialogue, based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), with a
View to promoting the sustainable peace that the Syrian
people so badly need.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

