Ms. Lee (Singapore): We welcome, as others
have, the High Commissioner back to the Council and
thank him for his very comprehensive briefing. His
presentation is a timely reminder of the links between
the issue of refugees and the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The targeting of refugees and internally displaced
persons has also long been used as a military objective
and political tool. In fact, as mass human
displacements are inherently destabilizing, such
exoduses can, as Mr. Lubbers has said, create tensions
between States and undermine international peace and
security.

We also thank the High Commissioner for
reminding us that Africa must remain a top priority. Of
course, as the Chair of the Liberian sanctions
Committee, we have taken careful note of his
comments on the situation in the Mario River Union.
We have also taken note of his comments on the
situation in East Timor. While the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
cannot, of course, remain in East Timor indefinitely,
we trust that its exit plans pay careful attention to and
take into account the current situation on the ground.

When addressing refugee flows, there is
increasingly a need to take into account the regional
context. The cross-border nature of many existing
conflicts means that human displacements - and,
indeed, the push factors - are not limited by national
boundaries. It is with this in mind that we welcome the
encouraging steps taken towards a more comprehensive
and holistic approach in addressing conflicts and the
resultant human displacements, for instance, in West
Africa and the Great Lakes region.

On its part, the Security Council has a special,
although not exclusive, responsibility in tackling the
root causes of conflict and also in helping to create the
conditions to support the return of displaced persons.
Here, it may be pertinent to recall the words of former
High Commissioner Mrs. Sadako Ogata to the Council
more than two years ago. She observed that:

"humanitarian action alone will not be able to
solve any of the problems leading to forced
human displacement; it cannot substitute for
Governments and the Security Council in areas
for which they have a clear responsibility, such as
peacekeeping and peace-building. The Council
has an essential role to play in preventing,
containing and resolving conflicts - and, hence,
refugee problems." (S/PV4089, p. 6)

Mrs. Ogata then went on to enumerate the ways
in which the Council could achieve this, which I will
not repeat, but, as the High Commissioner's own
presentation makes clear, these common-sense points
enumerated by Mrs. Ogata are still relevant today and
we should bear them in mind as we go about our work
in the Council.

We also wish to emphasize once again the critical
importance of assistance to host countries, many of
which are in the developing world and facing their own
economic challenges. Hosting large refugee
populations poses unique pressures and creates an
enormous strain on host countries. This was recognized
by our leaders in part VI of the Millennium
Declaration, under the heading "Protecting the
vulnerable", which pledged

"to strengthen international cooperation,
including burden sharing in, and the coordination
of humanitarian assistance to, countries hosting
refugees". (resolution 55/2, para. 26)

Unfortunately, we have yet to identify in concrete
terms how best to collectively tackle the problem in a
long-term and durable mariner.

Managing the dilemma of the global refugee
crisis requires a concerted international effort that lies
beyond the scope of today's debate, but we must, at the
very least, consider how the other parts of the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, can
better assist and complement the work of UNHCR and
other humanitarian agencies in providing refugee
relief. We welcome Mr. Lubbers' view on this.

In closing, let me take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Mr. Lubbers and his team for their excellent
and tireless work, often under the most trying
circumstances. We feel that it is unacceptable that there
should be deliberate targeting by armed elements of
humanitarian and relief personnel. There is a need for a
robust international framework for the better protection
of United Nations humanitarian personnel, building on
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. If the High Commissioner has
any thoughts on this, we hope that he will share them
with us, if not today, then whenever possible.

