Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of Lithuania for having
convened this open debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

As observed in the very instructive concept note
(S/2014/75, annex), the mandates of United Nations
field presences increasingly incorporate the rule of law
in the promotion of international peace and security.
In that regard, your delegation, Madam President,
has proposed that today's debate focus on how such
mandates can be made more effective at strengthening
the rule of law and how to ensure continuity of rule-of-
law support beyond Security Council mandates. In
addressing those questions, our delegation believes
that, to generate a peace dividend, there is a need to
take a broad approach to both justice and development
in the work of the United Nations so as to break cycles
of violence, lay the foundations for lasting peace and
ultimately strengthen the rule of law.

The international community has witnessed a
profound, if gradual, shift in global norms with respect
to the use of force and violence in inter-State relations.
As a result, the rule oflaw has consolidated its place at
the heart of policymaking processes.

In our view, there have been two major developments
in the approach of the Security Council that have been
key to producing more effective mandates and sustaining
rule-of-law support in the long-term. The first is the
recognition of the inextricable link between peace
and development, which has enhanced the resilience
and adaptation of States to the outbreak, escalation or
recurrence of conflict. That recognition was the basis
for the establishment, in 2005, of the Peacebuilding
Commission to work with the other United Nations
entities to achieve lasting peace. Much could be said
about post-conflict peacebuilding, but time constraints
prevent me from going into detail.

The second development is the Security Council's
role in promoting peace and justice, including by its
mandate to uphold the rule of law, maintain peace
and security and combat impunity while ensuring
accountability. Justice is crucial for breaking cycles of
violence and fragility. When that is ignored, peace and
reconciliation are jeopardized.

Among the tools at our disposal, the International
Criminal Court demonstrates the international
community's clear commitment to deterring war crimes
and mass Violations of human rights and humanitarian
law. The Court is already having an important impact
by putting would-be violators on notice that they cannot
be sure of impunity and by serving as a catalyst for
enacting national laws against the gravest international
crimes.

The International Criminal Court faces complex
situations in which the Security Council is trying
to achieve parallel objectives in its own sphere of
competence. In that sense, it is worth highlighting
resolution 2100 (2013), which authorized the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to support national and international
justice efforts, including those concerning the
International Criminal Court. The members of the
Security Council, as well as the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, should be mindful of the
positive synergies between missions and the Court,
taking into account their respective mandates. For that
reason, we must avoid situations that undermine the
Court and existing mandates. In that regard, the United
Nations policy on non-essential contacts is helpful as
it ensures the enforcement of measures imposed by the
Security Council on States.

By embracing peace and development as well as
peace and justice, the Security Council has allowed
for all rule of law-related matters to be dealt with in
an holistic and comprehensive way. It has also opened
a window of opportunity for greater cooperation and
coordination among major stakeholders.

There is also an international dimension when it
comes to cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, especially as a number of regional
organizations have become key partners for the
United Nations in the implementation of Security
Council mandates. Beyond peacekeeping assistance,
we believe that it is also necessary to support regional
and subregional organizations in capacity-building
in political and electoral matters, governance, human
rights and the rule oflaw.

My delegation believes that the Security Council
plays an important role in the consolidation of a
worldwide system based on the rule of law. Today's
debate should not only be concerned with the adequacy
of mandates, but also with whether the United Nations
is equipped to implement and fulfil them.

