We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), for her informative briefing. We also thank Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael, civil society representative, for the information he provided. Let me start by expressing our sincere condolences to Indonesia for the attack on a MONUSCO patrol near Beni earlier this week, during which an Indonesian peacekeeper was killed and another was wounded. We ask our dear friends to accept our words of sympathy. We have carefully studied the latest Secretary-General's report on MONUSCO (S/2020/554) and have to admit with regret that, despite the coronavirus, violence in the eastern provinces has not subsided. On the contrary, in an apparent refusal to adhere to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, the Allied Democratic Forces and other armed groups seem to be taking full advantage of the pandemic to step up their attacks against Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) and civilians. Particularly concerning is the deteriorating security situation in Ituri province, where the Lendu and Hema conflict, as well as the increased activity of armed groups, are seeing a new surge with a heavy toll on the local population. The situation in Ituri clearly proves the need to broaden support to the disenfranchised combatants under the framework of the appropriate disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes. A national framework policy on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, if prepared, could also play a helpful role. We commend the measures taken by the FARDC and MONUSCO with a view to strengthening their presence in Ituri and deepening coordination in the province. We call upon Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui to continue her good offices with the aim of facilitating the search for a sustainable solution to the situation in the eastern provinces. In these circumstances, we find it crucially important that, despite persisting tensions, members of the country's ruling coalition continue to resolve their differences through dialogue and that the coexistence model remain in place. We urge both blocks of the coalition to continue to work along those lines. We all need to support the Kabila-Tshisekedi tandem for the future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We note that the work on a joint strategy for a phased, responsible exit by MONUSCO has slowed down during the pandemic. We should not, however, overdramatize that. We hope that the Mission will soon be able to resume consultations with Kinshasa. All decisions on the exit strategy should be made while taking into account the situation on the ground and carefully considering the priorities of Kinshasa, States of the region and troop-contributing countries. We also note that MONUSCO has started implementing the recommendations contained in the report of retired Lieutenant General Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers. We would like to recall our position on the document. In principle, we are supportive of the measures being taken to strengthen coordination between peacekeepers and FARDC and enhance the operational capacity of the Force Intervention Brigade. We continue to believe, however, that cooperation on intelligence-sharing should be carried out in strict compliance with the peacekeeping principles and the Security Council's mandate. We urge the peacekeepers to focus on military reconnaissance and exercise more caution while using other forms of intelligence, especially those relying on special methods of obtaining information. To conclude, I would like to reassure the participants that the Russian Federation, both as a permanent member of the Council and as a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, will continue contributing to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the stabilization of the overall situation in the Great Lakes region.
