Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): We would like to
recognize the presence here of Minister Axworthy, and of
Minister de Miranda of Angola.
My delegation joins those who have spoken before
me in extending congratulations to you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April.

Zimbabwe enthusiastically welcomes the report of
the Panel of Experts on violations of Security Council
sanctions against UNITA and regards it as a privilege to
pronounce itself before this body on an issue of such
importance.

It is a shame that for more than 20 years now the
aspirations of the Angolan people for peace, stability and
development have remained thwarted by a handful of
reckless adventurers and misguided zealots who in any
civilized country would be rejected and disowned as the
lunatic fringe of the political spectrum. The report of the
Panel of Experts correctly identifies greed, and not
grievance, as the rationale for UNITA's declared war on
the Government and people of Angola. Furthermore, in
the process of establishing the symbiotic nature of
UNITA's relations with Rwanda and Uganda and their
surrogates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
report also situates the pursuit of economic goals by
UNITA, Rwanda, Uganda, the Congolese Rally for
Democracy (RCD) and the Movement for the Liberation
of Congo (MLC) as the motivation for what we all along

 

regarded as being senseless civil war. Because the report of
the Panel of Experts has identified both the economic
agendas and the beneficiaries in the armed conflicts that
characterize Central Africa's security landscape, my
delegation now calls upon the Security Council to
immediately raise the opportunity costs of pursuing those
agendas through warfare.

Just last week, the head of planning of the United
Nations Mission in Kinshasa, Colonel Steve Canyon,
reported that Rwanda had deployed fresh troops numbering
in the thousands for what could be a decisive force
designed to seize central Congo and pave the way for the
final march on Kinshasa. The deployment of Rwandese
forces in the Kasai province has been facilitated by
large-scale UNITA operations in that province. In March
this year, the Government forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo lost the town of Lueza to UNITA.

While embracing unreservedly the measures
recommended for the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) region in the Security Council draft
resolution on Angola sanctions, my delegation submits that
as long as Rwanda continues to occupy Congolese territory,
UNITA will have a lifeline, since that territory provides the
much-needed conduit for its arms and diamonds trade.

Against a background where Rwanda has introduced
UNITA to some of its arms brokers and contacts, as has
been reported by the Panel of Experts, it can be anticipated
that as soon as the sanctions begin to take effect UNITA
will expect Rwanda to come to its rescue in its hour of
need, as was the case in August 1998 when two Rwandese
battalions stranded in the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo found sanctuary in UNITA-held
areas of northern Angola and were eventually flown back
to Rwanda courtesy of Savimbi's contraband-running cargo
planes. The report of the Panel of Experts having
established that Kigali is fast becoming a nerve centre for
UNITA's external operations, it is only fair to surmise that
the Kigali-eastern Congo arms smuggling route offers
possibilities for UNITA.

The SADC region has always recognised that the
successful implementation of Security Council sanctions
against UNITA depends on the capacity and commitment
of the member States to deny UNITA the use of the
subregion's land routes, airports and airspace. In
recognition of the importance of cooperation in
implementing the sanctions regime against UNITA, SADC
set up a subcommittee in 1997 that recommended the
creation of an interdepartmental liaison mechanism within
its member States to ensure effective sharing of
information between the civil aviation authorities, the
immigration and intelligence services and the defence and
police forces, as well as the establishment of a
mechanism for regional liaison.

The ad hoc committee of ministers met in Harare on
19 November 1997 and set up a task force comprised of
personnel from civil aviation, immigration, intelligence,
the army and police forces. The task force's terms of
reference were defined as monitoring all suspicious
aircraft trafficking the subregion' s airspace; monitoring all
border posts and checking for materiel and goods likely
to be destined for UNITA-controlled areas; investigating
all allegations of UNITA's activities in the subregion,
including companies and individuals providing logistical
support to UNITA; investigating all allegations of
violations of Angolan airspace, airports and airstrips
located in the subregion, which were to be placed under
24-hour surveillance; and ensuring that sanctions imposed
on UNITA by the United Nations were not violated by
member States.

That task force recommended the establishment of
national information centres that would coordinate the
collection of data in accordance with task force terms of
reference. The task force also recommended that a
regional information centre, which would process
information received from the national information
centres, be established in Harare. The regional
information centre was to submit monthly status reports
to the national information centres.

Our experience in SADC has shown that the sharing
among member States of both strategic and tactical
information is an effective method of reducing UNITA's
war-making capacity. Zimbabwe, as coordinator of the
regional information centre, submitted detailed operational
procedures for the control and monitoring of flights
within the SADC region which, when put to use by the
member States, resulted in the interception of some of the
cargo planes that supplied UNITA with weapons, such as
Johannes Parreira's Interstate Airways, which is
mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts. From
information gathered by the national information centres,
the regional information centre compiled a comprehensive
dossier of companies and individuals that engaged in
commercial transactions with UNITA. All this
information was made available to the Panel of Experts
when they visited Harare.

 

Experience has also taught us that resources are
critical if operational information is to be disseminated in
a timely manner. In view of the sensitive nature of some of
the information that is transmitted between the national
information centres and the regional information centre, the
immediate relevance of some of that information could be
lost if there is no secure means of communication. While
SADC is ready to implement the recommendations in the
draft resolution, we appeal to the international community
to make available the requisite resources, including
communications and other monitoring equipment, so that
we can resuscitate and improve on the infrastructure that
was established three years ago.

We expect the whole world to applaud the sanctions
Committee's report and to cooperate with the Security
Council in passing and implementing the resolution before
it. The postures of those who want to adopt the ostrich
policy of burying their heads in the sand and pretending
that there is no storm reflect the destructive bravado of the
defenders of evil.

There are moral imperatives that dictate that the
Council must now act decisively to adopt the resolution
under consideration. The United Nations has for some time
now elevated the concept of justice and transparency to the
level of global ethics. This Council would desecrate its
commitment and diminish itself by any accommodation that
it makes with Savimbi and those who sup with him. Any
act of tolerance would tarnish the Council. Any passivity in
the face of what has become in Angola an onslaught on
humanity would be a terrible indictment on the United
Nations and on the Security Council in particular. The time
to act is now.

