Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's meeting. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks.

Our world is now facing turbulent times of
instability, unpredictability and tensions. Multiplying
conflicts interconnected with the threat of global
terrorism and violent extremism, growing racism and
xenophobia produce horrendous violations of human
rights law and humanitarian law. We believe that these
and other negative phenomena are consequences of the
economic crisis, inequality, chronic poverty, illiteracy
and unemployment, water and food insecurity, climate
change, global competition and the imbalance in finance
and trade. We therefore recognize that all three pillars
of peace, development and human rights are inseparable
and mutually reinforcing, as set out in resolution 2282
(2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262.

Kazakhstan fully supports the Secretary-General's
efforts to rebalance our approach to peace and
security, and to make prevention a priority. From the
very beginning of independence, our country has
been following a course that is in full harmony with
that initiative. In his manifesto, entitled The World.
21st Century, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan called on humankind to implement a
strategy that will forever rid the world of the threat of
war and eliminate the root causes of conflict. We also
began to develop the 2045 global strategic initiative
plan, which plans to launch by the United Nations
centenary a new trend in global development, based on
fair conditions, in which all nations have equal access
to infrastructure, resources and markets. We must be
equally aware that, in conflict prevention, all human
rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural,
are indivisible and interdependent. We must ensure
equal attention is paid to all of them.

The rights to decent work and adequate standards
of living, housing, food, water and sanitation, health
and education are at the core of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which provides an ideal
platform to demonstrate our commitment to human
rights. We also need to invest in a sustainable world with
basic services and protected human rights, by helping
Member States to build capacity for more effective
and accountable institutions, appropriate legislation,
security and justice reform, by ending all impunity and
by enhancing personnel competencies.

Human rights cannot be fostered in an environment
of continuous military action. Human rights must be
viewed through an impartial lens without double
standards, and should not be used as a political tool.
Indeed, the integrity and credibility of the Council
will only be enhanced if it proceeds in a balanced and
equitable manner with all Member States involved.
We see that human rights are mentioned 15 times in
the Charter of the United Nations, but not in Chapter
VII, which implies that these rights cannot be forcibly
imposed on States; rather they can be realized through
diplomacy, mediation and inclusive dialogue.

We believe that the Human Rights Council, its
mechanisms and procedures, as well as the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, play
a key role in monitoring the observance of the human
rights situation in all countries and have the appropriate
mandate and experience to contribute to conflict
prevention at an early stage. The Secretary-General
undoubtedly plays a key role in the prevention of conflict
and can, at any time, use his power under Article 99
of the Charter to bring to the attention of the Security
Council any issue that could threaten international peace
and security. The role of his Special Representatives
and Envoys is also significant. Protecting civilians,
especially against violence and sexual abuse inflicted
on women and children, is a priority for my country, and
we support the inclusion of these themes in the Security
Council resolutions. It is also significant for the Council
to give due thought to this factor, while formulating
mandates of peacekeeping operations. Our discussions
with troop- and police-contributing countries, as well
as pre-deployment training in human rights and gender
sensitivity are steps in the right direction. Kazakhstan
is fully committed to multilateral action to support all
human rights and to achieve peaceful coexistence and
mutual respect in a world without conflicts.

