President Zuma: Unfortunately, I am just hearing
now that I have to condense my statement. Although I
had no time to do any condensing, I will try to be brief.

South Africa welcomes the convening of today's
open debate on peacekeeping operations. For Africa
and for all States members of the African Union (AU),
the issue of peacekeeping operations - in particular,
AU-led peace-support operations - is one of great
importance. The debate is timely, as it comes amid a
manifestation of diverse threats to peace and security
in Africa.

The scourges of terrorism and violent extremism,
as well as the proliferation of illicit small arms and
light weapons, are some of the security challenges that
Africa has to contend with currently. Furthermore, the
emergence of new armed groups and splinter armed
groups and the presence of negative forces in some of
the conflict situations on the continent are a source
of concern. Some of these threats maybe peculiar to
the African continent. At the same time, it could be
argued that some threats, such as terrorism and violent
extremism, are global phenomena, with implications
that transcend borders. As such, the United Nations has
an obligation to support regional peace and security
initiatives undertaken in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Significant progress has been made in advancing
the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU on matters of peace and security. In this regard,
we welcome the signing of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, on 19 April. The Framework is
a clear demonstration that African peace and security
challenges cannot be left to the AU alone to resolve,
given their complexity and far-reaching implications.
The Framework will further enhance and consolidate
coordination, cooperation and collaboration between
the two organizations.

The issue of practicable, flexible and sustainable
financing for AU peace-support operations authorized
by the Security Council is one of great concern to
South Africa. While we understand the apprehension
of some Council members regarding the use of United
Nations assessed contributions for the financing of
such operations, we also maintain the View that the
discussions of the Security Council on this issue of
fundamental importance to Africa should be guided
by the principle of the primacy of the United Nations,
through the Security Council, in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and by the common
understanding that when the AU intervenes in conflicts
and crisis situations on the continent, it does so on
behalf of the Security Council. Therefore, the United
Nations has a duty to provide United Nations assessed
contributions for AU-led peace-support operations that
are authorized by the Security Council .

South Africa therefore welcomes the steps taken
by the Secretary-General in finding a solution to
this matter. We have taken note of the four financing
model options through which United Nations assessed
contributions can be utilized to meet the financial
gaps in AU-led peace-support operations, presented
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/454) on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations. These include subventions
in exceptional and emergency circumstances; joint
financing of a jointly developed budget; United Nations
support offices; andjoint financing ofa hybrid mission.
We further note that of these four, the Secretary-General
has recommended that the Security Council endorse, in
principle, the option of joint financing through a jointly
developed budget.

It is my delegation's considered view that the
Security Council should explore implementing all the
financing model options proposed in the Secretary-
General's report on a case-by-case basis, noting that
this will be determined by the nature and peculiarities
of each AU-led peace-support operation. However,
these should be applied in such a way as to build on
the successes while also addressing the weaknesses of
these models by learning from past experience.

I wish to reiterate South Africa's continued
commitment to the revitalization of the AU Peace
Fund. We support the three windows of activities to be
financed by the Fund. Our evaluation is that mediation
and preventive diplomacy should remain the primary
priority of our peace and security activities so as to
mitigate the impacts of conflicts.

South Africa agrees with the observation in the
report of the Secretary-General, that

"[p]eace support operations are a key tool on which
the international community increasingly relies
to address the challenges to peace and security in
Africa" (S/2017/454, para. 2).

For that reason, my delegation believes that the United
Nations can do more on the issue offinancing ofAfrican
peace-support operations, taking into consideration
the circumstances under which such operations are
deployed, often at significant human sacrifice. In
essence, this is a fundamental contribution to any
peace-support operation that ought to be appreciated
by the international community at large.

To conclude, I further wish to remind everyone of
our shared goal and responsibility towards a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Africa, in line with the objectives
of the AU Agenda 2063 flagship project, the Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative.

