Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this
open debate, which is helping to generate a rich
exchange of ideas and viewpoints on peacekeeping
operations in the light of the challenge facing the
Organization in meeting increased demands for more
operations with fewer resources.
My delegation also welcomes the valuable
briefings of Under-Secretary-General for Field
Support, Ms. Susana Malcorra, and Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain
Le Roy, as well as that of General Martin Luther
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Peru is firmly committed to the efforts of the
Organization to ensure peacekeeping in the different
regions of the world. Peru is present with military
observers and officials in four peacekeeping operations
in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Darfur. We also contribute a company in
Haiti and an official of our armed forces as the current
Force Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus.

We welcome the fact that the Departments of
Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support have
submitted a document that provides concepts and ideas
for the establishment of a new agenda for peacekeeping
operations.

We also acknowledge the efforts and interest of
the delegations of France and the United Kingdom, as
reflected in the document on peacekeeping operations
that they submitted to the Security Council in February.
That document sets out interesting approaches to
addressing the challenges that the Organization faces in
the area of peacekeeping operations.

Almost 10 years after the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) was issued, we have no choice but to
begin a process that, following a thorough assessment,
would allow us to rethink peacekeeping operations in
order to make them more effective and capable of
effectively ensuring the transition to peacebuilding,
which, after all, is the desired goal.

Peru believes that the objective that must be
pursued by peacekeeping operations is the commitment
to and ownership of the peacekeeping process itself on
the part of the country or countries involved.
Operations must gear all their efforts to strengthening
the institutions of those States, their capacities to
resolve conflicts, and national sovereignty. The
required international cooperation must also fit in with
the framework established by Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, maintaining the universal
nature and maintaining the standards and principles of
peacekeeping operations.

In connection with this point, my delegation
agrees with the document presented by the delegations
of France and the United Kingdom in the sense that we
are all responsible for promoting and ensuring
peacekeeping. That is why it is important that we
establish in the short term mechanisms to provide
greater coordination between the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, the Secretariat, the troop-
contributing countries and the Member States that host
peacekeeping operations.

Similarly, this dialogue must be intensified and
include other bodies that have some influence in the
areas where peacekeeping operations are taking place,
such as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, among
others.

Peacekeeping operations are a part of the set of
instruments with which the Organization and the
Member States respond to the demands of
peacekeeping and regional and international security.
They coexist with conflict prevention, the protection of
civilians, the mediation and good offices of the
Secretary-General, as well as the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Peru acknowledges the growing and valuable role
that is played by regional and international
organizations. The evolution of each of these elements
and its impact on every peacekeeping operation require
us to be flexible and to approach every case differently,
with firm adherence to the Charter's principles.

We believe that it is important to generate a peace
dividend or a stability dividend as a result of
peacekeeping operations. Short-term activities,
including quick impact projects, contribute to the
success of our efforts. We also believe that we must
explore different ways to better exploit the potential of
peacekeeping forces in order to create synergies
between mission mandates and the developing needs of
countries where the missions are deployed.

As we have said in other open debates concerning
issues that are directly related to peacekeeping
operations, conflicts are multidimensional and, as a
result, matters such as peace, security, development
and human rights are all interrelated. Peacekeeping
operations need to evolve towards a more
comprehensive approach to the peace and security
problems that they face. Such an approach must not
only address the immediate causes of the conflicts but,
as previous speakers have noted, contribute effectively
to developing coherent and consistent action on the
part of international community that, in turn, make it
possible to establish conditions conducive to
sustainable peace and security - in other words, an
effective peacebuilding process. Strengthening military
adviser teams would promote strategic planning that
takes all the elements involved in implementing a
peacekeeping operation into account and ensures that
they will achieve the desired results.

In this regard, my delegation notes that the new
architecture of peacekeeping operations we seek to
define, and the resulting changes in operational
mandates, will require us to take a comprehensive,
consistent approach in each of the corresponding
purviews of the Organization. Today, the Security
Council enjoys the valuable support of the
Peacebuilding Commission and is developing contacts
and coordination with troop-contributing countries. It
also relies in its work on the ad hoc mechanisms of the
Economic and Social Council and on the activities of
the funds and programmes. We must strengthen these
mechanisms and promote greater coordination and
interaction among these bodies in order to make
peacekeeping operations more effective and efficient.

An excellent example of this comprehensive
vision is the case of the United Nations Stabilization
09-44283

Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), to which Peru is fully
committed. The Mission has adapted to the changing
situation on the ground, and established indicators and
benchmarks in the areas of security, development and
institutions. I take this opportunity to reiterate Peru's
firm support for Haiti through its participation in
MINUSTAH.

In order to bring about this positive change in
peacekeeping mandates and for the United Nations to
maintain its credibility in international public opinion,
it is essential that the political and strategic visions of
the main actors - the Security Council, the regions
concerned and the parties involved in individual
conflicts in particular countries - all converge. That
vision should be complemented by rapid action by the
forces available to the United Nations, without
conditions and with a pre-established mandate.

In conclusion, I stress our interest in continued
cooperation in developing the conceptual exercise of
shaping a new alliance within the Organization in order
to create a more flexible, workable and effective
framework for peacekeeping operations.

