Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his valuable briefing on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I
wish to deliver the following remarks.

First, on the situation in Darfur, we welcome the
continued security stability in Darfur, as was mentioned
by Mr. Lacroix, as well as the positive impact of the
weapons collection campaign and the reduction of
intercommunal violence, despite some fighting on in
the J ebel Marra area where Abdul Wahid Nour militias
of the so-called the Sudan Liberation Army are present.
We welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government to
ensure security and stability throughout Darfur.

Turning to the rule of law, including security and
judicial institutions, it is this area that is most in need of
capacity-building for consolidating peace by anchoring
justice and human rights. We reaffirm the importance
of the support of UNAMID to the local Sudanese
capabilities in this area.

Regarding the political process, Kuwait continues
to believe that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
remains the cornerstone for discussions with all
non-signatory parties. The Doha Document remains
decisive in evaluating UNAMID's performance.

Secondly, with respect to the exit strategy, we
welcome the contents of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/530) concerning the exit of UNAMID from
Darfur. We would like to see more discussions among
the Government of the Sudan, Member States and the
Secretariat over the course of this month to set out a new
mandate for the exit strategy, in line with the League of
Arab States decision taken during its Jerusalem summit
in April, which supports UNAMID's exit strategy
for Darfur. The next two years will give the Council
the opportunity to make UNAMID's mandate better
tailored to reflect the needs on the ground, based on the
Doha Document.

Turning to support for the Sudan, one common
element to be discerned our consideration of the various
reports and the Secretariat's briefings is the need to
assist that country in meeting its humanitarian needs or
to increase financial and moral support for sustaining
development there, with the aim of achieving our main
goal of sustaining peace.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms its
readiness to cooperate with the United Nations and
the Sudanese Government and to support their efforts
to strengthen stability in Darfur and to tackle the
root causes of the conflict so as to ensure that it does
not recur.

