Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I should like to join others in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. As mentioned earlier by the Special Envoy, regrettably there is no progress on the political track and differences remain with regard to the Constitutional Committee. However, my delegation believes that the Syrian parties fully realize the importance of this process for moving forward, and that they will honour their responsibilities eventually to agree on constitutional principles. As much as we want the Syrian parties to build trust and confidence among themselves, the international community must also have trust in them and fully support the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, in accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). The situation in north-western Syria is extremely disturbing. As we heard from Special Envoy Pedersen, since | December, 900,000 people, the majority of them women and children, have been displaced. That is quite a large number. We have been hearing reports of babies and children dying because of the freezing temperatures. Families have fled their homes, looking for safety. However, they have ended up sleeping outside because the camps for internally displaced persons are overcrowded. The humanitarian response is _ overstretched. Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, in his latest statement, said that humanitarian workers themselves were being displaced and killed. This is a nightmare for the Council and the entire international community. However, this is not a nightmare for all those displaced people. This is a not a nightmare for mothers who are trying to protect their dying babies from the cold.This is, rather, the reality that they have to suffer - a catastrophic reality. Indonesia wishes to emphasize three points. First is the need for an immediate de-escalation. My delegation urges an immediate de-escalation and appeals to all key relevant parties on the ground to immediately restore calm and not to prolong the suffering of civilians. The escalation and violence must stop. The ceasefire must be fully respected. All parties involved in the conflict must respect their obligations to protect civilians, as well as public infrastructure, under international humanitarian law. As mentioned by Mr. Pedersen, the principle of proportionality should always be respected. All parties must respect international law and the Security Council resolutions. Secondly, there must be the creation of an enabling environment for dialogue. The establishment of a positive environment on the ground is key to advancing the work of the Constitutional Committee and to allowing any constitutional reform in Syria. In the meantime, we hope that the Syrian parties will always make themselves available for genuine dialogue and to continue the United Nations-facilitated talks in good faith. Thirdly, it is important to avoid any provocative rhetoric or actions. The complex situation in Syria should not be exacerbated by unnecessary actions or rhetoric that would further provoke and complicate the current circumstances. Now is the time for all of us to exercise restraint and find concrete solutions. We must focus on saving people's lives. That is what is expected of us. In conclusion, once again we stand by the Special Envoy in trying to find a solution to this long-standing issue in Syria. The efforts of the Special Envoy and his team, such as the return of detainees and missing persons, small as they may seem, should be continued in order to build trust. We affirm once again the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We stress that there is no military solution, that a lasting political solution is needed and that our objective should be easing the humanitarian suffering of the people of Syria. Concrete actions are needed to end the suffering of the Syrian people. That can start from the Council. Let us be united in saving people's lives. As Mr. Lowcock mentioned just now, people are watching us all.
