Mr. Hyseni: As always, it is an honour to speak
before the Council about my country's achievements.
The Republic of Kosovo has continued its steady
progress in all areas since my last statement to the
Security Council, in November 2008 (see S/PV.6025).
Last month, on 17 February, the people of
Kosovo celebrated peacefully and in a very dignified
manner the first anniversary of their country's
independence. In spite of a grave provocation and
challenge to the security situation, incited by a

considerable number of members of the parliament of
the Republic of Serbia, who joined some kind of
session in Zvecan, the situation remained peaceful and
calm during our national day festivities.

Independence day was also an appropriate
occasion to look back and to take stock of
achievements, progress, key events and developments
in Kosovo during one year of its independence. And its
achievements are huge. Recognition of Kosovo as an
independent and sovereign State has continued. Since
my last Security Council address, another four
countries around the world have recognized the
independence of my country. I wish to extend our
profound thanks and appreciation to the peoples and
Governments of Panama, Micronesia, Maldives and
Palau for supporting the right of the people of Kosovo
to freedom and independence.

Internally, since the last Security Council debate
on this subject, Kosovo has seen a number of very
positive developments. Reconfiguration of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has continued, and the European Union's
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) deployed
throughout the Republic of Kosovo on 9 December. We
greatly welcomed the deployment of EULEX. As
EULEX achieves full operational capability, for very
practical and pragmatic reasons we request the
conclusion of the mission and the mandate of UNMIK.
Deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo is in
accordance with the mandate that derives from the
Kosovo independence declaration, the Ahtisaari
package, the constitution of the Republic of Kosovo,
the laws of the Republic of Kosovo, the European
Union joint action plan of 4 February 2008 and the
invitations of the President of 17 February and
8 August.

Kosovo has also continued its steady progress on
other fronts.

In its sessions held on 15 and 16 December, the
parliament of Kosovo adopted a number of important
laws, including the laws on the Constitutional Court,
the Foreign Service and the Consular Service of
Diplomatic and Consular Missions of the Republic of
Kosovo. In addition to the first already functional
embassies, the establishment of another 12 diplomatic
missions and nine consular missions of the Republic is
well under way.

State institution-building based on European
standards has continued with the launching of the
Kosovo Security Force in January. With the help of
NATO, we are developing our civilian-controlled
Security Force. The Kosovo Security Force is of great
benefit to our neighbours as well as to our country. It
will be a democratically controlled, multi-ethnic,
apolitical, NATO-interoperable force focused primarily
on emergency response and generally on activities to
promote development and regional stability.

Two other very important institutions of the
Republic were launched in February. The Kosovo
Security Council was established, chaired by the Prime
Minister, and the Director of the Kosovo intelligence
service was appointed. The Government of the
Republic of Kosovo has been working around the clock
to address the many issues of the utmost importance to
our country, especially in the areas of the economy,
justice and security, as well as in the fight against
crime, corruption and cross-border criminal activity.

The Government is careful in managing the
financial assistance that many nations have given to
Kosovo. Substantial improvements in the school and
road infrastructure are obvious. Huge progress has
been achieved in other areas as well. Our Government
has continued to seek ways to improve conditions in
minority-community areas, especially in Serb-majority
areas.

I have to say, however, that the Republic of
Serbia has not been at all helpful in that regard, as it
has continued to encourage and support the illegal and
criminal structures in the north of Kosovo. Serbia is
working actively to prevent Serb citizens of Kosovo
from cooperating with institutions that are seeking to
protect their rights and to help them solve their
problems and improve their lives. The Serbian
Government supports illegal parallel structures that
exploit our Serb citizens but never deliver appropriate
assistance or any solutions to their problems.

The situation in the north remains an issue of the
utmost concern. Lawlessness, with evident support of
the leadership in Belgrade, has turned that part of
Kosovo into a safe haven for all kinds of criminal and
illegal economic activities. The institutions of the
Republic of Kosovo are committed to cooperating and
working very closely with the International Civilian
Office and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to restore law and order in the north
and to improve the situation and living conditions in
Serb-majority areas.

The Republic of Kosovo has made cooperation
with all of its neighbours a high priority. Belgrade is
trying to impede our cooperation with neighbours and
the international community by blocking our
participation in regional and wider international
bodies. Belgrade is blocking our exports to Serbia. Our
Government has refrained from reciprocal measures,
which would only hurt people and businesses on both
sides. We hope that the Republic of Serbia will
appreciate the necessity of joining the efforts of other
nations in the Western Balkans to establish an
environment of cooperation and understanding in the
region, including by normalizing relations with the
Republic of Kosovo. My Government stands ready to
engage in talks with Serbia, as two independent and
sovereign States, on a wide range of issues of mutual
interest. Dialogue would help to ease tensions and
normalize relations between our two countries.

In the new Kosovo, there will be no room for
hatred and violence. Kosovo's institutions are
committed to building a multi-ethnic democracy at
peace with its neighbours and contributing to regional
and global cooperation and stability.

We are committed also to pursuing the goal of
full membership in the European Union (EU) as soon
as feasible and are implementing the reforms required.
The European Commission's conclusion of
5 November 2008 that Kosovo has a clear European
perspective in line with the rest of the Western Balkans
and that a feasibility study will be presented to advance
Kosovo's EU perspective is an encouragement to us to
intensify our efforts to meet all necessary
requirements. The future of all nations of the Western
Balkans lies in European integration, and Kosovo
intends to pursue that goal very vigorously.

In attaining all the objectives that I have
mentioned, the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo
will continue their close cooperation with the European
Union, the United States and NATO. Close cooperation
with our international partners is indispensable as we
implement the Ahtisaari plan and as we work to build a
multi-ethnic Kosovo based on democratic values and
the highest international standards.

In conclusion, let me emphasize Kosovo's
commitment to become a contributing member of the
international community. The Republic of Kosovo

looks forward to working with all members of the
Security Council to promote the shared goals of
international peace and safety. Once again, I wish to
thank the Council for the opportunity to present the
views of the Republic of Kosovo.

