The Deputy Secretary-General: One of the
greatest missions of the United Nations is the
prevention of genocide. The horrors of the past and the
dangers of the present remind us of the importance of
that mission. The genocide at Srebrenica was one of the
darkest chapters in recent history. In three days, family
and community members, faith leaders, dignitaries and
representatives from around the world will gather in
Srebrenica to honour the victims. I will travel there to
represent the United Nations on behalf of the Secretary-
General.

Today, we meet here in New York to pay our respects
to all victims and to share in the grief of the affected
families and communities. We gather in humility and
regret to recognize the failure ofthe United Nations and
the international community to prevent such tragedies.
But we also meet to proclaim our determination that
the lessons learned from those unspeakable days in July
1995 must help us detect the dangers earlier. We must
build an Organization that is better equipped to keep
such crimes and atrocities from reoccurring.

The United Nations has acknowledged its
responsibility for failing to protect the people
who sought shelter and relief in Srebrenica. The
15 November 1999 Secretary-General's report to the
General Assembly on the fall of Srebrenica (A/54/549)
identified the mistakes committed by the Organization
and by the wider international community. That same
year, the independent inquiry into the actions of the
United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda
found similar deficiencies. We have since then worked
in many ways to implement the recommendations of
the reports. Prevention has become an imperative. A
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide has been
appointed. International criminal tribunals have brought
perpetrators of heinous crimes to justice. The 2005
General Assembly endorsement of the responsibility to
protect made the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity a core
State and international responsibility.

Peacekeepers are now regularly provided with
robust mandates to protect civilians. They are often
authorized to use all necessary means in defence of
populations. But peacekeepers continue to face many
of the same challenges that plagued the United Nations
in Srebrenica, not least paralysing divisions among
Member States and a lack of political and material
support. The Human Rights Up Front initiative is
generating structural changes inside the Organization,
which aim to improve our efforts to take early preventive
action. The Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect have developed a framework of analysis
for atrocity crimes, a useful tool to assess risks and
develop prevention strategies. The United Nations and
its Member States and regional organizations have
an obligation to strengthen our collective prevention
efforts and to find peaceful solutions in the spirit of
Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The Security Council has a central role to play. We
see today how situations can deteriorate and get out
of control when the Council is divided. The carnage
in Syria has undoubtedly taken a toll on the reputation
and standing of the Council and the United Nations.
Atrocious crimes are today also taking place in Iraq,
South Sudan and elsewhere. Extremist groups like
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab are seemingly competing in brutality
with the aim of spreading fear and division among
populations. As the Charter and as morality direct us,
we must unite our strength against such atrocious acts
and threats. When we are running out of words in our
outrage, we have to take action and live up to basic
values and principles.

All of us share the same objective - to work
towards a world that has finally learned the horrific
lessons of the past and where people can live in peace
and dignity, as is their right and aspiration. The world
looks to us at the United Nations and to the Security
Council and expects us to uphold that right and to meet
those aspirations. That is our shared responsibility
today. And it is how we can best pay homage to the
victims of Srebrenica.

