Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to brief
the Council once again today on the situation in Syria.

We are following developments as closely as
possible, and I base this briefing on reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) and other United Nations entities,
published and confidential information from major
international human rights and humanitarian
organizations and a review of reputable media sources.
We have also reviewed the official websites of the
Government of Syria and social media sites of Syrian
opposition groups.

Anti-Government demonstrations started in mid-
March, following the detention of 15 school children in
Dar'a for writing anti-Government graffiti. Those
demonstrations have since gradually, but steadily,
increased in geographic scope and participation. There
are documented reports of protests in the coastal cities
of Latakia, Baniyas and J ablah and the central cities of
Horns and Hamah, the southern cities of Dar'a and
Izra, the eastern city of Dayr Al-Zawar, the suburban
towns around Damascus of Duma and Al-Moadamyeh
and in the north-east in the cities of Al-Hasakak and
Al-Qamishli. Demonstrations in the major cities of
Damascus and Aleppo have been sporadic and more
limited. Protesters began with demands for greater
freedom and political and economic reforms. They are
increasingly calling for the downfall of the regime,
2
echoing slogans that have been heard elsewhere in the
region.

The Syrian authorities have reacted with a mix of
reform measures and increasingly violent repression,
which the Secretary-General has strongly condemned.
In his speech to the Parliament on 30 March, President
Al-Assad announced that a series of political, social
and economic reforms would be undertaken to respond
to demands of the Syrian people, including an
investigation into the killings during protests. On
7 April, a presidential decree granted long-awaited
citizenship to stateless Kurds residing in the north-east
of the country. On 15 April, the President pledged to
release all protest-related detainees, except those
accused of committing crimes "against the nation and
the citizens". Local officials were removed, and new
ones appointed, in an apparent attempt to open
dialogue with the population in Horns and Dar'a.

On 16 April, President Al-Assad swore in a new
Government, which he tasked with developing reforms,
including preparing new laws on media and political
parties. In a series of decrees issued on 21 April, he
lifted the state of emergency, which had been in place
since 1963. He also abolished the High Security Court
and recognized the right to peaceful protest while
strictly regulating it. The next day, Friday, 22 April,
witnessed the largest demonstration to date across the
country, with demonstrators claiming that the measures
taken were too little and too late. Despite the promise
of reform, in fact, the Government crack-down
intensified dramatically. OHCHR has information that
more than 100 persons were killed in many towns
across the country from Friday to Sunday. There is
growing concern about the overall well-being of the
population, including their access to medical care and
services, and access to food and water in some cities.

Following the massive demonstration of Friday,
22 April, the Syrian army started a major military
operation against Dar'a and surrounding villages.
Tanks and large numbers of soldiers entered the area.
Given the siege-like conditions, it is difficult to
confirm our information. But reliable sources are
consistently reporting the use of artillery fire against
unarmed civilians, door-to-door arrest campaigns, the
shooting of medical personnel who attempt to aid the
wounded, raids against hospitals, clinics and mosques
and the purposeful destruction of medical supplies and
arrests of medical personnel.
11-31393

The United Nations can confirm that electricity,
communications systems and water in the city have
been cut since at least Monday, and that as a result of
those operations United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools
and health facilities in Dar'a have been closed for the
past week. There are reported shortages of medicine,
water and food, and this could become a major
humanitarian issue in the coming days.

The United Nations is requesting access to those
areas to assess humanitarian needs and to provide an
accurate first-hand account of developments.

I should also note that the land border between
Syria and Jordan has been closed for much of the
period of this ongoing military operation.

The towns of Duma and Al-Moadamyeh, in the
vicinity of Damascus, are also surrounded by tanks and
armed forces, as had been Baniyas earlier this month.
There have been reports of security forces opening fire
on demonstrators in the city of Djabla, killing at least
13 in the past couple of days. In Horns, security forces
opened fire on demonstrators on 18 and 19 April,
reportedly killing up to 20 people. Overall since mid-
March, a review of reputable reports from media and
human rights groups put the total number of anti-
Government demonstrators killed by security forces
and their supporters at more than 300, most likely
between 350 and 400.

The High Commissioner's Office has also
received information of wide-scale arrests of
protesters, human rights defenders, lawyers, journalists
and others. There are serious allegations of beatings
and torture of people detained in connection with the
protests, including children.

A review of the reports of the media,
international human rights groups, United Nations
agencies and diplomatic missions confirm that the
overwhelming majority of protests have been peaceful
and unarmed. However, there have been credible
reports of a very few instances where protesters have
used force, resulting in the deaths of members of the
security forces.

Human Rights Watch has documented, with
eyewitness testimony, only one such incident, on
8Apri1 in Dar'a, when, after a number of protesters
had been killed by live fire from the security forces,
some demonstrators seized weapons from an
11-31393
abandoned checkpoint and opened fire, killing perhaps
a dozen security personnel. There are no confirmed
reports that this is a recurring phenomenon, nor do we
have confirmation of reports of security personnel or
soldiers being killed by Government agents. Some of
the overall confusion on this sensitive issue may stem
from the widely reported presence of armed security
agents and regime supporters in civilian clothes.

The lack of transparency is compounded by the
denial of access to the international and independent
media, which, of course, violates freedom of the press
and the right to information. The Committee to Protect
Journalists and numerous other sources note that the
Syrian authorities continue to detain journalists on a
regular basis, disrupt Internet and telephone service,
prohibit the entry of international journalists into the
country, and block all access to areas of unrest. One
cumulative effect of this policy is to prevent the
collection and dissemination of accurate and impartial
information, leaving observers unable to confirm or
deny many allegations.

The official news agency, the Syrian Arab News
Agency reported the death of at least 21 military and
security personnel in recent days, and it alleged that
more than 290 internal security officers had been
injured since the beginning of the events. The
Government has stated that most of the killings of
civilians have been committed by anti-Government
armed militias, but it has provided no evidence to date
to support this.

Syrian television has also broadcast alleged
confessions by detained protesters speaking of armed
protesters and interference from abroad. The Syrian
State media has also accused Lebanon's Future
Movement of supplying arms to the protesters, which it
has denied. We have no further information on those
allegations.

The Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights have emphasized that
all the killings during the demonstrations should be
investigated, including the alleged killing of military
and security officers. There will be a special session of
the Human Rights Council on the situation of human
rights in Syria in Geneva on Friday.

The regional implications of the situation in Syria
are a source of concern in particular for its neighbours.
In a press release dated 25 April, the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States said that the League was
3
following the current developments in a number of
Arab countries with great concern. It supported the
growing popular aspiration in the Arab world for
change, social modernization, the end of repression and
a movement towards democratization and reform. It
urged an immediate halt to violence against
demonstrators, insisting that the people's demands for
freedom and democracy deserved support, not bullets.

The statement also announced that the
forthcoming meeting of the League of Arab States
Ministers for Foreign Affairs will discuss the current
dangerous situation between the people and their
Governments in the Arab world. We also note the
efforts made by the Government of Turkey to engage
with Syrian interlocutors.

The Secretary-General is following the situation
in Syria closely and with deep concern. As members
are aware, he has issued three statements and spoken
directly with President Al-Assad. The Secretary-
General has condemned the use of violence against
peaceful demonstrators and called for an independent,
transparent and effective investigation into the killings.
He has conveyed our belief that the Syrian authorities
should fulfil their obligation to protect civilians and
respect international human rights, including the right
to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, as
well as the freedom of the press.

Repression is not the solution. An inclusive
dialogue and genuine reforms should address the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, restore
confidence and ensure social peace and order.

