Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor's eighteenth
report to the Security Council pursuant to its resolution
1970 (2011), on Libya.

Indonesia joins others in expressing deep concern
at the situation in Libya. Today I would like to make the
following points.

First, like others, Indonesia calls for the immediate
cessation ofhostilities in Libya. We welcome the efforts
made by the United Nations and other partners to bring
the parties to the conflict back to political negotiations.
To that end, we reiterate our full support for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.

The international community, including the
Council, needs to show that we are united in our support
for the Libyan people and refrain from taking actions
that will push peace further out of our reach.

Secondly, like others, we, too, are concerned at
the large number of grave violations of international
law and of serious multidimensional crimes, as we just
heard in Prosecutor Bensouda's update. We join the
Prosecutor's call, in her statement of 16 April, on all
parties and armed groups involved in the fighting to
fully respect international humanitarian law and take
measures to protect civilians.

That leads me to my last point, which relates to the
ICC proceedings. Indonesia is committed to pursuing
justice in Libya. The efforts to pursue it are part of the
Wider efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable
peace in Libya, including the current ongoing effort by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salame'
and in particular his three steps of mediation effort.

The rule of law must be respected; peace cannot
be complete and sustainable without justice; and justice
cannot prosper in the absence of peace. For Indonesia,
the priority at hand is to cease all remaining hostilities
and return to the political dialogue. Action by the
international community must be taken on the basis
of careful decisions so as to avoid provoking further
Violence, endangering lives and jeopardizing the quest
for peace.

Ijoin the Prosecutor in stating that it is Libya's
obligation, first and foremost, to ensure accountability
for crimes committed on its territory. We therefore must
empower the Libyan judicial authorities to enable them
to exercise their sovereignty. That is why the referral
of the situation in Libya to the ICC should not dissuade
the competent Libyan authorities from invoking its
jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of human
rights and bring the perpetrators to justice.

