Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): We too would like
to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.

Brazil wishes to express its long-standing support
for the implementation of a two-State solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace and security within
internationally recognized and mutually agreed
borders based on the 1967 lines, in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the established guidelines of the peace process. At
the heart of that formula is the need to work towards a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
viable and territorially contiguous, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

In that regard, the expansion of Israeli settlements
in Palestine, which are illegal under international law,
and the incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on both
sides continue to hinder the achievement of lasting
peace in the region. Brazil is also following with
concern the situation of the Palestinian village of Khan
Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and urges the Israeli authorities
to rescind its decision to demolish the village, which
is in contravention of international law. The Brazilian
Government also reaffirms its understanding that the
final status of the city of Jerusalem should be defined
in negotiations between Israel and Palestine based on
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Brazil remains deeply worried about the situation
in Syria, especially the ongoing military operation in
the south-west region of the country and its devastating
impact on civilians. Brazil urges all parties to
immediately suspend hostilities and engage in efforts
leading towards a peaceful solution to the conflict. We
also call on parties to take all necessary measures to
safeguard civilian lives and infrastructure, especially
medical and educational facilities, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

We therefore renew our full support for the efforts of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee in line
with the agreements reached in Sochi. The support
of the international community, especially that of the
Security Council, is vital for negotiations to move
forward in a concrete and constructive way. Current
negotiations benefit from United Nations mediation but
must be led by and for the Syrian people and safeguard
the unity, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of
the country.

Yemen's civil war, which is considered to be the
largest current humanitarian crisis, is now in its fourth
year and shows no sign of abating. We wish to reiterate
that the only viable path for the future of Yemen is a
negotiated settlement. In that regard, Brazil expresses
its full support for the plans of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths to relaunch political negotiations, and urges all
parties to renew efforts to achieve a negotiated solution.

