Mr. Guterres: I thank you very much, Madam
President, for your kind words. Indeed, I have had the
enormous privilege in the United Nations to serve the
most vulnerable of the vulnerable people in the world.

Nearly 1 million people have arrived by boat in
Europe this year, more than 50 per cent ofthem Syrians.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) just published a survey of over
1,200 of them, and the findings confirmed something

we have long suspected. Syria is experiencing a massive
brain drain; 86 per cent of those we interviewed
have a secondary education. Almost half have gone
to university. One can only imagine the disastrous
consequences of such an exodus on the future post-
conflict reconstruction of Syria.

The enormous suffering and displacement inside
the country continue and the Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator just spoke about the humanitarian situation
generating them. But the fact that two-thirds of the
Syrians we interviewed in Greece had left the country
in 2015 - with 37 per cent coming directly from Syria
after just a few days in transit - shows how unbearable
things have become. That is why it is so urgent to
achieve the ceasefire foreseen in the Vienna talks and
in the recently adopted resolution 2254 (2015).

It is also obvious that Syrian refugees in the
region are descending deeper and deeper into poverty.
A recent joint study by UNHCR and the World Bank
found that nine in ten Syrians in Jordan and Lebanon
live below the respective national poverty lines.
Not having been allowed to work legally, refugees
are increasingly vulnerable, dependent on scarce
humanitarian assistance and forced to go into debt to
feed their families. That has a particularly devastating
impact on children; they drop out of school, go to work
or get married early. Only half of all refugee children
are in school. We are also worried that increasing
numbers of people have no documentation, which puts
them even more at risk, as many new refugee arrivals
are not registering due to obstacles and safety concerns.
In addition, thousands of children being born to Syrian
parents in exile face a potential risk of statelessness.
They are not stateless, but they face that risk for lack of
registration.

The refugee crisis has had an enormous impact on
host countries and communities, affecting all aspects of
daily life, from housing and unemployment to general
price levels and public sanitation. The economies of
Lebanon and Jordan have lost billions and billions
of dollars as a result of the Syria conflict. We know
Syrians will go on trying to reach Europe until there
is a fundamental change in the factors that are pushing
them to leave.

There must be more international support to
refugees and their hosts, and humanitarian assistance
has to match the level of the needs. Even with the recent
surge in funding triggered by the refugee influx into
Europe, our Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan (3RP)
was only 52 per cent funded, with dire consequences
for many families. Massive investments are required
in support of Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey to prevent
refugees from slipping further into destitution and to
help Governments cope with the increased pressure on
health and education, water, electricity and other public
infrastructure.

Of course such longer-term strategies need a
stronger link between development and humanitarian
efforts than is currently the case. The 3RP was a
first step in this direction, but what is really needed
is a change in bilateral and multilateral development
cooperation policies and rules that would enable
middle-income countries such as Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey to benefit from several development instruments
from which they are currently excluded. I hope that the
upcoming London conference will mobilize support
not only for the vast humanitarian needs in the region,
but also for longer-term approaches that combine
self-reliance for refugees with effective international
solidarity and responsibility-sharing with the host
countries and communities.

We need a new deal between the international
community - Europe in particular - and Syria's
neighbours. It is clear that without education for their
children, access to the labour market and protection
against poverty, more and more Syrians will see
themselves left with only one option - moving
on. After having seen their homes destroyed, their
neighbours killed and their loved ones disappear; after
having fled multiple times within Syria, faced poverty
and lacked basic services in exile, they try to get to
Europe to rebuild their future. It breaks my heart to
see these families, who have already suffered so much,
forced to put their lives into the hands of criminal
smugglers and traffickers who exploit them, rob them of
their last savings, violate their most basic human rights,
and often outright leave them to drown in overcrowded,
unseaworthy boats.

That is why I strongly support the idea of a vast
programme forresettlement and other forms of admission
to European countries and further afield - one that
is large enough to help put an end to the tragedies of
the Aegean Sea and the chaotic movement through the
Balkans. Because if things continue as they are right
now, I fear not only for the lives of refugees, but for
the future of European asylum, as restrictive measures
are already spreading like a Virus that also threatens to
contaminate other parts of the world.

Ultimately, the fact that so many of the Syrians
arriving in Europe are now coming straight from Syria
demonstrates that the violence and human rights abuses
inside the country are only getting worse and that the
true solution for this humanitarian tragedy must be
found inside Syria.

As High Commissioner for Refugees, it is clear that
my focus is on the people who have had to flee this war.
But in this last meeting, allow me to say a few words as
a citizen of the world because we face much more than a
refugee emergency. The Syria-Iraq crisis - because that
is what it has become - also has an enormous impact
on regional stability and global peace and security.
While the restoration of the caliphate may have been
an aspiration for several groups since its abolishment
by Atatiirk, we now have, for the first time, a terrorist
organization that has the political objective of building
a State and that effectively controls a large territory
from which it can plan strikes anywhere in the world.
This is a radical change even when compared to the
worst of the international terrorism we have seen so far.

The link to regional, European and global security
is clear. Tens of thousands of young foreign fighters
from around the world are in Syria or Iraq today. We
know that many of them will travel back home, and we
know the risks that entails. But as legitimate as these
concerns are, we must not forget that despite the rhetoric
we are hearing these days, refugees are the first Victims
of such terror, not its source. They cannot be blamed
for a threat which they are risking their lives to escape.

Yes, of course, there is a possibility that terrorists
could try to infiltrate refugee movements, but that
possibility exists for all communities and homegrown
radicalism is, by far, the biggest threat, as all the
recent incidents have shown. Those who reject Syrian
refugees, especially if they are Muslim, are the best
allies of the propaganda and recruitment efforts of the
extremist groups. The war has to end, and quickly. The
longer it drags on, the more difficult it will be to keep
paying for its consequences.

The European Union just decided to give €3 billion

to Turkey for a plan of action to limit the onward
movements of refugees - €3 billion to the country
with the strongest economy in the region. The total cost
exceeds that by far and will continue to rise, as will the
price of the future reconstruction of Syria. But more
importantly, if the conflict does not end quickly, it may
be the end of Syria as we know it - and the same is
true for Iraq. We are all aware of the complexities of the
situation which the end of the First World War created
in the Middle East - in the words of David Fromkin,
that was "a peace to end all peace".
But we must not allow today's sectarian divide to
escalate to the level of the wars of religion that flattened
large parts of Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Let us not forget that religious wars are
always, essentially, political wars. Peace cannot wait.
The world needs a surge in diplomacy for peace, and I
strongly hope that Vienna will be a key step for peace

to be re-established as the number one priority on the
international agenda.

