Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Guterres,
and to thank him for his valuable participation in this
meeting. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Khare, for his briefing and for his very valuable
contribution to peace in Timor-Leste. I would like to
pay tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) under his
leadership, which have contributed to stability and
progress in Timor-Leste.

We have followed the developments in Timor-
Leste with great interest, and we again welcome the
continuing stability and calm in that country and the
progress made towards peace, as reflected in the State
authorities' response to the recent crisis and the
measures taken to restore stability and security in order
to continue working towards steady socio-economic
development. We note with satisfaction the closure of
most of the camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons without any incidents, as well as the ongoing
reintegration of the petitioners of the Falintil-Forcas de
Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) into civilian life. We
note as well the adoption of administrative reform
measures and anti-corruption laws.

We believe that it is important to devote greater
attention to the post-reintegration phase in order to
enable all citizens to earn a living and to enjoy access
to basic necessities, such as water and other services,
because that is one of the prerequisites for lasting
stability in the country. It is evident that Timor-Leste
has achieved substantial progress. However, there are
still many challenges, such as poverty, unemployment,
the lack of an effective land and property management.
In addition, the State institutions remain fragile,
including shortcomings in the justice and law-
enforcement sectors. In that regard, primary
responsibility for the adoption of a comprehensive
approach to the four priority areas lies with the
Timorese authorities. Those are security sector reform,
State building and the rule of law, the promotion of a
culture of democratic governance and governance, and
socio-economic development, so that greater progress
within the context of the medium-term strategy, in
cooperation and coordination with UNMIT and the
United Nations country team, can be achieved.

We note with satisfaction the efforts of President
Ramos-Horta to strengthen the ongoing dialogue
among the various political parties, as well as all
segments of society. It is evident that the statements
made recently by the various influential political
parties and the measures that they have taken clearly
demonstrate their respect for the rule of law and all
State institutions. We hope that that constructive spirit
will prevail so as to ensure that a democratic society
enjoying peace and stability continues to be built.

During this period, it is important that we
continue to strengthen and advance the State
institutions, especially their capacities, in order to
enable them to fully meet their responsibilities, in
particular in the fields of security and socio-economic
development and respect for the rule of law and human
rights, and to ensure that understanding and tolerance
prevail.

We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendations and agree with him when he states
that much remains to be done in Timor-Leste (see S/2009/504, para. 53). That is why we support his
comment with regard to maintaining the strength and
composition of the Mission at the current levels, and
we look forward to the recommendations of the
technical assessment team.

