Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): Mr. President, we
wish to thank you for convening this important meeting
and also to commend you for the exemplary manner in
which you have stewarded the Council during the
month of July.
We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The South African Government is deeply
concerned at the escalation of the conflict in Lebanon,
northern Israel and the Gaza Strip, which has resulted
in the loss of many lives and the destruction of critical
infrastructure. Those attacks are clearly raising
tensions in the region to new dangerous heights at a
time when all sides in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
should be looking at ways to end the deadlock in
negotiations and move the peace process forward.

The South African Government reiterates that
Israel's use of air strikes in heavily populated areas to
carry out extrajudicial killings is against international
humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions. We
cannot accept the principle of collective punishment.
We do not believe that an entire nation can be attacked
because of tensions with Hizbollah. The Government
of South Africa calls on the Israeli Government to
refrain from that type of action and, as a major military
Power in the region, to act with restraint to avoid
further civilian casualties and the destruction of vital
infrastructure.

Furthermore, we call on the Palestinians and
Hizbollah to release the Israeli prisoners, and we call
for an end to the launching of rockets into Israel.
Failure to do so is resulting in the Israeli military
offensive that is causing massive death and destruction.

We welcome the package of elements put forward
by the Secretary-General after the return of his
diplomatic mission to the region. We believe that it is
only through a cessation of hostilities - which would
prevent further loss of innocent life, allow for full
humanitarian access and give diplomacy a chance -
that there will there be an opportunity to end the crisis.

We therefore urge the Security Council to act
decisively and to assume its Charter-granted
responsibility of contributing to the maintenance of
international peace and security by working to urgently
resolve this conflict.

