Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Mr. President, I
thank you for this opportunity to address the Council
on the issue of children and armed conflict.

The eleventh report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) on the matter describes exhaustively and
in detail the dire situation of children recruited, killed,
maimed and violated by groups in situations of armed
conflict on the Security Council's agenda.

The Philippines wishes to note, therefore, the
efforts undertaken by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to keep us all informed about
the developments on the ground and to posit possible
ways by which we can address the circumstances
and the contexts that expose our societies' most
vulnerable - our children - to the most difficult
realities of our modern world, namely, armed conflicts.
At the same time, however, it is equally important that
the report must impartially reflect the situation on the
ground.

In that regard, the Philippines welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Her independent and impartial
office plays an instrumental and pivotal role in putting
forward positive, transparent and balanced actions that
will help permanently lift children from the quagmire
of violence and restore to them the full rights that they
deserve. The task, as we can plainly see, is not an easy
one and much more needs to be done and properly
evaluated in that area.

The issue of children in armed conflicts is
multidimensional and requires concerted, coherent
and coordinated decisions and actions on the part of
all stakeholders. While Governments are rightly held
accountable for their duty to protect children and
their rights, it must be emphasized that the issue of
accountability likewise lies with all parties concerned.
Therefore, the political will of all stakeholders and
parties, particularly persistent perpetrators, will be key,
if we are to make more concrete and visible progress on
the issue.

The Philippines notes that despite the efforts of
stakeholders, through the years, the number of persistent
perpetrators has increased drastically, a concern that
continues to draw on the Security Council's attention
and time. Permit me then to highlight some points that
we hope will help build on past and current efforts.

The listing and delisting criteria for parties should
be clear, transparent, objective and balanced. As the
Philippines has stated before, the Security Council may
wish to assess the level of commitment and the scope
of mechanisms, efforts and outcomes on the ground as
indicators for the delisting of parties.

As we remain focused on these goals, the Security
Council may wish to consider a stronger focus on the
encouragement that delisting can bring in order to
sustain efforts aimed at protecting children in armed
conflicts. It would, in fact, be an indicator of failure on
the part of the Security Council and the United Nations
if the list were expanding. There should be movement
from list 1 to list 2, and subsequently, graduation
from those lists. While being seized of the matter,
the decision adopted this morning in resolution 2068
(2012) starts with graduation from the list and will let
appropriate agencies or bodies do their job to secure
the improvement of actions in favour of the children
concerned. At the same time, that would free up the
Council so that it can engage itselfin the most prominent
issues regarding international peace and security.

The discussion ofthe issue ofpersistent perpetrators
must be in keeping with the mandates of the Security
Council and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The current monitoring efforts must be in keeping
with paragraph 2 (d) of resolution 1612 (2005), which
stresses that
"any dialogue established under the framework of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism by United
Nations entities with non-State armed groups
in order to ensure protection for and access to
children must be conducted in the context of peace
processes where they exist and the cooperation
framework between the United Nations and the
concerned Government".

Yet, certain proper appreciation of that paragraph really
must be applied in that regard.

More frequent and regular interaction and deeper
engagement on the part of the Special Representative
with stakeholders, including the missions of the United
Nations, may help move relevant processes forward
and help identify possible solutions to standing issues.
The interaction may likewise further help the Special
Representative in the preparation of a more balanced,
impartial and candid report.

For its part, together with the rest of the world,
the Philippines stands ready to work closely with all
relevant stakeholders and parties to help provide the
strong political and ideological framework within
which the realities that expose children to armed
conflicts and the violence associated with them can be
effectively addressed. Of course, we are doing our part
in protecting our children.

We are a bit disheartened, however, that the process
as it emerges from the report does not seem to enjoy
the satisfaction of anyone. The Philippines questions
certain information for which we provided points of
clarification; yet what came out did not thoroughly
reflect the situation on the ground. We have made it
clear that some required actions are simply beyond
the Government's ability to influence, because they
constitute a clear call to action for other parties. We are
also concerned that all such attention by us here may in
fact be counter-productive to efforts to put finality to
the situation that gave rise to our concern for children.
We often favour the involvement of non-Violent peace
forces, which groups that are impartial and therefore
accepted by all parties. Unfortunately, sometimes the
United Nations is not perceived that way. It is seen as
more on the side of the Government.

