Mr. Feltman: We meet at a moment of heightened
risk across multiple fronts in the Middle East. It is
already two months into a year that could preserve
or even extinguish what hope remains for a two-State
solution. I do not believe that it is hyperbole to say that.
Yet, as demonstrated today by the troubling rocket
attack fired from Gaza into Israel, the temperature
between Israelis and Palestinians is again rising,
with the situation of Palestinian prisoners the most
immediate but not the only cause. There is as yet no
process of negotiation to offer hope on the horizon.

Meanwhile, in Syria, even tentative steps towards
dialogue are struggling to take root. The destructive
military spiral churns more forcefully each day and
threatens to pull its neighbours, most notable and
worrisome Lebanon, into its vortex. Opportunities
exist to reverse those trends but not if the international
community sits still. Stepped-up efforts by the Council
and its members can make a substantial difference
while there is still time to do so.

Turning first to the Middle East peace process, we
have all voiced frustration at the failure over many years
to break the impasse between Israelis and Palestinians.
Yet resignation is not an acceptable option. Relying on
the status quo - even if it were sustainable, which we
do not believe is the case 4 would represent a failure on
the part of the parties and the international community
at the very time when we should seize opportunities
to help the parties define and implement a final status
agreement. It is now time for all of us to act decisively
and with concerted purpose, including through a
revitalized and relevant Quartet, but also beyond, if we
are to salvage a two-State solution and realize the vision

ofa State of Palestine and a State ofIsrael living side by
side in peace and security. The United Nations stands
ready to support any serious international initiative to
that end.

In the aftermath of the Israeli elections on
22 January, international partners have been meeting
and discussing how to move decisively towards
creating the conditions by which a two-State solution
may become reality, and not remain mere rhetoric. The
Secretary-General has continued his engagement with
both Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and Palestinian
President Abbas. His recent meetings with European
Union High Representative Catherine Ashton in New
York and United States Secretary of State John Kerry in
Washington, DC, focused in part on the Middle East.
In addition, Mr. Kerry and United States President
Obama intend to visit the region next month, and
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have made separate
preparatory trips to Washington, DC. We look forward
to this renewed United States engagement.

At a press conference on 19 February, Prime
Minister Netanyahu reiterated his commitment to a two-
State solution and a peace process that yields results.
On the same occasion, he announced the appointment
of Tzipi Livni, an experienced interlocutor, to lead
negotiations. Palestinian President Abbas has also
shown patience in allowing the time necessary to get
a new process on track. Both sides must be prepared
to embrace their responsibilities in order to engage
fully with any credible new initiative and demonstrate
goodwill and renewed commitment.

The dire fiscal situation of the Palestinians must
be addressed. Fiscal stability is critical to safeguarding
the achievements of Palestine's State-building agenda,
including important progress that has been made
in the Palestinian security services. With regard to
the Palestinian Authority's financial situation, the
Secretary-General notes with relief the decision by
Israel to release Palestinian revenue clearances for
January, and reminds the Israeli authorities that full
transfer of Palestinian tax and customs revenues in
a timely and predictable manner is an obligation that
Israel accepted as part of the Paris Protocol, which
remains in force. Timely donor contributions are also
more important than ever. The meeting next month of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians will be
an opportunity to renew the collective commitment
to supporting State-building efforts and promoting
Palestinian financial and economic sustainability.

The United Nations continues to follow closely the
security, political and human-rights dimensions of the
issue of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli custody. On
Saturday, we were concerned to learn that a Palestinian
man, Arafat Jaradat, died in detention after his arrest
by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) days earlier. Earlier
today, Gaza militants from the Al-Aqsa Martyrs
Brigade cited this death in claiming responsibility for a
rocket attack on Israel - a most troubling development.
The prisoner's death also sparked a series of popular
demonstrations and clashes, which, reports indicate,
resulted in the IDF injuring 43 Palestinians. Two Israeli
soldiers were also injured.

The United Nations underscores the importance
of restoring and maintaining calm and calls for an
independent and transparent investigation by Israeli
authorities into the circumstances of Mr. Jaradat's
death, the results of which should be made public as
soon as possible. Also of particular concern is the
deteriorating health of four prisoners who are on an
extended hunger strike. The United Nations remains
closely involved on the ground, and the Secretary-
General has raised his concerns with Prime Minister
Netanyahu, urging that a solution be reached without
delay in order to end the prisoners' plight and preserve
calm. He also recalled the importance of full adherence
by all sides to the agreement of 14 May 2012, including
implementation of the prisoners' families' visiting
rights. It is the firm position of the United Nations
that anyone in administrative detention without
charges should be charged and face trial with judicial
guarantees, in accordance with international standards,
or be promptly released.

Operations by Israeli security forces in the
occupied West Bank, including in Area A, have
continued at a steady pace. According to reports,
since our last briefing (see S/PV.6894), a total of 391
such operations have resulted in 617 Palestinians,
including 116 children and 10 women, being injured
and 491 being arrested, while nine Israeli soldiers have
also been injured. Palestinians detained included two
parliamentarians affiliated with Hamas, who were
arrested on 4 February. The increased use of live fire by
Israeli security forces directed at unarmed Palestinian
civilians is of deep concern. On 23 January, a 22-year-
old Palestinian woman was killed while walking on her
college campus south of Bethlehem. On the same day,
a 15-year-old boy was shot dead by soldiers near the
Al-Arroub refugee camp.
Settlement activity continued, with Israeli
authorities giving final approval for the construction
of 90 housing units in the settlement of Beit E1.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly stressed that
settlements are illegal under international law. Israel
should heed the calls of the international community
to stop such activity. We are also looking into media
reports that the Israeli Government authorized drilling
to search for oil in the occupied Syrian Golan. Clashes
between Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the occupied
West Bank resulted in injuries to 10 Palestinians,
including two women and two children, while one
teenage Israeli settler was injured by a Palestinian
on 29 January. We deplore attacks committed as part
of so-called price tag violence, which included the
desecration of 10 Muslim tombstones in the Mamilla
cemetery in West Jerusalem on 14 February.

Since my last briefing, Israe1i security forces
have demolished 30 structures in the occupied West
Bank, resulting in the displacement of 89 Palestinians,
including 49 chi1dren. We now have figures for the
month of January, during which at least 139 Palestinian-
owned structures, including 59 residential structures,
were destroyed by the Israeli authorities, most of them
in Area C, with the remainder in East Jerusalem. That
is the highest number of such demolitions in a single
month in more than two years.

Planning efforts to benefit Palestinian communities
in Area C continue. Unfortunately, none of the 32 plans
submitted to Israeli authorities, some since June 2010,
have yet been approved. We call upon the Government
of Israel to facilitate tangible progress if community-
based planning is to be adopted as a constructive
approach for many of the Palestinians concerned.

Palestinian demonstrations continued to be
organized against the barrier, which deviates from
the Green Line in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice (see A/ES-10/273). Palestinians attempted to set up a
number of encampments near the wall, to protest
land confiscation, which were quickly dismantled by
Israeli forces. A number of Palestinians were injured
during demonstrations against the barrier, as well as in
demonstrations in solidarity with prisoners on hunger
strike, which I mentioned earlier. The Secretary-
General stresses the importance for protests to remain
non-violent and for the right to peaceful protest to be
fully respected.

With regard to Gaza, we are deeply troubled by
today's rocket attack into Israel. There is nojustification
for such attacks, which not only target innocent civilians
indiscriminately but which risk triggering a renewed
spiral of violence that will only bring suffering to
Palestinians and Israelis alike. We continue to condemn
all indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza into Israe1.
We also urge Israel to demonstrate maximum restraint.

It is important for both sides to maintain their
commitment to the ceasefire brokered in November
2012. It is the responsibility of the de facto authorities
in the Gaza Strip to prevent any recurrence of today's
attack. Until today's Palestinian rocket attack, this was
the longest period without projectiles fired from Gaza
in recent years. Both sides should work to consolidate
the calm that prevailed before today. In the past month,
Israeli forces conducted three incursions into Gaza,
and a total of 14 Palestinian civilians were injured by
Israeli fire, mostly while attempting to approach the
border fence. On 21 February a Palestinian fishing boat
was shot at by Israeli forces, resulting in injuries to a
fisherman and damage to the boat.

It is essential that today's rocket attack not be
repeated and not interrupt efforts to strengthen the
understandings reached in November with the assistance
of Egypt. The mechanism established in the Egyptian-
brokered understanding is being implemented, and
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process remains engaged with concerned parties and
the Egyptian mediation.

Israel continued to allow gravel for commercial
use through the Kerem Shalom crossing. Israel has also
allowed Palestinian farmers access up to 100 metres
from the fence with Israel, and Palestinian fishermen
have been able to access up to six nautical miles from
shore. While such steps are welcome, we continue to
advocate for a further extension of the fishing limit to
12 nautical miles, which is necessary for a significant
increase in the catch of the fishermen, but still below
the 20 nautical miles provided for in the 1995 Israeli-
Palestinian Interim Agreement. We also call for
unrestricted entry of all construction materials. Further
measures to lift the closure should include transfers of
goods between Gaza and West Bank, as well as exports
to Israel and beyond.

To further advance this important agenda and
address Israel's legitimate security interests, it is
essential that parallel efforts continue to enforce
the calm and prevent the smuggling of weapons into
Gaza. There have been reports of Egyptian authorities
closing large numbers of tunnels from the Sinai into
Gaza. Separately, Egypt has permitted further entry of
construction material through the Rafah crossing for a
range of Qatar-funded projects.

I would like to reiterate that the full implementation
of resolution 1860 (2009) includes the important step
of overcoming the Palestinian political divide in ways
that can advance the potential for a two-State solution.
In that regard, the Palestinian Central Elections
Commission was able to conduct voter registration from
11 to 20 February, in both the West Bank and Gaza, for
the first time since 2007 - a result of the Cairo accord
on reconciliation. A total of 450,000 new electors
were registered, including 350,000 in Gaza, which
represents a very high turnout. The updated Palestinian
voter register should be available shortly. To that end,
the United Nations encourages Israe1i authorities to
authorize the transfer of registration forms from Gaza
to Ramallah.

Recent opinion polls suggest a popular demand
for inclusion in a democratic process, including
the holding of the long-overdue Palestinian general
elections. Negotiations and ending the divide between
the West Bank and Gaza under the leadership of
President Abbas and adherence to Palestine Liberation
Organization principles remain essential for achieving
the two-State solution. The parties are expected to
meet again soon in Cairo to commence consultations
on Government formation. The United Nations remains
of the view that negotiations and reconciliation is not an
either/or proposition, and should be made compatible
by advancing both in a mutually reinforcing way.

Turning to developments in the region, Syria

continues to be a source of extreme concern for the
United Nations. We are reminded every day of the
heavy toll the civilians in Syria are paying. Citing the
appalling number of civilian casualties, the Secretary-
General strongly condemns the reported ballistic missile
strikes in Aleppo as well as the series of bombings in
Damascus. Let me repeat again the Secretary-General's
call for the need to immediately end the supply of arms
to both sides in this brutal conflict. Let me be clear:
perpetrators of serious crimes will be held accountable.
There is no statute of limitations for war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

In its latest report (A/HRC/22/59), published on
5 February, the independent international commission
of inquiry of the Human Rights Council concluded
that both Government and opposition forces had
become increasingly violent and reckless with human
life. Both have committed abuses amounting to war
crimes, athough the scale of the abuses committed by
the Government side significantly exceeds those of the
opposition. Hospitals, bakeries and bread lines have
been targeted. Whole neighbourhoods have been razed.
Syria's rich cultural heritage is being destroyed.

As predicted, the war has also taken on sectarian
overtones, permeated by opportunistic criminality
and aggravated by the presence of foreign fighters and
extremist groups, as well as by some actions of the
Government, including its affiliated Shabbiha militia.
This is simply an appalling picture. There should be no
room in the future Syria for those who hold contempt
for the beliefs, practices and symbols of other religious
traditions, or who cite secularism as a pretext for trying
to monopolize power predominantely in the hands
of one group. There is no room for sectarianism or
discrimination on any grounds. All communities must
be assured that their rights will be respected.

Regrettably, the warring parties remain locked
in a military logic that is bound to bring more death
and destruction. In that context, the proposal for
dialogue from Mr. Moaz Al-Khatib, President of the
Syrian National Coalition, is a positive development.
The Secretaries-General of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States as well as the Joint Special
Representative have welcomed this initiative. They
called on all parties to engage, at the earliest, in talks
based on the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex), with a view to ensuring a political
transition that would meet the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people, preserve the unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Syrian
nation, and bring to an end the bloodshed, the
humanitarian disaster and the destruction in Syria. The
Secretary-General is encouraged by statements from
Security Council members supporting Mr. Al-Khatib's
proposal.

The humanitarian situation is becoming worse in
Syria, as Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos's
briefing to the Council tomorrow will make clear. She

will provide more details on United Nations efforts to
address the tragic humanitarian consequences of the
conflict, which has left over 4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, including 2 million internally
displaced, and has led more than 900,000 people to
flee to neighbouring countries, including 150,000 this
month alone.

The situation in the Golan also remains precarious,
posing risks to the ceasefire between Israel and Syria and
the safety and security of civilians and United Nations
personnel. In recent days, the Area of Separation saw a
spike in such confrontations. Allow me to reiterate that
the primary responsibility for the safety and security of
United Nations personnel in the Area of Separation and
the areas of limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Syrian Government. Countries with influence should
also impress upon the armed members of the opposition
the importance of ensuring the freedom of movement
and the safety of the personnel of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force in the occupied Golan.

Concern remains high about the ongoing impact
of the Syrian conflict on Lebanon. While the overall
situation in Lebanon remains stable, tensions have
increased in the north-eastern border areas. On
1 February, an operation by the Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) near Arsal resulted in the deaths of a
man wanted for terrorism and of two LAF soldiers.
On 16 and 22 February, there were again tensions in
border areas as a result of cross-border shellings, the
deaths of Hizbullah fighters and threats of escalation.
On 24 February, further fighting along the border
resulted in at least two Lebanese deaths, prompting
President Sleiman publicly to react, stressing the need
for continued commitment to Lebanon's disassociation
policy and urging the Syrian side to refrain from
shooting or firing missiles towards Lebanon's territory.

We are concerned at any actions that risk drawing
Lebanon into the conflict in Syria. Continued reports of
arms transfers to and through Lebanon are contrary to
international obligations. We call on all sides to respect
the integrity of the border and Lebanon's sovereignty,
as well as on all Lebanese parties to honour their
commitments under the Baabda Declaration of June
2012.

On 4 February, a Lebanese court issued arrest
warrants for Syrian General Ali Mamlouk and an
unnamed aide for their alleged involvement in a terrorist
plot in Lebanon, along with former Minister Michel
Samaha. On 20 February, a judge issued indictments
against all three suspects.

The situation along the Blue Line remained generally
calm. However, there was an increase in the number of
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace, notably ahead
of the air strike in Syria on 30 January. The Secretary-
General called on all concerned to prevent tensions or
escalations and to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all countries in the region.

On 21 February, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon
announced the postponement of the start of the trial
provisionally scheduled for 25 March. A new tentative
date is expected to be set soon. The eighth anniversary
of the assassination of the late Rafik Hariri, on
14 February, underlines the need to achieve justice for
past assassinations and attempted ones, including in the
past year.

Meanwhile, consensus has not yet been reached on
a draft law for the Lebanese parliamentary elections
scheduled for June. Free, fair and credible elections in
a timely fashion are important for Lebanon's stability
and continued political advancement. All parties are
therefore encouraged to work to ensure that elections
take place on a consensual basis within the legal and
constitutional timeframe.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that it is our strong
belief that we need to inject new life in the Israeli-
Palestinian political process now. We know that there
are negative forces on both sides, such as those who
fired today's rocket from Gaza into Israel, who draw
strength from stalemate and paralysis. Both sides
have a responsibility to marginalize those forces by
creating the conditions, including trust, for a successful
negotiating process. It is now my hope that the shared
sense of frustration will translate into a shared
sense of urgency. Given the lack of confidence that,
unfortunately, characterizes the Israeli-Palestinian
relationship today, we cannot underestimate how
difficult it will be to develop a serious and substantial
political initiative, with a realistic and not unlimited
timeframe, and one that is collectively supported by all
stakeholders.

But it is our view that one cannot expect progress
this year without the articulation of a credible political
framework to achieve the negotiated two-State solution
that we all hope for and that will best serve the interests,
rights and aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
This is a time for renewed impetus and political will
to end the conflict and the occupation, which has
already scarred the lives of far too many Israelis and
Palestinians for far too long. We need to act now, first
and foremost for the sake of the younger generations.
They deserve a future of peace.

