Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to thank Their Majesties for graciously being with the Security Council today. It enhances the reputation of the Council to have them here. I also want to thank them for the amazing efforts that Belgium has long made on the issue of children in armed conflict. I am very pleased to be able to salute those efforts and the progress that this important dossier has made under Belgian leadership. Talso wish to welcome the ministers here today and thank them for being with us. Finally, I would like to thank the Secretary-General, Commissioner Chergui and Ms. Becker for their important briefings. We have all seen and heard of the dreadful and lasting effects that global conflicts have on children, their communities and their future, so I will not repeat them. Instead, I would like to highlight a couple of case studies that really illuminate how this impact devastates children's lives. In Syria, as stated in the recent report on children's rights by the United Nations Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, children continue to be "[rlobbed of their childhood and forced to participate in a brutal war" (A/HRC/43/ CRP.6, p.1). They have been killed, maimed, raped, abducted and detained. They have been forced to act as combatants and, in the case of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), as executioners. Places where they are meant to be safe and nurtured, such as schools and hospitals, have been targeted. Over 2.5 million children have been displaced in Syria, leaving many at the mercy of the elements and without adequate sustenance or services. And that trend is far from over. As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock told the Council last week (see S/PV.8715), the bombardment of Idlib has seen the continued killing of civilians and attacks on civilian objects, and the displacement of more than 300,000 children in north-eastern Syria since early December alone. And, as the Commission of Inquiry report finds, the mental health of children is and will continue to be deeply affected for years to come. Children and young people have sustained crucial damage to their long-term prospects and a huge number have missed out on years of education. Turning to Mali, children continue to suffer the effects of the ongoing conflict, particularly in central Mali, where they are killed and maimed as direct targets of attacks in the course of intercommunal violence. Insecurity, attacks and threats on schools and teachers, the absence of State authorities and a lack of equipment have led to the closure of more than 900 schools, at the last count. As with Syria, children are suffering both the immediate effects of conflict and long-term effects on their mental well-being, as well as a lack of access to services such as medical care and attention. In Cameroon, the impact of conflict on children in the Anglophone region is significant. Children's education is used as a political bargaining chip by the separatists, who have closed down schools and taken children hostage. UNICEF estimates that 80 per cent ofschools have remained closed since 2016, and the ban on education has affected more than 600,000 children. The scale of the impact of conflict on children is clear, but when it comes to peace and efforts for peace, their needs and their views are often neglected. That is why we welcome the launch today of the United Nations practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. As the guidance points out, the Security Council has highlighted on numerous occasions the importance of integrating child protection issues into mediation and peace processes. Doing so is essential in order to ensure that negotiating parties commit to upholding their international, regional and national child-protection obligations; to guarantee that the special needs of children and young people are taken into consideration and embedded in efforts to build and sustain peace; and to improve the sustainability and success of peace efforts, given the central role of children's issues in reconciliation and development in post-conflict situations. We welcome the Secretary-General's personal investment in the guidance and we look forward to its broad dissemination. I also take this opportunity to urge all mediators, facilitators and negotiators involved in peace and mediation processes to use it as a tool in their work, noting that engaging on issues of children and armed conflict may open doors to discussion of other priorities. In the Arria Formula meeting that we hosted alongside Belgium and Poland in November, the United Kingdom called for the United Nations system to take a more holistic and coherent approach across its departments and agencies to ensure that child protection and development was integrated across the conflict cycle. This guidance is a very good example of that, and we hope there will be further efforts to integrate approaches across the United Nations system. We would like to renew our calls for children's views to be taken into account on issues that affect them, in accordance with best practice, and for the Security Council to do more to implement resolution 2282 (2016), which recognizes that security, development and human rights are closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
