Mr. Nesho (Albania): Let me first congratulate
you, Sir, on the enormous amount of excellent work
being done by your delegation during your presidency
of the Security Council this month with regard to the
situation in the Middle East, as well as to other matters.

At the same time, let me welcome the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael Steiner. My delegation fully supports the
statement that he made today. Albania commends the
great work that he has done - even though he has
spent such little time in the country - as well as his
foresight, maturity, professionalism and determination
to carry out the difficult task of creating a democratic,
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo, ready to be integrated
at some point in the future into the European family.

As you mentioned in a previous Security Council
meeting, Mr. President, during today's discussion we
will review the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to make
several comments. Kosovo is a success story for the
United Nations and the international community. We
saved the nation from the obscure genocidal
philosophy of the previous regime. Reconciliation
between the people, which was desirable but difficult
to arrive at, has been achieved. We are in the process of
creating democratic institutions. Finally, there are
provisional institutions of self-government able to
respond to the will of the people and to take
responsibility.

My Government fully supports the work done so
far by UNMIK, as well as its future activity. We
support the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner. It is essential for all the
parties involved in the region to fully support them in
the successful implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). We believe that the
important - indeed, essential - message of that
resolution, the message sent by the international
community, is not about who will rule or reign over
Kosovo, but about the creation of democratic
institutions and the future of a multi-ethnic society
there, one in which the people can speak freely and,
Albanian and Serb together, choose their future.

We would like to note that democratic activities
and a democratic attitude are the responsibility of a
Government to its people and do not entail the right of
that Government to be compensated by the
international community. At the same time, we would
like once again to stress that the old ideas of creating a
greater Serbia, a greater Croatia or a greater Albania
belong to history; no one should re-activate them.
These provocative ideas are dangerously reborn when
one party is a slave to the past, as reflected in its policy
towards Kosovo and the region.

In conclusion, we would like to say that Albania
fully supports the activities of the Special
Representative, Mr. Steiner, and we believe that there
will continue to be progress in Kosovo in the future,
for the benefit of peace and security in the region, as
well as for the international community as a whole. At
the same time, we would like to stress that, in future
Security Council meetings on this subject, elected
representatives from Kosovo should be present, in
addition to Mr. Steiner.

