Mr. Olsen (United States of America): The
United States voted in favour of this resolution because
it endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation
for a 30 per cent force-level reduction, as well as his
intention to conduct a further review of the mandate,
force levels and concept of operations of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP),
continuing to take into account developments on the
ground and the views of the parties prior to the next
UNFICYP renewal. This resolution is an important
first step in the ongoing examination of UNFICYP.

As we have noted, resources for peacekeeping
operations are under strain as the demand for United
Nations peacekeeping has risen significantly in recent
years. Accordingly, we welcome the resolution's
support for the Secretary-General's request for further
voluntary contributions to UNFICYP from other
countries and organizations.

We note in addition the Secretary-General's
assessment that a recurrence of fighting in Cyprus is
increasingly unlikely, with the emphasis of UNFICYP's
activity moving towards liaison, observation and
mediation rather than the deployment of forces to
prevent the recurrence of fighting and maintain the
status quo.

We also note that the Secretariat team that
conducted the review of UNFICYP sought the views of
the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot sides about the
situation on the ground and the Secretary-General's
observation that both sides, as well as the guarantor
Powers, shared the view that under current conditions
UNFICYP should remain in Cyprus beyond 15 December
2004.

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-
General's report on his mission of good offices in
Cyprus (S/2004/43 7). We agree with the report that the
way ahead to a settlement is for the Greek Cypriots to
articulate with clarity and finality the concerns they
have indicated regarding implementation of the settlement
plan and its security provisions. We continue to support
that report's assessment that Turkey and the Turkish
Cypriots have done everything possible to reach a
Cyprus settlement. We also appreciate Greece's support
for the Secretary-General's effort, including,
specifically, for his final settlement plan.

We reaffirm our support for the Secretary-
General's recommendation in paragraph 93 of the good
offices mission report that, "not for the purpose of
affording recognition or assisting succession", the
Security Council should encourage all States to
cooperate both bilaterally and in international bodies to
eliminate unnecessary restrictions and barriers that
have the effect of isolating the Turkish Cypriots and
impeding their development. We concur with the
Secretary-General's assessment that such a move
would be consistent with Security Council resolutions
541 (1983) and 550 (1984).

We regret that to date the Council has not
endorsed the Secretary-General's report on his mission
of good offices in Cyprus, and we look forward to
Council action in that regard.

I would also note that it is the policy of the
United States Government to ensure that members of
the armed forces of the United States of America
participating in United Nations peace operations are
protected from criminal prosecution or other assertion
of jurisdiction by the International Criminal Court,
including through the possible inclusion of express
provisions providing such protection.

