Mr. Ward (Jamaica): The issue of terrorism
demands our attention, and for that reason we thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. We
thank Mr. Hans Corell for his briefing, which
enumerated the actions taken to combat terrorism and
detailed further action needed by the international
community in this regard.

Jamaica welcomes this opportunity to discuss the
issue of terrorism, which continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
wish to express our appreciation for the initiative to
hold this debate.

The fight against terrorism has intensified
significantly since the General Assembly first
considered the issue in 1972. Since that time,
numerous lives have been lost as a result of
indiscriminate terrorist attacks on civilian populations.
It is regrettable that despite the efforts of the
international community over the past 10 years, the
world is witnessing even more serious manifestations
of terrorism, as terrorists are increasingly resorting to
inhumane actions that are designed to result in a
maximum number of casualties and damage to

property.

Terrorism poses a serious threat to the peace and
stability of nations and to the security and well-being
of their citizens, and it therefore requires a serious
response by the international community. The
indiscriminate death and injury and the damage to
essential services and infrastructure that result from
terrorist acts demand that we support practical efforts
aimed at addressing the causes and sources of
terrorism. The international community must act to
create disincentives for those who support terrorism.
Jamaica condemns all acts of terrorism, and we
believe that the most effective response to these acts
continues to be full cooperation at the international
level. It is in this context that the development of a
more comprehensive legal framework to combat
terrorism becomes a key factor in developing an
organized response to this scourge. In this regard, it
also remains a matter of primary importance that States
strive to ensure that those responsible for terrorist acts
are brought to justice.

We welcome the work done by the General
Assembly to elaborate the convention on measures to
eliminate international terrorism. We hope that the
elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, which will complement the
existing network of various crime-specific counter-
terrorism treaties, will also be concluded in good time.
These legal instruments create the foundation for
addressing terrorism through appropriate cooperation
and information exchange.

The challenges presented by terrorism have been
compounded by globalization and the revolution in
communications technology. Terrorism has thus
become intricately intertwined with transnational
organized crime, which manifests itself in several
forms of criminal activity, including illicit narcotics
production and trafficking, money-laundering and
illegal arms transfers. In any consideration of
terrorism, focus must be placed concurrently on efforts
to counter the trafficking in small arms, which
undoubtedly contributes to the spread and escalation of
terrorism. The international community is therefore
faced with new challenges in its fight against terrorism
and must develop comprehensive strategies and take all
appropriate action in an expeditious and effective
manner to address new and more complex
manifestations of terrorism.

It is in this context that today's debate provides
us an opportunity to examine new and innovative
strategies and to consider the Council's role in
developing systematic and comprehensive approaches
that complement those already being undertaken at the
international level. Though much progress has been
made, much remains to be done by the Council in

S/PVAZAZ

 

fulfilling its role to counter threats to international
peace precipitated by terrorism.

The Security Council has adopted several
resolutions and issued a number of presidential
statements addressing the issue of terrorism. Every
effort must be made to ensure that the Council's
rhetoric is followed by effective action to counter
terrorist activities. By adopting resolution 1269 (1999)
the Council signalled its intention to increase its efforts
to counter terrorist threats to international peace and
security. While the General Assembly has the primary
role in defining the juridical framework and principles
for addressing terrorism, the Security Council has an
important role to play in complementing and
contributing to the collective efforts to counter the
threat of terrorism.

It is in this regard that the Council's resolutions,
including resolution 635 (1989) on illegal acts against
the security of civil aviation and its statement of 31
January 1992, which highlighted the importance of
collective action against terrorism, continue to serve as
important and effective complements to efforts aimed
at addressing this scourge.

Today's debate undoubtedly serves as an
important opportunity for the Council to reaffirm its
condemnation of terrorism and to reiterate its call on
all States to ensure that they do not engage in activities
aimed at assisting, supporting or facilitating terrorist
activities or at harbouring terrorist organizations or
groups. In this respect, we wish to recall the
resolutions of the Security Council which call on all
States to refuse assistance to terrorist organizations.
Those States acting in contravention of these
resolutions are themselves contributing to the scourge
of terrorism. Our deliberations today must be seen as
another step in expressing the Council's readiness to
take necessary steps, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter, to counter terrorist
threats and to put pressure on those who would seek,
whether directly or indirectly, to acquiesce in,
encourage or tolerate those terrorist acts.

