Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and the Government of
Lebanon on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of September. I also thank my good friend
Special Representative Staffan De Mistura for his
briefing and presentation of the Secretary-General's
report on Afghanistan (S/2011/590).

I am pleased to have the opportunity to address
the Council once again. Today's meeting takes place
against the backdrop of yet another recent tragedy in
Afghanistan. A little over a week ago, the enemies of
peace in Afghanistan martyred the Chairman of the
High Peace Council, former Afghan President
Burhanuddin Rabbani. Mr. Rabbani will be
remembered for his distinguished service in the cause
of peace in Afghanistan. But I want to assure the
Council that, despite this national loss, our
reconciliation process will continue. On behalf of the
Afghan people and Government, I convey gratitude and
appreciation for the outpouring of condolences and
support received from around the world.

This year is of particular importance to
Afghanistan. First, it marks 10 years since the end of
the rule of the Taliban, culminating in the opening of a
new chapter in our modern history defined by a
concerted effort to achieve what has eluded us Afghans
for too long: peace, stability and prosperity. Over the
past decade, we have come a long way in our joint
efforts and have much to show for our progress in
building our State institutions, in ensuring our people
with essential services, in enabling democracy to take
root and in upholding the fundamental rights of all our
citizens.

Secondly, this year we also embarked on
transition, an ambitious process by which we Afghans
will take full responsibility for the security of our
country by the end of 2014. As President Karzai
emphasized in his statement to the General Assembly
last week,
"With the completion of the transition process,
we Afghans and our international partners will
achieve the most strategic goal of our 10-year
long partnership: the emergence of a sovereign
Afghanistan that is self-reliant and the peaceful
home of all Afghans; an Afghanistan that is at
peace, and lives in peace with the rest of the
world" (A/66/PV18).

In addition to solid Afghan national resolve, the
success of the transition process will depend on the
continued support of the international community, most
importantly in building the capacity of our national
security institutions.

Alongside the transition of security
responsibilities, we are focused on doing what is
necessary to implement the economic pillar of the
transition process. This will be a more difficult task,
requiring more time and the sustained and long-term
engagement of our international partners during and
after the transition process.

In this regard, we are determined to maximize the
potential offered by our natural resources for
strengthening our economy. Furthermore, we have
prioritized attracting foreign investments and building
our infrastructure. Such efforts will enable us to play a
key role in broadening, deepening and strengthening
regional economic integration by reviving our historic
place as the land-bridge between Central Asia, South
Asia and the Middle East. In that connection, we are
pleased that the new Silk Road initiative has gained
momentum. We welcome the constructive discussion of
last week's ministerial meeting here in New York,
which we co-chaired with Germany and the United
States.

Despite our efforts to stabilize our country,
Afghans are still suffering an endless campaign of
terror carried out by Afghanistan's enemies. Over the
past months, terrorists have launched sophisticated
attacks, including the raid on the Inter-Continental
Hotel, the attacks on the NATO compound and the
United States embassy in Kabul, and a chain of
targeted assassinations of a number of Afghanistan's
prominent and high-profile national figures.

The continued spate of attacks, which originate
from terrorist sanctuaries and safe havens beyond our
borders, has generated an unprecedented level of anger
and frustration among a wide spectrum of Afghan
society. Let me stress once again our repeated call for a
definitive end to these sanctuaries, which are not only

harming Afghans, but also destabilizing the region as a
whole.

To help end the conflict and meet the demands
and aspirations of the Afghan people for a durable,
dignified and inclusive peace, we will work to bring
back to social, economic and political life all members
of the armed opposition willing to renounce violence,
sever ties with terrorist groups, and accept our
Constitution, including respect for human rights and
women's rights in particular.

Despite the assassination of Mr. Rabbani, which
was intended to disrupt the peace process, the High
Peace Council will pursue its mandate for peace and
reconciliation. If reconciliation is to succeed, we must
have the support of regional and international partners.
In this connection, I emphasize the importance of a
result-oriented role for the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan. At the same time, we wish to remind the
Council that we are committed at all costs to defeating
those bent on the destruction and destabilization of our
country.

We have an important political calendar ahead of
us. We look forward to the Istanbul and Bonn
Conferences, scheduled for November and December.
In Istanbul, together with the countries that make up
the heart of Asia and other international partners, we
will focus on defining a new vision for regional peace
and development. We will do so by soliciting concrete
commitments to enhancing confidence-building,
security and political cooperation centred around
Afghanistan. A peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan is not only an Afghan need; such an
Afghanistan is an absolute precondition for peace,
security and prosperity in the region.

In Bonn, we will brief the international
community on our achievements over the past decade,
with a specific focus on transition, reconciliation and
regional cooperation. We will also share our vision for
the 10 years after transition on consolidating our
stability, democracy and economic development.
Above all, in Bonn we will call upon the international
community for continued assistance beyond 2014.

Indeed, Afghanistan is already working with our
friends and allies on mapping out our enduring
partnerships, including with the United States, the
European Union and NATO. These partnerships will
help guarantee our security, stability and future
economic development.

The United Nations has played a very important
role in our achievements thus far, for which we remain
grateful. On the way forward, this role must be
adjusted to reinforce Afghan sovereignty. We welcome
all efforts to ensure a more integrated, effective and
one United Nations approach, and look forward to the
joint comprehensive review of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. In
that connection, let me thank the Secretary-General
once again for authorizing the joint review.

In conclusion, I thank all Afghanistan's partners
in the international community for standing beside us
in solidarity as we strive to strengthen the foundations
of peace, democracy and development we have laid
down in Afghanistan. Over the past decade, we have
come a long way in our joint efforts, which is
something we can all be proud of. But we are still not
completely out of the woods. We in Afghanistan are
convinced that, together with the support of the
international community, we will succeed in realizing
our common vision of a peaceful, stable and
democratic Afghanistan, a country that is self-reliant
and a factor for regional and global peace and
cooperation.

