Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United Kingdom for convening this meeting on security,
development and the root causes of conflict. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I thank
Ambassador Olof Skoog, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Ouided Bouchamaoui, President
of the Tunisian Confederation of Industry, Trade and
Handicrafts and Nobel Peace Prize laureate of 2015, for
their briefings.

Clearly, the lasting maintenance of international
peace and security requires the settlement and
prevention of ongoing conflicts, particularly by way
of socioeconomic development. Chad endorses the
Secretary-General's appeals for the entire United
Nations system, including the Security Council, to
work for conflict prevention. It is all the more important
as conflict prevention is the main topic of three
reports on the review of United Nations peacekeeping
operations - the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the report
of the Secretary-General, entitled "The future of
United Nations peace operations: implementation of
the recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations" (S/2015/682) and the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) - and the
study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We welcome the General Assembly's contribution
to building normative prevention capacity and the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoys
and Special Representatives, which have contributed to
the prevention of more than one conflict worldwide.

Nonetheless, several observations attest to the fact
that we are far from a world free of war, especially given
the increasing number of conflicts. Moreover, a number
of reports and analyses attest to the limits pertaining to
prevention. In those circumstances, it is clear that the
current United Nations methods for conflict prevention
need to be reviewed. In order to do that, it is necessary to
deal with the root causes of conflicts, which include the
issue of development. In general, the causes of conflicts
can be endogenous, notably involving problems
stemming from governance and political transitions,
the inequality and exclusion of certain segments of the
population and issues of public management. There are
also exogenous factors, characterized by assaults on the
sovereignty of States and the outside destabilization of
regimes and institutions, which lead to new conflicts
that wind up becoming more costly and devastating,
although they could have been prevented.

Concerning Africa, the various reports on the root
causes of conflicts and the promotion of lasting peace
and development, the Secretary-General has continued
to stress that there should be greater emphasis on the
link among peace, security and development. That is an
extremely close relationship, which has been recognized
by various United Nations bodies, in particular by the
Security Council. For Chad, there can be no peace and
security without development. In that connection, it is
important that concrete actions be taken to bolster the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, while bringing
women and youth on-board in the process. Although
the Security Council does not treat with issues of
development, there are nonetheless questions relating
to development that have an impact international peace
and security.

The matter of migrants is a perfect example.
Approaches implemented by the Security Council that
take into account matters of security, governance and
development, such as the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, should be welcomed. The actual
implementation of the strategy, however, is still taking
some time. We would therefore call for an emphasis
to be placed on the situation of youth and women in
the implementation of the strategy. We also call on
international organizations, financial institutions
and donors to finance activities seeking to create
opportunities for that part of the population. Those
types of initiatives will serve to combat threats such as
violent extremism and terrorism.

To conclude, we call upon the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendations contained in
his most recent report (S/2015/730) on the causes of
conflict and promoting lasting peace and development
for Africa. Support for the African Union's Agenda
2063 in particular will help shore up development for
the sake of peace of security.

