Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank the three peacekeeping operations Force
Commanders for their briefings. Their first-hand
accounts and suggestions are useful and can help us to get
a better idea of the actual deployment of peacekeeping
operations and the difficulties peacekeepers face, all
of which is in the interest of improving the efficiency
of the Security Council's work. China wishes to pay
its highest tribute to all the Force Commanders present
and all the United Nations peacekeeping personnel on
duty for their professionalism, which is characterized
by dedication, devotion and willingness to sacrifice.

The current international situation has undergone
profound changes. There are threats from terrorist
organizations, situations where there is no peace to
keep, and changes in terms of the growing size of
peacekeeping operations. These new developments
demand that peacekeeping operations adapt to the
changing times and embrace innovation.

China supports the initiative of the Secretary-
General to conduct a review of peacekeeping operations
during the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations. We welcome the report submitted by the
High-level Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations. We expect to further refine mandates,
strengthen capabilities and improve the efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping operations through this
review, so as to bring peace and hope to host countries
and peoples and realize the goal of maintaining
international peace and security.

Taking into account the views expressed by the
three Commanders, I wish to make the following four
points on peacekeeping operations.

First, the basic principles of peacekeeping
operations should be upheld unswervingly. The
success of the United Nations arises from compliance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and peacekeeping operations are no
different. Continued adherence to the basic principles
of peacekeeping operations - the consent of the
parties to the conflcit, impartiality and non-use of force
except in self-defence and defence fo the mandate - is
fundamental to guaranteeting their smooth conduct,
ensuring their fairness and impartiality and winning
the support of Member States. We must persist in
applying those principles. At the same time, we must
refine the rules of engagement and guidelines for troop-
contributing countries in the light of changes in the
peacekeeping environment and mission mandates, so
as to better implement the principles of peacekeeping
operations.

Secondly, the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be practical and feasible. In order
to solve regional hot-spot issues, we need to have a
comprehensive policy. Peacekeeping operations cannot,
and should not, attempt to resolve every problem. In
deploying peacekeeping operations and in formulating
and reviewing peacekeeping mandates, the Council
should enhance its political guidance, ensure that
the mandates correspond to the actual needs of host
countries and clarify priority priorities, targets and
specific focuses for various stages. At the same time,
we should review the results of the implementation of
peacekeeping operations in a phased manner, and, in
keeping with the changing environment, we should
make adjustments to the mandates of the missions and
the deployment of forces. Peacekeeping operations
should, in accordance with the changing environment
and the will and consent of host countries, determine
timely exit strategies.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations should respect
the sovereignty of the host countries. With regard to
protecting civilians, host countries have the primary
responsibility for protecting their own civilians.
Peacekeeping operations should conform to Council
mandates and international law and should assist
host countries in implementing the responsibilities
for protecting civilians. The scope and conditions of
the protection-of-civilians mandate should be clearly
defined and should be recognized and supported by
host countries and the international community in
order to prevent misunderstandings and animosity from
the local people. Peacekeeping operations should also
be equipped with the necessary resources in terms of
personnel, equipment and logistics.

Fourthly, peacekeeping operations should strengthen
their capacity-building and scientific management.
China attaches great importance to the challenges
facing peacekeeping operations in an asymmetrical
security environment. We hope that the Secretariat
and peacekeeping missions will collaborate closely
with troop-contributing countries and host countries
to come up with tailor-made standards governing the
safety of installations, in keeping with the changing
security situation in mission areas, and with detailed
rules for the organization, training and management of
United Nations peacekeeping personnel.

At the same time, there is a need to strengthen the
scientific planning and management of peacekeeping
missions in order to optimize our financial resources.
We should utilize the existing resources more efficiently
and avoid unnecessary duplication and waste.

China firmly supports and actively takes part in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. At present
there are more than 3,000 Chinese peacekeepers on
duty in about 10 peacekeeping operations in countries
such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali
and South Sudan. The Chinese infantry unit assigned
to the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan is fully deployed. This is the first time
that China has sent an infantry unit to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China has also decided to
send a helicopter squadron to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. This will be the
first time that the Chinese Air Force will join the Blue
Helmets. China is willing to send more peacekeeping
police and police affairs experts to be part of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We will continue to support African countries in
strengthening their capacity-building and to promote
the United Nations support of the African Union, as
well as other regional organizations, in conducting
peacekeeping operations. We are ready to work with the
international community to contribute positively to the
healthy development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and to make new and positive contributions
to the noble cause of maintaining international peace
and security.

