Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, we thank
you for convening this important debate and for your
personal presence today.

Germany attaches great importance to the fight
against organized crime. We highly appreciate the
efforts of the delegation of Togo in this regard. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks and Mr. Fedotov for his briefing at the outset.

We all have been observing with growing concern
the impact of transnational organized crime on peace
and security in West Africa and the Sahel region. The
spread of transnational organized crime - including
illicit trafficking of drugs, arms and human beings, as
well as the more recent phenomenon of acts of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea - and insecurity go hand in
hand. They are facilitated by weak governance,
insufficient implementation of the rule of law and
corruption.

Countries in conflict and post-conflict situations
are especially vulnerable to organized criminal
activities, which in turn further undermine the already
weak institutions of these States. In recent years, links
between organized crime and terrorist groups, made in
a mere partnership of convenience, have become a
particular concern.

Most of the States in West Africa and the Sahel
lack the capacity and equipment to address criminal
and terrorist activities effectively. At the same time,
transnational organized crime is a security threat that,
by definition, cannot be tackled by any one country
alone. A comprehensive, integrated approach is
required to address transnational organized crime.
Cooperation and coordination between the affected
countries, as well as with and between the regional
organizations must be strengthened. Information-
sharing in particular needs to be improved.

To this end, several instruments and initiatives
have been developed, yet their effective
implementation requires enhanced national and
regional capacities, strong political will and sufficient
financial support. Let me highlight the following
example.

At the global level, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
the so-called Palermo Convention, including its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, is of
particular importance. We welcome the recently
developed United National Office of Drugs and Crime
framework for action providing guidance on how to
implement the Protocol against the Smuggling of
Migrants, and we encourage all States parties to make
use of this helpful instrument. The Palermo
Convention, like other United Nations conventions
focusing on organized crime and illegal drugs, provides
important legal tools to counter these scourges of
humanity.

At the regional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Regional Action
Plan 2008-2011 represents a promising framework for
combating illegal drug trafficking and organized crime
in West Africa. It should be extended to 2012 and
beyond, and its implementation should be accelerated.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Office in West Africa and INTERPOL
have played a crucial role in assisting the ECOWAS
Plan through the West Africa Coast Initiative. Its focal
points for cooperation - the so-called transnational
crime units - could serve as an example for other
regions.

The Judicial Regional Platform of Sahel
countries, established in 2010, is aimed at
institutionalizing judicial cooperation in preventing
and combating organized crime, corruption, drug
trafficking and terrorism. We encourage other States in
the region to join that Platform.

Effective regional and international cooperation
in the fight against transnational organized crime relies
heavily on the stability and capacities of the individual
partners involved. National capacities therefore need to
be strengthened, and root causes need to be addressed
in countries susceptible to organized crime. That
includes the promotion of the rule of law and of good
governance in fostering socio-economic development.

Germany has been working together with
countries in West Africa and the Sahel region, as well
as with regional organizations and the United Nations
agencies concerned, in fighting transnational organized
crime, including through addressing its root causes. In
that regard, I should like to mention our support for the
Global Container Control Programme, which is aimed
at ensuring the effective control of container cargo in
several West African countries, in order to suppress
and prevent drug trafficking from Latin America via
West Africa to Europe.

Furthermore, we support capacity-building
projects aimed at enhancing the rule of law and the
justice systems in C6te d'Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia, the
Niger and Sierra Leone. We also support the activities
conducted by ECOWAS in States of the region to
enhance police capacities in post-conflict situations.

Germany also cooperates with C6te d'Ivoire in
the control of small arms and light weapons by
supporting the relevant authorities, by training and
capacity-building, and by developing arms-collection
mechanisms at the community level. We contribute to
the European Union's Sahel strategy, which addresses
both development and security issues and is aimed at
strengthening regional cooperation.

With a View to dealing with the long-term
socio-economic root causes of transnational crime, we
would recall that just a week ago agreements
establishing the West African Science Service Centre
on Climate Change and Adapted Land Use were signed
in Lome. That forward-looking initiative is designed to
respond to climate change and to preserve sustainable
livelihoods in the region. Climate change certainly
constitutes one of the root causes of the current food
crisis in the Sahel.

Germany recently allocated €12 million in
additional funds for food aid in the region, and the
European Union is increasing its food aid from
€95 million to €124 million. We hope that concerted
efforts will help to overcome this humanitarian crisis.

Let me conclude by pointing out that my
delegation associates and aligns itself with the
European Union statement to be delivered later.

