Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome and thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing, for introducing
the report on the implementation of the peace
agreement (S/2015/300, annex), and for the work being
accomplished by his Office in ensuring steady progress
in the consolidation of the multinational State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. At the outset, we would like to
declare the strong support of the Republic of Angola for
the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in accordance with the Dayton
Peace Agreement. In our statement, we will focus on
three main issues: the general political enviornment,
challenges to the General Framework Agreement for
Peace, and objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

Concerning the political environment, we welcome
the new Government established on 31 March, six
months after the general elections. Despite coalition
agreements signed at the federation and entity levels,
disagreement over the distribution of ministerial posts
delayed the formation of the Government, justifying the
View expressed in the High Representative's report on
the need to improve the electoral process, including by
reforming the electoral law and relevant constitutional
provisions. Thejoint declaration on tripartite presidency,
confirming the commitment to institutional reforms
at all State levels in order to prepare the country for
future European Union membership, is an important
political development as well, as is the statement of
the European Union Foreign Ministers on the need
for meaningful progress in implementing the reform
agenda for European Union membership application.

The initiative launched by the Foreign Ministers
of Germany and the United Kingdom in November
2014 - now a European Union initiative - offers
Bosnia and Herzegovina a real opportunity to make
progress towards integration into the Euoprean Union.
We expect that the decision adopted by the Council
of the European Union, adopting the European Union
Stabilization and Association Agreement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, will effectively enter into force on
1 June and that it will provide the road map for its full
integration into the European Union, guaranteeing
the future of a united, sovereign, multi-ethnic, stable,
prosperous and developed country.

With respect to the challenges of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace 20 years after the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, we are
concerned about statements made by senior officials
of Republika Srpska advocating the dissolution of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Such acts undermine
cohesion among the multi-ethnic communities in the
country and national reconciliation. In this regard, we
call upon political leaders to refrain from such rhetoric
and to make every effort towards national reconciliation
and the integration of all ethnic communities in order
to consolidate the positive achievements made so far.

We are deeply concerned that many young people
from Bosnia and Herzegovina have been joining
terrorist groups in the Middle East. We call upon the
authorities to adopt energetic measures and policies to
counter such negative and dangerous trends.

On the issue of objectives and conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, it is
regrettable that, in the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina made limited progress towards meeting
the outstanding objectives set by the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council as a prerequisite for
the closure of the Office, as recalled in resolution 2183
(2014).

Finally, the Republic of Angola welcomes the
fact that the overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains calm and stable. We acknowledge
the activities of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea in support ofpeace and security
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the work
carried out by the Office of the High Representative to
maintain a safe and secure environment in accordance
with its mandate and are confident of a new future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, hoping that the new leaders
will look beyond the divisions ofthe past and will focus
on good governance, rule of law and economic reforms
towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

