Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my profound appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, for his very
clear and enlightening briefing.

Because of the interest in, and demand for, stability
between Central Asia and the Middle East, Egypt
commends the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
in combating terrorism, as well as its relentless efforts
to establish sovereignty over its territory. At the same
time, we welcome the preparations that are under way
for the mid-2018 elections. We also support the Afghan

authorities in their social and political efforts to uphold
security and promote development. However, we would
like to emphasize the following areas.
First, at the heart of security there is a collective
commitment to fighting terrorism in all its guises,
within the framework of an international counter-
terrorism strategy, and to fighting extremist ideologies,
particularly given the escalation of unprecedented
security incidents and terrorist attacks in Afghanistan
this year. With that in mind, we encourage partners
to engage in close cooperation at the national and
international levels with the Afghan authorities in order
to combat drug trafficking, especially trafficking in
opium. Those efforts must go hand in hand with efforts
to combat terrorism, as drugs are a major source of
financing for terrorist organizations and armed groups.

My second point concerns development in the
light of economic and investment initiatives that are
undertaken by neighbouring countries and regional
and strategic projects. At the head of those initiatives
are the Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference and the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan concerning the
economy and cooperation.

Thirdly, in political terms, there must be support
for the Afghan Government to uphold internal peace
and reinforce national dialogue, particularly within the
Quadripartite Coordination Mechanism.

Fourthly, with regard to international affairs, a
strategic review was recently conducted of UNAMA to
evaluate the Mission and its effectiveness. The review
corroborated the central importance of UNAMA.
With that in mind, we welcome the crucial mission
undertaken by the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.

Fifthly, on regional issues, particularly the role
of organizations and regional entities in Central Asia,
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, it is
important to connect efforts with the positive results
of the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan held last
year, and as a follow-up to the commitments that were
a result of the Conference.

I would be remiss if I did not stress the importance
ofmoving towards the definition a United Nations vision
that is integrated and that includes all of the elements
that I have just outlined, in order to uphold peace and
stability and to ensure development and prosperity in
Afghanistan and the region of Central Asia.

