Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): As this is the first time
that my delegation takes the floor in the Council this
year, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country's election to the Security Council and
on your assumption of the presidency so early in your
term. You have indeed hit the ground running. Let me
also take this opportunity to congratulate the other
new members of the Council - Chad, Chile, Jordan
and Nigeria - on their election and assumption of
membership in this important organ. I am confident
that, under your stewardship, the Council will continue
to execute its mandate efficiently and diligently, as has
been the case already.

The topic under discussion addresses issues that are
at the core ofthe founding principles ofthe Organization
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
thank the Lithuanian delegation for the concept note
(S/2014/75, annex), which focuses on incorporating the
rule of law as an integral component of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates. However, we wish to
highlight the international dimensions of the rule of
law, which are fundamental for peaceful relations
between States and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The three pillars of the United Nations
agenda - development, peace and security and human
rights - are inextricably linked with the rule of law.
The settlement of disputes by peaceful means is an
integral element of that nexus. The Charter provides a
sound framework for the peaceful conduct of relations
between States. The United Nations should continue to
be guided by the principles of the sovereign equality
of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, support for self-determination, non-aggression,
the peaceful coexistence of States and respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States. Guided by our commitment for nations to
live in harmony, the United Nations should continue
to champion the resolution of conflicts by peaceful
means within the confines of international law. Small
States like my country depend upon the rule of law
for protection against arbitrary actions by the rich and
powerful.

As agreed in the Declaration of the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at National and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted by Heads of State and
Government on 24 September 2012, States must refrain
from the threat of or the use of force to solve disputes.
The tendency to resort to force at every instance only
undermines peace, security and the rule of law. Recent
experiences amply demonstrate that heavy-handed
interventions do not bring about sustainable solutions,
but only cost more lives, destroy and degrade economic
and social infrastructure and often leave behind more
unstable situations than those they intended to solve.
More often than not, local people are left to pick up the
pieces from a trail of destruction.

The Declaration on the rule of law also cautions
States to avoid the use of unilateral measures against
other States. Regrettably, such measures, which are
employed by powerful States against weaker ones
to achieve narrow political objectives, undermine
socioeconomic development efforts. As we frame
the post-2015 development agenda with a focus on
eradicating poverty and transforming our economies,
we hope that developing country efforts will not
continue to be hindered by such unilateral coercive
measures. Poverty in all its dimensions is a threat to
peace and security.

Zimbabwe supports international efforts to end
impunity and to hold accountable those responsible
for atrocities. We are, however, concerned that the
international criminal justice system is operated in
a selective manner. The impression it has created is
that it is focused only on soft targets in the developing
world, mainly in Africa. That perception undermines
confidence in the system. Testimonies from those
in countries where it has been applied suggest that it
has neither facilitated peace nor reconciliation. For
the system to be credible, it has to be seen to apply
universally and equally to all.
At the national level, we are committed to
enhancing the rule of law by strengthening law
and justice institutions. Our new Constitution has
strengthened the separation of powers and enhanced
the independence of the judiciary. Independent watch-
dog bodies and commissions, such as the Zimbabwe
human rights, anti-corruption and media commissions,
have been established to protect the rights and interests
of citizens. We believe that the United Nations is an
appropriate forum for the sharing of best practices, and
capacity-building can be of assistance in facilitating
cooperation in those areas. Peace and security can be
guaranteed only through multilateralism, dialogue and
cooperation in addressing the root causes of conflict,
and not through force and coercion.

