Major General Kandji (spoke in French): I have
been asked to speak to the Council about the United
Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), specifically the transition phase from
the European Union Force (EUF OR) to MINURCAT,
and about our achievements and to briefly touch upon
deterrence.

I believe - and the Council would agree - that
MINURCAT can be considered a textbook case. The
youngest of the missions, it will be the first to expire
after a mere 21 months of activity. Over these 21
months, the Mission has gone through all the most
critical phases of any deployment. First came the
launching of the Mission, followed by the transition
from EUF OR to MINURCAT, and now the drawdown
announced for 31 December 2010. These three key
phases divide the life of the Mission into three
sections.

(spoke in English)
The first section phase of nine months during
which we went at a slow pace because of the
difficulties related to the start-up of the Mission. It was
only when we had achieved a comfortable operational
capability that we entered the second phase, which was
five months long. We were almost at the high point of
the Mission when we were suddenly asked to stop our
operations and start to withdraw.

(spoke in French)

The three periods were nine months, five months
and seven months, respectively.

(spoke in English)

Naturally, those three phases affected our
achievement's on the ground. Because of the slowness
of our deployment, during the first nine months we had
to accept a great many compromises because we were
not there. It is always difficult to reverse a compromise
once it is established. Here, we did not respect one of
the main aspects of any relief operation, where it is
necessary to be strong in relieving a weak unit. But in
this case, we had a weak unit to relieve a strong unit.
That is where all our difficulties arose.

And our achievements were many. From the
military point of view, we were not really in a warfare
situation, so the military challenge was not too great.
But starting in December, we were at the peak of our
deployment - and that peak, again, was 65 per cent of
our authorized mandate. We never reached the total
authorized strength, and that was how we had to face
all those difficulties.

In the other areas of the Mission - civilian and
police - the achievements were even greater. I am not
here to speak on the substantives, but the Mission has
done a lot for prisons, the judiciary, gender issues, and
so forth. It has changed mindsets and behaviours in
eastern Chad in only 21 months. It is important to
mention here that, as part of our activities, we had a
military unit that drilled for water in that part of the
country, where it is said that they will now have water
for 50 years. And we know how important and strategic
water can be in that part of the world.

To sum up, I am not ashamed of what we have
done. Much has been said, even in this Chamber,
accusing the force of having done nothing. So this is a
divine opportunity for me to denounce that; it was not
true. We have done a lot; the statistics are here. And I
think that the seminar that will be conducted in
September, as planned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, will cover all these issues,
give clarity and just re-establish the truth for the
record.

The last point I was asked to touch on was
deterrence. The principle of deterrence is to show force
simply in order to be respected, so that the others know
that these guys have the capability to operate and to
make the difference. What does that mean? You need to
have adequate resources. It means presence and force
projection all over the theatre. One cannot deter if one
cannot move, and in order to move, we come back to
the same old story of having helicopters, and so forth.

I think I will just end here, and express the hope
that the difficulty we had at the beginning will not

come back again. It took too long for us to start the
Mission. The mandate to start the Mission was signed
two months before 15 March. I think we should agree
that we need at least six months for the resources to be
developed and force generation to happen, and then we
will be in better shape to avoid the difficulties I had to
go through during the start-up phase.

