Mr. Eler (Turkey): For centuries, the Middle East
has been the cradle ofpeaceful coexistence for different
communities. People of the Middle East lived side by
side, considering their differences to be a richness.
Today we are witnessing a dramatically different
atmosphere, and we all need to try to understand the
root causes of this situation.

Sectarian policies and brutal responses to the
legitimate demands for democracy in the region have
been coupled with feelings of resentment due to the
growing discrimination, xenophobia and Islamophobia
in other parts of the world. This has created a poisonous
mixture that has eroded the culture of tolerance and the
social fabric of the region and has acquired dimensions
that affect global security.

We should be clear on two facts: first, terrorism
and extremism are not a Middle Eastern phenomenon.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.

Secondly, as violence and terrorism have no
religion, we should not treat their victims differently
or selectively based on their identity, nationality or
religion. Even though the majority of the victims of
violence and persecution in the Middle East are Muslim,
our empathy, solidarity and efforts of protection should
encompass all.

With this understanding, let me briefly touch upon
some particular situations.

The conflict in Syria has just entered its fifth year.

The situation has gone from bad to worse and
become a threat to global peace and security. That said,
I will not take up the Council's time by responding to
one delegation's renewed baseless allegations, which
we categorically reject.

The focus of most of the interventions today was
the shocking persecutions and abductions committed
by Daesh. The brutality of its actions should not lead
to any illusions about the conditions that have caused
the emergence of this terrorist organization. The
regime brutally suppressed the legitimate demands of
Syrians and, in an attempt to prolong its grip on power,
continues to employ all kinds of instruments, including
chemical weapons and barrel bombs, and to commit
mass violations of human rights.
Nor should Daesh's appalling actions mislead
us about our priorities on the way forward. The
international community and the Security Council
need to address the root cause of the problem in Syria
through resolute action. A genuine political transition
in accordance with the Geneva communique is the only
solution in that regard.

In Iraq, Shiite and Sunni Muslim communities
were among the first to be persecuted by Daesh. These
persecutions, which targeted all segments of Iraqi
society, have forced 2.2 million civilians to flee their
homes. We support the Iraqi Government with respect
to the challenge it faces. We have so far provided 750
truckloads of humanitarian aid to Iraq for all Iraqis,
including Sunnis, Shiites, Turkomans and Christians.
In response to the aid appeals made by the governorate
of Mosul and the Kurdish regional Government of Iraq,
they were delivered to populations in need in Mosul,
Telafer and Sinjar, in addition to the aid channelled
to the central regions of Iraq affected by the ongoing
cr151s.

We have also built three camps in northern Iraq for
internally displaced persons, with a total capacity of
37,500. We are in the process ofbuilding a fourth camp
in Kirkuk in coordination with the local authorities.
These efforts will continue. Last but not least, we have
opened our doors to the victims. Almost 200,000 Iraqis,
including Christians and 20,000 Yazidis, have sought
refuge in Turkey.

This figure is in addition to the over 1.7 million
Syrians whom we are hosting without any regard for
their ethnic or religious background.

In the framework of this important open debate,
we cannot ignore the plight of the Palestinians who
are living under occupation. They are deprived of their
basic rights and are subject to discrimination. We need
to keep in mind that the historical injustice against the
Palestinian people is fuelling hatred, alienation and
radicalism. The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on the two-State vision would not only
enable the Palestinians to enjoy their basic rights
and freedoms, but also constitute a key step towards
tackling instability and radicalism in the region.

In today's world, no region or community is
immune to violence and persecution. We are witnessing
a global phenomenon, and we need to address it through
global cooperation. Our common struggle against
discrimination, intolerance, racism, xenophobia,
anti-Semitism and Islamophobia is more relevant than
ever.
With this understanding, we co-launched the
Alliance of Civilizations initiative in 2005. We have
insistently argued that our commonalities outweigh
our differences and that fostering intercultural
understanding can help create an environment of
mutual respect.

The fundamental rights and freedoms of the peoples
in the Middle East can be secured by eliminating the
conditions that provide a fertile environment for Daesh
and other terrorist groups. Political, democratic and
inclusive solutions to the multiple crises in the region
will be essential in this regard.

Despite all of the difficulties, we believe that the
peoples of the Middle East will succeed in their efforts
to revitalize their deep-rooted culture of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence.

Lastly, in relation to the remarks made by the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Armenia, let me make the
following points, which were also highlighted in the
messages by President Erdogan and Prime Minister
Davutoglu in April 2014 and last January, respectively.

Turkey shares the suffering of the Armenians and is
endeavouring, with patience and resolve, to re-establish
empathy between the two peoples. It is indisputable that
the last years of the Ottoman Empire were a difficult
period, full of suffering for Turkish, Armenian,
Kurdish, Arab and millions of other Ottoman citizens,
regardless of their religion or ethnic origin. It is the
duty of humankind to acknowledge that the Armenians
remember the suffering experienced during that period,
just like every citizen of the Ottoman Empire.

However, we disagree as to the portrayal of events
as genocide. The narratives of the parties do not as yet
converge. What we need to do is forge a shared andjust
memory. In that regard, let me once again stress that
our desire to share in the pain, to heal the wounds and
to re-establish friendship is sincere. Our course is set
towards a horizon of friendship and peace.

