Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first of all
join previous speakers in thanking the delegation of
Costa Rica for convening this open debate and in
welcoming you, Mr. President, as you personally chair
this very important high-level debate. We should also
like to warmly acknowledge the participation of His
Excellency Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama.

The issue of collective security and disarmament
continues to be one of the most critical and enduring
issues on the agenda of the United Nations. At a time
when the world needs precious resources for
development, there is no doubting the need to reduce,
and eventually eliminate, nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, as well as to restrain the

vast military expenditures on conventional arms. This
is even more urgent when considered in the light of the
need to address several global economic and social
crises and achieve the Millennium Development Goals
and other development goals. Military spending and
the insecurity caused by proliferation emerge clearly as
challenging hurdles to the implementation of our
multilateral objectives.

The United Nations and its bodies have been
seized of this issue for a long time. Numerous
decisions and resolutions of the General Assembly
have long been devoted to disarmament. Yet, large
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction still threaten
our existence. On top of the insecurity that this has
caused, countries continue to increase military
spending and invest in even more armaments in the
quest for a higher level of security. Resources that
ought to be invested in peace and development are
thrown into this effort, which is fuelled by the fear that
by disarming or reducing armaments they would
compromise their security. A way must be found to end
this trend.

Indonesia has been among the countries that seek
to break that vicious cycle by consistently supporting
the objective of regulating arms, and of disarmament,
particularly as regards weapons of mass destruction. It
is our firm belief that reduction in armaments and the
total elimination of weapons of mass destruction would
create a stable atmosphere and the confidence to
further increase the level of security.

In the face of stagnation in the efforts towards
disarmament and the regulation of armaments - most
conspicuously the inability of the Conference on
Disarmament to move forward with its work for over a
decade now - and the continuing increase in global
military expenditure, we think this is an opportune time
for the Security Council to make a contribution to the
effort to find a solution.

We, therefore, encourage the Council to play its
proper role, in cooperation with the General Assembly
and other relevant bodies. However, in doing so, we
would like to emphasize that the Council should not act
as a legislative body. Whatever plan is formulated by
the Council should consistent with Article 26 of the
United Nations Charter, be submitted to Member States
for their consideration.
We believe that, as a complement to multilateral
arrangements, a regional approach to collective
security and disarmament may contribute to enhancing
efforts towards arms reduction and confidence-building
measures. On the model of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Security
Community, regional security would be based on
sharing norms and rules of good conduct in inter-State
relations, effective conflict resolution and prevention
mechanisms and post-conflict peacebuilding activities.
It would also promote political development, which
would reinforce political stability. The shaping and
sharing of norms in ASEAN is also crucial to building
peace in the wider Asia-Pacific region. The Treaty of
Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia is a code of
conduct for relations between ASEAN and external
Powers. Signatories and acceding States renounce the
use of force and bind themselves to peaceful settlement
of disputes in the region, serving as a model for other
regions. The South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone is a further ASEAN contribution to the
non-proliferation and disarmament agenda.

Indonesia advocates a world in which financial
and other resources now being squandered on the
acquisition, development and maintenance of
armaments are allocated to pressing humanitarian and
development needs, both by countries that manufacture
and produce arms and by those who trade in or
purchase them.

We would therefore appreciate a more active role
by the Security Council on the issue of reduction and
regulation of armaments, and disarmament, like that of
other forums. But, more important, regardless of the
forum, we call for political will among all Member
States to recognize this issue for its unusual win-win
potential: to strengthen international peace and security
while also liberating immense resources worldwide
that can be used to guarantee development and general
human advancement.

