Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): Over the past
year, the Council has invited me to brief it every month,
and sometimes several times a month, and I thank you
for it, Sir. Your interest has been commensurate with
the stakes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Happily, my statement today shall be delivered in a
context that is far more tranquil than was the case in
December and January.

The handover of power in the wake of the elections
was the first in the recent history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and unrolled peacefully. I
cannot fail to note that the results of the elections
were contested by a segment of the opposition, but we
can also say that the majority of Congolese welcomed
the inauguration of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
with relief.

I should like to point out that the electoral process,
which continues with the scheduled elections of
governors and the holding of postponed polls in four
constituencies owing to insecurity and the Ebola
epidemic, is a decisive step towards strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, the reactions of
some political parties and their supporters to the results
of last week's senatorial elections represent a challenge
and reveal the fragility of the political process under
way in the country.

In his first public statements, the Head of State
has pledged to work for the consolidation of peace,
the rule of law and democracy, and the promotion and
protection of human rights. These statements of intent
have been followed by concrete actions, especially with
respect to the casing of tensions. Some political and
opinion prisoners have just been released; meetings
held across the country by the opposition leader and
presidential candidate Martin Fayulu have unfolded
without hindrance; and announcements have been
made in favour of the return of political exiles. It is
important to continue in this direction, especially by
maintaining spaces for expression by the opposition,
which we encourage to work closely with all political
parties, the Congolese authorities and civil society.

Discussions for the formation of a new Government
are currently under way between Front commun pour
le Congo, which won the majority of legislative seats
at the national and provincial levels, and the Cap pour
le changement platform, which had supported the
candidacy of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi. The two
parties agreed last week on the upcoming appointment
of aformateur, who will in fact be the future Prime
Minister of the Republic.

It is hoped that the new Government team will
soon be established and operational and able to work
according to the guidelines of President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi's programme. Indeed, the expectations of
the Congolese population are immense and it is crucial
not to make them wait too long or to disappoint them.
These expectations of a better life, as embodied in
easier access to education, care and employment, and
an existence free from fear and threats, is one of the
greatest challenges facing the authorities currently
in place.

I assure Council members that I continue to take
to heart the mission of good offices that they have
entrusted to me in order to support this political
transition and thereby advance the peace and security
agenda in the Republic. Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There are now real opportunities to strengthen
peace and security in several provinces of the country
following the voluntary surrender of hundreds of
fighters of armed groups or their expressed wish to do
so, thanks to the change of presidential power.

Another current challenge will be to seize these
opportunities in time by quickly identifying options
for reintegrating these ex-combatants into their
communities. The task will not be easy but it is urgent to
act together here, in the field and in capitals to provide
qualitative support to the Congolese authorities. We
have noted other positive signs in this regard, including
the reaffirmed will of regional actors at the level of
States and organizations to tackle the root causes of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
we hope, thereby end it.

(spoke in English)

Despite the opportunities arising to achieve lasting
peace and security in the country today, I remain
concerned about several developments in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In North Kivu's
Grand Nord region, where the now second-largest Ebola
outbreak in history is ongoing, the Allied Democratic
Forces and Mayi-Mayi elements continue to attack
civilians and the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) alike, and in several
cases, humanitarian workers and the personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
MONUSCO'S force, including the Intervention Brigade,
and the Mission's police component, are sparing no
effort to protect civilians and to support the FARDC
and the Police nationale congolaise in the provision of
security, while our civilian teams are actively pursuing
good offices, advocacy and dialogue initiatives at the
local level.

Following recent attacks against Ebola response
centres in Butembo and Katwa, MONUSCO redeployed
additional uniformed and civilian personnel to support
the security of Ebola response staff and operations and
efforts to address community resistance to the response.

Meanwhile, preparations are ongoing in the area for
upcoming national and provincial elections at the end of
this month. We will be doing our utmost to prevent and
mitigate any risk of violence throughout this politically
sensitive period. In Minembwe, South Kivu, clashes
have flared up between the militias oftwo communities,
resulting in significant displacements ofthe population,
with the potential of further deterioration. MONUSCO
is supporting a reinforcement of the FARDC presence
in the area, in addition to our own standing combat
deployment and intercommunal mediation efforts. In
these hotspots, the Government has shown a genuine
willingness to respond quickly, although the capacity
of national security forces must be further enhanced.
However, in North and South Kivu, structural violence
is profoundly entrenched and conflict dynamics related
to identity, access to land and resources and regional
issues have taken deep root in the fabric of everyday life.

To sustainably address those drivers of insecurity,
concentrated engagement will be needed in the period
ahead, including with the region. Even areas not
historically affected by armed conflict can prove fragile,
and we must collectively encourage the Government to
take measures to preventively address and mitigate the
potential causes of violent conflict country-wide. The
shocking violence in Yumbi in December 2018 -which,
as documented by our Office, left at least 535 dead,
111 wounded, 19,000 displaced and many homes and
livelihoods destroyed - is a troubling reminder of how
quickly violence can escalate.

In the light of the opportunities and the challenges
that exist in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at this time, I encourage the Security Council to
continue to support the consolidation of that which
has been achieved in the country in recent months and
to support the country in addressing the remaining
threats to peace and security. We must support the
Government in its efforts to honour the expectations of
the Congolese population to advance political dialogue
and collaboration and seize the opportunities we are
now seeing for a sustainable reduction of armed groups
in some areas.

