Mr. Aass (Norway): Allow me to associate Norway
with the words of congratulation extended to you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. We wish you every success in the
execution of this important mission.

Since the late 1980s there has been a positive trend in
Latin America towards democratization and peaceful
resolution of conflicts. A milestone in this regard was the
signing on 29 December last year of a final peace
Agreement in Guatemala, which put an end to an internal
armed conflict that had been ravaging the country for 36
years, causing the death of 150,000 people and displacing
a million men, women and children.

The peace Agreement came as a result of arduous
negotiations between the Guatemalan Government and the
guerrilla movement, the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional
Guatemalteca (URNG). The negotiations which started with
an accord in Oslo, in March 1990, establishing the format
for formal talks. The perseverance and pragmatism shown
by the negotiating parties bode well for the handling of the
important challenges with respect to the social, economic
and reconciliation issues which now confront the
Guatemalans.

Guatemala is a poor country in a purely economic
sense, but rich in history, traditions, culture and ethnic
diversity. A majority of the population is of indigenous
origin, and they have paid a heavy price in terms of
social injustice and the sufferings of war. The Guatemalan
people deserves a better tomorrow, and the peace
agreement represents a historic opportunity in that respect.

The international community and the United Nations
have played an essential role in the Guatemalan peace
process. The patient and constructive mediation by the
United Nations since 1994, coupled with the constructive
engagement and encouragement of the Group of Friends,
contributed in a significant way to the peaceful outcome
of the conflict. Now the weapons have been silenced.
However, peace is not merely the absence of war. There
cannot be peace in Guatemala without development,
education, tolerance and equal opportunities. Today the
Guatemalans are eager to construct a better Guatemala.
To assure a smooth transition to the new phase of
reconstruction and reconciliation, Guatemala is, however,
still in need of some help from its many friends. Some of
this will be assistance provided by donor countries and
international institutions. But to assist the Guatemalans in
the process of beating swords into ploughshares, the
Secretary-General has recommended the attachment to the
United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA) of a group of 155 military
observers and the requisite medical personnel.

Norway, as a member of the Group of Friends, has
co-sponsored the draft resolution authorizing military
observers in Guatemala. The reintegration of the URNG
into civilian life is a crucial element of the peace process.
Considering the heavy toll which has been exacted from
its people throughout the armed conflict, it is our hope
that no extraneous issue will be allowed to impede the
endeavours to assure Guatemala a better future. In this
respect, the members of the Security Council, and its
permanent members in particular, bear a very special
responsibility. My Government therefore urges the
Security Council to adopt the present draft resolution.

If the international community is prepared to
accompany Guatemala a bit further on the road to peace
and normalization, the Guatemalan experience may
become a model of constructive and effective
international solidarity.

 

There is much at stake in the vote today. It is in the
hands of the Security Council to give peace a chance in
Guatemala.

