The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister of External Relations of Brazil.

I am greatly pleased that Council members have
adopted such a positive response to our proposed
debate on the interdependence among peace, security
and development. In addition to thanking the
Secretary-General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the representative of the World Bank
for their statements, I would particularly like to thank
the Ministers of Germany, Colombia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Portugal and India and the Vice Minister
of Gabon for their presence among us today.

Allow me to start by making a brief historical
digression before looking at some of today's challenges
and suggesting courses of action.

As we are all keenly aware, the United Nations
was created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war by avoiding a repetition of the mistakes
made after World War I. An important aspect of that
approach involved parallel initiatives aimed at creating
improved economic and social conditions for the
recovery of the countries that had been most severely
ravaged by World War II, whether they had been the
victors or not. Instrumental in the success of that effort
was the Marshall Plan, which embodied the notion that
a more stable and peaceful international order required
not only a credible system of collective security, but
also what we might call a recovery or development
agenda.

Even though the term "development" was not in
use then, the Charter of the United Nations already
incorporated the idea of interdependence between
peace, security and development. Article 55, on
international economic and social cooperation, states
that:

"With a view to the creation of conditions
of stability and well-being which are necessary
for peaceful and friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, the United
Nations shall promote: a) higher standards of
living, full employment, and conditions of
economic and social progress and development".

In subsequent years, the concept of development
was further refined through the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean - ECLAC -
and the first United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, UNCTAD. In the aftermath of the
decolonization process, demands for improved terms of
trade and increased development assistance would
motivate, in the 1970s, the adoption of a General
Assembly resolution calling for a new international
economic order (resolution S-VI/320l). The right to
development was recognized in a General Assembly
declaration in 1986 (resolution 41/128, annex), and in
2000, the General Assembly established the
Millennium Development Goals, thereby calling
attention to the centrality of combating poverty to our
overall agenda.

Over the past two decades, challenges to peace
and security brought before this Council have followed
new patterns. Once the East-West rivalry was
superseded, many situations placed before the Council
involved parts of the developing world recently
emerged from colonialism in vulnerable conditions. In
some cases, their plight was made worse through the
proxy wars of the bipolar period.

I am not implying that the most serious threats to
peace are to be found today in comparatively poorer
and less developed places. That would be a serious
misreading of both the current international scenario
and historic trends. Many of the situations we are
called upon to deal with in the Security Council -
from East Timor to Haiti, from Liberia to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - involve societies
that do not, in and of themselves, represent a global
threat to peace and security. Yet these are countries that
have, to varying degrees, suffered conflict and
instability in the context of pre-existing situations of
poverty, unemployment and fragile institutions, among
other conditions, and that deserve our differentiated
attention.

We are convinced that purely military or security
strategies will not, by themselves, be able to
adequately deal with the overwhelming majority of
today's situations of conflict. The Security Council has
indeed already recognized this by incorporating
reconstruction tasks into peacekeeping mandates. As
early as 2001, the Council noted the need to enhance
peacebuilding activities by formulating a strategy
based on the interdependence among sustainable peace,
security and development in all its dimensions.

But the main point I would like to make in our
debate today is that we can do more and we should be
able to do better. We are not proposing to reconfigure
the responsibilities of different United Nations organs
or agencies, or to transform this Council into a
development programme. Today's debate will, in our
view, achieve its objective if it contributes to raising
awareness of the importance of associating
development with the security strategies we conceive
for sustainable peace. This is particularly relevant
when dealing with situations in Africa and the Middle
East and the one situation in the Americas that is part
of our agenda, namely, that of Haiti.

From the early stages of the development of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Brazil,
with the invaluable support our Latin American
partners and others, has argued for mandates that
incorporate reconstruction and peacebuilding activities
in parallel with peacekeeping actions. I am particularly
gratified that we are in the Council with India and
South Africa, which through IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa) have been making a very important
contribution - as our friend from South Africa
mentioned earlier - to Haiti, the occupied Palestinian
territories and several other places.

The same perception has guided us in leading, for
the past three years, the Peacebuilding Commission's
configuration for Guinea-Bissau, a sister lusophone
country, where the linkage between security and
development is very plain to see.

Sustainable peace implies a comprehensive
approach to security. Without economic opportunity,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in and
of themselves rarely lead to the desired results.
Peacebuilding activities such as support to youth
employment and the provision of basic services play an
essential role in increasing support for peacekeeping
missions, and therefore they have a bearing on the
missions' political sustainability on the ground.

Unfortunately, we are all aware of the worrying
levels of frustration sometimes associated with the
presence of the United Nations in certain parts of the
world. We believe this situation could improve if the
Council were also to focus on the positive impacts of a
well executed, integrated strategy on the part of the
agencies, funds, programmes and international
financial institutions.

With these considerations in mind, increased
cooperation by this Council with the Economic and
Social Council is clearly needed, as is greater
interaction between this body and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

The PBC came into being to fill an institutional
gap in the United Nations. It was born out of the many
bitter lessons the United Nations learned from countries
lapsing and relapsing into conflict and instability. Its
mission is to act as a catalyst or coordinator, within and
beyond the United Nations system, for support and
dedicated efforts in consolidating peace and promoting
development in countries emerging from conflict, apart
from its mandate as a source of advice when there is a
risk of conflict.

I hope today's debate will enhance the ability of
the United Nations, and this Council in particular, to
help post-conflict societies move from a vicious circle
of violence and instability into a virtuous circle of
peace, security and development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security and its readiness to strive for
sustainable peace in all situations under its
consideration.

"The Security Council underlines that
security and development are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and are key to attaining
sustainable peace. The Council recognizes that
their relationship is complex, multifaceted and
case-specific.

"The Security Council reiterates that, in
order to support a country to emerge sustainably
from conflict, there is a need for a comprehensive
and integrated approach that incorporates and
strengthens coherence between political, security,
development, human rights and rule of law
activities and addresses the underlying causes of
each conflict. In this regard, the Council affirms
the necessity to consider relevant economic,
political and social dimensions of conflict.

"The Security Council affirms that national
ownership and national responsibility are key to
establishing sustainable peace. The Council
reaffirms the primary responsibility of national
authorities in identifying their priorities and
strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding, with a
view to ensuring national ownership.

"The Security Council reemphasizes the
importance of considering and initiating
peacebuilding activities from the earliest stages
of planning and implementation of peacekeeping
operations, including through clear and
achievable mandates. The Council stresses the
importance of clarity of roles and responsibilities
of the United Nations peacekeeping operation and
the United Nations country team and other
relevant actors for the delivery of prioritized
support to a country consistent with its specific
peacebuilding needs and priorities, as outlined by
national authorities, in order to ensure effective
integration of effort. The Council recommends
that particular focus be given to improved
integration of United Nations effort where
peacekeeping missions are operating together
with peacebuilding activities of other United
Nations actors, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.

"The Security Council notes that successful
implementation of the many tasks that
peacekeeping operations could be mandated to
undertake in the areas of security sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
rule of law and human rights requires an
understanding of and acting with a perspective
28

which takes into account the close interlinkage
between security and development. In this
context, the Council notes with appreciation the
contribution that peacekeepers and peacekeeping
missions make to early peacebuilding, including

through creating a conducive environment which
enables economic recovery and the provision of
basic services. The Council acknowledges that
this contribution can help to establish and build
confidence in the mission.

"The Security Council undertakes to
consider how peacekeeping operations can best
support national authorities, as appropriate, to
articulate peacebuilding priorities, and acting in
accordance with these priorities, can both support
other national and international actors to
implement peacebuilding activities and undertake
certain early peacebuilding tasks themselves. The
Council underlines that reconstruction, economic
revitalization and capacity-building constitute
crucial elements for the long-term development
of post-conflict societies and in generating
sustainable peace, and, in this regard, attaches
special importance to national ownership and
stresses the significance of international
assistance.

"The Security Council notes that in matters
relating to the maintenance of international peace
and security under its consideration, conflict
analysis and contextual information on, inter alia,
social and economic issues is important, when
such issues are drivers of conflict, represent a
challenge to the implementation of Council
mandates or endanger the process of
consolidation of peace. "In this regard, the
Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that his reporting to the Council contains such
contextual information.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance it attaches to the sustainability of
peace in post-conflict situations. In this regard, it
reaffirms that the overarching objective of
peacekeeping missions should be to achieve
success through creating the conditions for
security and sustainable peace on the ground,
thereby allowing for reconfiguration or
withdrawal of the mission.

"The Security Council recalls the role
played by the illegal exploitation of natural
resources in fuelling some past and current
conflicts. In this regard, it recognizes that the
United Nations can play a role in helping the

States concerned, as appropriate, upon their
request and with full respect for their sovereignty
over natural resources and under national
ownership, to prevent illegal access to those
resources and to lay the basis for their legal
exploitation with a View to promoting
development, in particular through the
empowerment of Governments in post-conflict
situations to better manage their resources.

"The Security Council encourages close
cooperation within the United Nations system and
with regional, subregional and other
organizations on the ground and at Headquarters
in order to properly engage in conflict and post-
conflict situations, in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations, and expresses its willingness to consider
ways to improve such cooperation.

"The Security Council underlines that
integrated action on the ground by security and
development actors needs to be coordinated with
the national authorities and can significantly
contribute to stabilizing and improving the
security situation and ensuring the protection of
civilians. The Council also notes the importance
of cooperation with civil society in this context.
The Council affirms that sustainable peace and
development cannot be achieved without the
inclusion of all relevant stakeholders and
underlines that women must be included as active
participants in all stages of peacebuilding, peace
agreements and development programmes. The
Council expresses its willingness to engage in
dialogue, where necessary, on specific situations
on its agenda with other actors, including United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
international financial institutions.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States, particularly those represented on the
governance structures of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, to promote
coherence in the United Nations work in conflict
and post-conflict situations.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and its readiness to make greater use of the
Commission's advisory role. The Council further
recognizes the need for coordination and dialogue
with the Commission. The Council calls upon the
Commission to continue to promote an integrated
and coherent approach to peacebuilding and to
seek to ensure that development and security-
related activities supported by the Commission
are mutually reinforcing.

"The Security Council highlights the
contribution that the Economic and Social
Council can make in addressing economic, social,
cultural and humanitarian issues and underlines
the importance of close cooperation in
accordance with Article 65 of the Charter of the
United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under symbol S/PRST/2011/4.

I recognize the presence of the Foreign Ministers
of Costa Rica and Slovenia.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Rene
Castro Salazar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica.

