Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my Government, I wish first of all to convey
our grief to the Government and people of Turkey on
the recent tragedy that cost so many lives. We also
convey our condolences to Saudi Arabia on the death
of Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I am very grateful to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for the interesting report on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, in which he describes to us a disturbing scene
of confrontation that is very worrying.

In recent months, we have seen the renewed and
ongoing expression of the rightful demand of peoples
in defence of their freedoms and fundamental rights,
which for so long have been ignored and violated. That
clamour that has been spreading in the entire region
must lead to the strengthening of democratic
institutions.

We welcome the progress and the reforms that
have already started to bear fruit, as in the case of
Tunisia with the elections for the Constituent Assembly
that took place this weekend. Likewise, we value the
efforts made by the Egyptian people and Government
towards an ordered democratic transition.

We can say the same about the new Libya that is
now starting to take shape. Its people, masters of their
destiny, have decisively marked out the path of
freedom amid pain and suffering. The time has come
for Libya's democracy, the rebuilding of its social
fabric, and the opportunity to lay the foundations for a
stable and developing future. We wish its people every
success in that task and offer our cooperation and
support where they deem it appropriate.

We hope that in the case of Yemen, resolution
2013 (2011) adopted last week by the Council, along
with the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council,
will contribute to a national dialogue that is not only
necessary but urgent for a harmonious coexistence that
would lead to the strengthening of institutions and
meet the rightful demand of its people.

A cause of concern continues to be the very
serious situation in Syria and the ongoing use of
violence. We call an end to the violent repression and
confrontation and for reason and dialogue to prevail.
Reforms must take place immediately and produce
tangible results so that its people can benefit from them
as soon as possible.

On the Palestinian question, for many years we
have expressed our view clearly in favour of a
comprehensive, structured and lasting solution on the
basis of the principles of the United Nations Charter
and the noble goals of international peace and security.
We understand and support the aspiration of the
Palestinian people to have a State. We therefore
reiterate that we support the goal of establishing a
viable Palestinian State living in peace alongside
Israel, with defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders. However, it must be the result of
an agreement that guarantees coexistence between
those two peoples.

Fully convinced of that, we once again
underscore that negotiation is the only possible and
robust path to achieve that objective. Ending the
settlement activities that we have always condemned,
as well as less threatening language as a result, we
hope, of the recent release of prisoners, will contribute
to that.

We support the Quartet statement on the Middle
East of 23 September because we believe it to be a
concrete proposal that may bear fruit in so far as the
parties accept the set timeline. We hope that the parties
manage to agree a viable agenda and clear negotiating
terms at the meeting to take place on 26 October.

In the context of that initiative, the Colombian
Government contributed to the invitation to dialogue as
a result of the Quartet's proposal through direct and

discreet actions of President of Colombia Juan Manuel
Santos Calderon and the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
who have had individual exchanges with the senior
officials of Israel and Palestine. It entailed discreet
good offices promoting dialogue and understanding
since we believe the time has come to firm up a peace
process.

Palestinian children and young people have the
right to grow up in hope. The new generations of
Israelis deserve to enjoy peaceful relations with their
Arab neighbours. We must all do our best to ensure that
that noble becomes a reality and that we find peace.

