Ms. Sunday for their briefings. The Chairman is aware
that the Transitional Government of National Unity
submitted its October 2016 report. The previous report
was in March. So far, JMEC has not raised any concerns
to the Transitional Government of National Unity over
the implementation of the chapters of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Aside
from the lack of the resources needed to implement
chapter II, relating to security arrangements, the delay
in the implementation of article 14 of chapter I is largely
attributable to the Chair of the National Constitutional
Amendment Committee.

We are delighted to report that the Chair of the
Committee reported to Juba two weeks ago, and
all efforts are being made to review the legislation
necessary for the reform, consistent with chapter IV of
the peace agreement. We wish to advise that it includes
the incorporation of the agreement into the constitution
of the Republic of South Sudan.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
has repeatedly declared its firm commitment to
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. In fact, it has already taken
practical steps to that end in order to achieve lasting
peace. It has established the Transitional Government
of National Unity of the Republic of South Sudan,
the Transitional National Legislative Assembly, the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee and
the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, among other
things. It has also implemented political inclusivity
at the national level, as stipulated in the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. In
other words, various political forces are represented
in the Government's composition, in line with the
peace agreement.

In an effort to revitalize peacebuilding, the
Transitional Government of National Unity came up
with a plan for reconciliation and national dialogue
using a bottom-up approach - starting within the
communities and all the way up to the national level.
The Government has also welcomed the Action Plan
for Peace and Reconciliation, launched by the South
Sudan Council of Churches, as a means of reinforcing
Government peacebuilding efforts. The Transitional
Government of National Unity welcomes all
stakeholders to join that effort. However, it is important
to note that the peace agreement in South Sudan was
not based on individuals, but rather on various parties.
Therefore, it should not be held hostage by individuals
who have chosen to self-exile for reasons best known
to themselves.

The implementation of the peace agreement can, and
will, go on without those individuals. National dialogue
is a process, and those who are not ready to join now
may join whenever they feel ready to do so. National
dialogue is not an alternative to the peace agreement in
South Sudan. The Transitional Government of National
Unity has actively engaged with the United Nations
through its interactions with various delegations that
have visited the country. That includes the delegation
of the Security Council in early September 2016, with
which it signed a joint communique; the delegation of
the United Nations strategic assessment team in early
October 2016; the Head of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to
Afghanistan in early November 2016; the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Mr. Dieng; the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and his assessment team; and the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2206 (2015).

The Transitional Government of National Unity
has also cooperated closely with UNMISS through
its technical team. The two parties have reached a
common understanding on various issues of concern,
in particular with regard to the deployment of a
regional protection force, which the Government has
accepted without preconditions. They agreed on other
issues of concern as well, including, but not limited
to, freedom of movement for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), unhindered
access for relief personnel to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all populations in need in South Sudan
and the establishment of a one-stop-one-shop system
to facilitate and expedite the issuance of visas, timely
customs clearance, flight clearance and the elimination
of bureaucratic obstacles, among other things.

As was indicated earlier, the Transitional
Government of National Unity has accepted the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force without
any strings attached. It took further steps by allocating
a plot of land to host the proposed force that covers
an area of 2.514 square kilometres. Furthermore, it
has approved requests for a second plot of land for
the Regional Protection Force. UNMISS has already
submitted the names of those who are to join officials
in Jubek, along with state authorities, to inspect and
survey that land.

During a visit to the country's capital on Tuesday,
21 March, Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, said that the
first units of the regional protection force for South
Sudan would be deployed within a few weeks. Having
cooperated with the United Nations, the region and
the entire international community, the Transnational
Government of National Unity had expected that its
efforts would be positively acknowledged, rather than
negatively reported.

The Transnational Government of National Unity
strongly rejects as baseless any accusation of looming
genocide or ethnic cleansing in South Sudan. South
Sudan is a diverse country composed of approximately
60 tribes and ethnicities that have been living in
peace and harmony since ancient times. The conflict
in South Sudan is political, and characterized by a
power struggle on the part of those who seek to take
power by force: it has no ethnic dimension, despite
what has been alleged by certain circles. Using the
ethnic divide serves to muddy the waters and, perhaps,
warrants the application of punitive measures against
the Government.

We commend the Secretary-General for the recent
statement he made at his press conference at the United
Nations Gigiri complex, in which he said that the risk of
genocide in South Sudan had significantly diminished.
Although, in our view, the statement did not go far
enough to debunk the allegation of looming genocide,
it is nevertheless a welcome development and a step in
the right direction.

Furthermore, the Transnational Government of
National Unity categorically rejects any accusation
that its forces target civilians, or use sexual Violence
as a tactic of war. The Government has only carried
out its constitutional mandate to protect civilians from
attacks by rebels and maintain law and order, which
are among the primary constitutional functions of
any Government in the world. It has also exercised
its right to self-defence when attacked by negative
forces and criminal elements, which is in line with
international law, including Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

The Transnational Government of National Unity
therefore appeals to the United Nations, the region
and the entire international community to encourage
and support the genuine efforts of the Government
to implement the peace agreement, specifically the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, including the transitional
security arrangements, so as to enable the achievement
oflasting peace and stability in the country and end the
immense suffering of the people. The Government is
ready to do its part. The challenge is how to deal with the
spoilers ofpeace and the political opportunists. We have
recently witnessed the formation of new rebel groups
that are bent on dislodging the Government by military
means. Even the Chairman of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission recently remarked that those
new groups are composed of opportunists and criminals
who have no coherent political agenda. Unless a clear
message is sent to all rebel groups, they will continue
to derail peace efforts.

The Transnational Government of National Unity
thanks the United Nations and the donor community
for their interventions in, and response to, the famine
in the two counties of the former Unity state. The
Government, however, takes issue with the accusation
that it is responsible for the famine. It is also important
to note that other parts of the country are affected by
drought as a result of climate change. The Transnational
Government of National Unity therefore takes this
opportunity to state that it will spare no effort to address
the situation and to call on the international community
to assist in addressing that urgent matter.

The call for imposing targeted sanctions and an
arms embargo would further aggravate the situation
and hit vulnerable groups the hardest, as previous
experience has shown.

I should like to conclude by reiterating my
Government's stand on the implementation of the
peace agreement in letter and spirit. The Transnational
Government of National Unity accordingly appeals
today to the United Nations, the region and the entire
international community to encourage and support the
genuine efforts of the Government in implementing
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, including the transitional
security arrangements, so as to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the country and eliminate the immense
suffering of the people.

The meeting rose at 5.30 pm.
