Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like tojoin those who have spoken before me in thanking
you, Mr. President, as well as Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Mr. Ertugrul Apakan and Mr. Stephen O'Brien for their
briefings to the Security Council on the worsening of
the situation in the Donbas region.

Egypt expresses its serious concern about the
continuation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine, and
especially with regard to the supplies of electricity,
water and heat, which have been cut off and which
affect a great number of civilians in very difficult
weather conditions in Ukraine. Egypt calls upon all the
parties to respect an immediate cessation of hostilities
and to fully implement the ceasefire and prevent any
provocation that could create further stress.

Furthermore, we must guarantee full access for
humanitarian assistance to the entire region affected
by the conflict with a View to improving the living
conditions of the citizens, above all in the light of the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the region. In
that context, Egypt welcomes the agreement expressed
by the Council on press statement SC/12700, which was
issued on 31 January.

Egypt believes that we should seek a peaceful
solution to the conflict in keeping with international
commitments. We support the Minsk agreements
and believe that they are the appropriate framework
for dealing with this crisis, which must be resolved
in the context of the region, through mediation
efforts among the stakeholders and with respect and
appreciation for both parties to the conflict and the
entire international community. That is essential if we
are to reach the ultimate goal of a political solution to
the crisis in Ukraine and to achieve peace and stability
in the country and a lasting settlement of the conflict
in the region.

Egypt also urges full compliance with resolution
2202 (2015) and calls on all the parties involved
to implement the Minsk agreements' package of
measures and procedures, particularly observance of
the ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the
institution of essential constitutional reforms and the
holding of elections in the Donbas region. Those should
be accompanied by a settlement of the military crisis
brought on by the conflict in coordination with all the
parties, without exception.

Egypt reaffirms its confidence in the various
formats for peaceful negotiations between the two
parties. We urge those parties to redouble their efforts
to reach a peaceful settlement of the crisis that can
fulfil the people's aspirations within a framework of
international legitimacy, to show restraint and to avoid
any military escalation. We reiterate our firm support
for all efforts designed to achieve a political solution
to the crisis, including those in the Normandy format.

