Mr. Williamson (United States of America): We
would like to welcome our Somali friends, Foreign
Minister Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim and other members of
the Transitional National Government, back to the
Security Council. We thank them for their statements to
the Council this morning. We note their efforts to
comply with the provisions of Council resolution 1373
(2001) and appreciate their contributions to date in the
war against terrorism.

The United States remains committed to working
with all Somalis dedicated to the tasks of combating
terrorism, ensuring a secure environment for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, promoting
economic development and overcoming long-term
governance challenges.

We thank the Secretary-General for the recent
report on Somalia and share his concern over the lack
of progress on political reconciliation. We, too, remain
concerned over continued violence throughout
Somalia. In particular, we condemn those responsible
for the recent death of a worker for the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the kidnapping of the
UNICEF programme director based in Mogadishu.
Those incidents point out once again the very dangers
that United Nations personnel face each day in
Somalia.

We commend the United Nations for its continued
efforts to assist civilians in need through the provision
of humanitarian assistance and promoting economic
development where feasible. We share the Security
Council's concern over the worsening humanitarian
situation, which is compounded by the level of
violence, which threatens to reduce humanitarian
assistance operations.

The United States supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation for the establishment of a
friends of Somalia group constituted both in Nairobi
and here in New York. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Mr. David Stephan, the former
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his dedicated and tireless work. We welcome
Mr. Winston Tubman, the Secretary-General's new
Representative for Somalia, and pledge to work with
him as we move forward.

We fully concur with the assessment of the
security situation in Somalia, based upon the
recommendations of the United Nations headquarters
inter-agency mission and their recommendation not to
re-establish the peace-building office in Mogadishu at
this time.

As members recall, the inter-agency composition
of the United Nations mission was intended to ensure
that those United Nations departments responsible for
conducting operations in Somalia would have an
opportunity to evaluate the security situation on the
ground from the perspective of their humanitarian and
political operational requirements. Those officials
contributed to the final assessment contained in the
report. We believe that those United Nations
departments, in conjunction with United Nations
security officials, are best suited to make a judgement
concerning the United Nations presence in Somalia.

We remain committed to removing the terrorist
threat in Somalia and ensuring against the use of
Somalia as a terrorist base. To that end, we call upon
all parties in Somalia to observe the provisions of
Council resolution 1373 (2001).

We also seek to prevent developments in Somalia
from threatening regional peace and stability. Security
Council resolution 733 (1992), which calls for a
general and complete embargo on all deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Somalia, remains in
force and is relevant to the fight against terrorism as
well as to the quest for peace and reconciliation. All
States have a continued obligation to implement
resolution 733 (1992) fully and completely. We
appreciate the leadership demonstrated by Bulgaria in
convening the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 733 (1992) and stand ready to assist the
Committee in developing strategies that will result in
an effective arms embargo for Somalia.

We support Somali and regional efforts intended
to promote national reconciliation and to overcome the
long-term governance challenges that terrorists have
exploited to make Somalia a base. Specifically, we call
upon all Somali parties to attend the April national
reconciliation conference in Kenya - sponsored by
President Moi, endorsed by both Ethiopia and Djibouti
and carried out under the auspices of the
lntergovernmental Authority on Development -
without reservation or preconditions. We also call upon
neighbouring States to play a constructive role in
efforts aimed at Somali political reconciliation and
request that they encourage all Somali parties to attend
the conference and approach it with the goal of
fostering political stability in Somalia.

We believe that, ultimately, the Somali people
control their own political destiny and must choose to
lay down their arms and end the interminable cycle of
violence that has engulfed Somalia since 1991.
Nonetheless, we also recognize that the international
community and we must do our part. The international
community has once again turned its attention to
Somalia and is ready to demonstrate its commitment to
assist in political reconciliation and economic
development. It is now up to the Somali people to turn
away from "warlordism" for their "States" which seek
to play a constructive role, to demonstrate their
willingness to put the failures of the past behind them
and to work together for a new Somalia.

