Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, back amongst us in the Security
Council. Your presence here to preside over the debate
on the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and the phenomenon of mercenaries' threats to peace
and security in West Africa is one indication of the
importance of this issue to the region from which you
hail.

I would also like to extend a very warm welcome
to the Ministers from several other African States and
to the representatives of the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

We congratulate Guinea, our brother Ambassador
Traore and you yourself for the initiative to hold this
meeting.

It is alarming that 8 million illicit small arms are
in circulation in West Africa. Intra-State conflicts have
created a staggering demand for small arms and have
contributed to the continued proliferation of bandits,
rebel groups, mercenaries, child soldiers and militia in
the entire subregion. As was succinctly expressed by
the Secretary-General in his opening remarks today,
these problems sustain conflicts, hinder development,
undermine human rights and humanitarian law and
exacerbate violence, especially against women and
children.

Pakistan was affected by the problem of small
arms in the context of the Afghanistan war, which
began in 1979. Two years ago, we adopted a
comprehensive strategy to control and eliminate this
problem. We have had considerable success, although
this is not yet complete. Our campaign against illicit
arms is continuing, but we would be happy to share our
experiences with friendly countries.

We feel that the problems faced by West Africa
are complex and multifaceted, affecting stability and
peace within and outside individual countries. We need
to address peace and stability in the entire subregion,
not one country at a time. We agree with the
assessment of the Secretary-General that efforts must
be made to remove tensions between the concerned
countries and also to find ways to collectively address
their problems. To this effect, we fully support the
efforts that have been made in ECOWAS and urge the
United Nations to take a more proactive role to find a
comprehensive solution to West Africa's problems.

Efforts must focus on the implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We also endorse several of the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report on
small arms, submitted to the Security Council last year
in document S/2002/1053.

With the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on
an African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons on 1 December 2000, the
African Union articulated for the first time a continent-
wide strategy for tackling illicit small arms on that
continent. Similarly, the renewal by ECOWAS of its
Moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons last year is a sincere
effort to address the issue.

The ECOWAS Moratorium can be strengthened
through several of the recommendations that are
reflected in the draft presidential statement before us,
that is, through transparency, better end-user
certificates, effective implementation of United
Nations sanctions and well-conceived disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Arms-producing and exporting countries should also
enact stringent laws and regulations to ensure that their
exports to West Africa do not contribute to
destabilizing the region. The implementation of DDR
programmes in the affected countries needs generous
financial support of the donor community.

We are facing what one could call a series of
complex crises in West Africa and elsewhere. It is
obvious that only a comprehensive approach that takes
into account social, economic, political, security and
other factors can address effectively the problems
associated with small arms and light weapons. The
international community should help deal with the
complex causes of instability in West Africa. In
particular, the economic and social problems afflicting
the region must be tackled through comprehensive
support for development, greater market access, debt
relief, enhanced official development assistance,
human resources development and a focused effort to
eradicate HIV/AIDS.

We at the United Nations, and especially in the
Security Council, need to devise a new composite
method and a composite approach that draws together
all those who can contribute to solutions to these
complex crises in one place. I suggest that we discuss
this composite approach in the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
already exists.

