Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): In
recent weeks my delegation has frequently had
opportunity to express its views on the current serious
crisis in the Middle East. I shall therefore limit myself
to commenting on what we consider to be priority
aspects.

First of all, with regard to the immediate causes
of the current crisis in the Middle East, we reiterate
once again that the primary responsibility falls on
Hamas and Hizbollah due to their provocative and
irresponsible actions in recent months. Argentina has
already unequivocally condemned those actions and
the rocket attacks against Israeli territory, which have
caused death and injuries to numerous innocent Israeli
civilians. I take this opportunity to reiterate that those
attacks should stop and that kidnapped Israeli soldiers
should be immediately and unconditionally released.

In recent weeks we also expressed our serious
concern about the disproportionate and excessive use
of force by Israel. We reiterate our condemnation of the
military actions that have caused the deaths of
hundreds of innocent Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians and the destruction of basic infrastructure in
the Gaza Strip and on Lebanese territory.

There is no doubt that all of that constitutes a new
historic tragedy in the region.

Argentina recognizes that Israel has a legitimate
right to self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter. However, we believe that such a right
should be exercised in conformity with international
law, in particular with the provisions of international
humanitarian law and respect for the human rights of
the population. It is clear that those who suffer the
most in the Middle East are the innocent civilians, be
they Lebanese, Palestinian or Israeli. Protecting them
should be the priority of the Security Council and the
international community.

Argentina believes that immediate measures
should be taken to alleviate the suffering of the
Lebanese civilian population. The first step to that end
should be a cessation of hostilities and the granting of
access to humanitarian organizations to all affected
areas. We are witnessing a very serious humanitarian
crisis. The establishment of humanitarian corridors is
essential so that assistance can reach the affected
population, as well as to carry out the necessary
evacuations.

We believe that the Security Council should act
urgently and declare a cessation of hostilities. That has
been Argentina's position since the beginning of the
conflict. Unfortunately, our call has not been repeated
by all the other members of the Security Council.

While seeking a solution to the most urgent
issues, we should also work to create the foundations
for a lasting and sustainable ceasefire. We therefore
believe that the proposals presented to the
Governments of Israel and Lebanon by the Secretary-
General's envoys are an appropriate basis for solving
the problems linked to southern Lebanon and for fully
implementing Security Council resolutions 425 (1978),
426 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006). We are
prepared to work on the basis of those and other ideas
with a view to drawing up a draft resolution that sets
out the framework for a lasting solution to the conflict
between Israel and Lebanon.

I cannot fail to mention my country's concern
about the situation regarding the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and its personnel.
We remind the parties of the need to guarantee the
safety and security of United Nations personnel.
Likewise, we believe that UNIFIL should be able to
carry out its mandate, and it should therefore be
allowed freedom of movement.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, I would like to
reiterate Argentina's concern about the suffering of the
civilian population. We believe that right away a
package of measures should be considered that
addresses an end to the launching of Qassam rockets
against Israeli territory by Palestinian groups, the
release of the Israeli soldiers, the release of Palestinian
officials and legislators, the cessation of the excessive
use of force by Israel, the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from the territory and the acceptance by the
Government of the Palestinian Authority of the three
principles set out by the Quartet.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is also very
serious and has worsened even more as a result of the
extensive destruction of civilian infrastructure of the
territory. We once again demand that the crossing
points be reopened immediately to allow for the
importing of food, medicine, other basic goods and
fuel. We call on the donor community to respond
generously to the humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip.

We believe that it is important to recall that the
underlying cause of these conflicts and of other
unresolved situations in the Middle East is the absence
of comprehensive regional peace. Argentina therefore
once again calls for renewed efforts aimed at achieving
a just and lasting peace based on the resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular, as we have said,
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well the road map, the
Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace.

The Security Council has an important role to
play in all the aspects I have referred to. We should rise
to the challenge, act with determination and resolve to
fulfil our responsibilities regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security. The lives of hundreds
of innocent civilians and the prospects for peace in the
Middle East depend upon our immediate and decisive
action. I believe the time has come to take urgent
action.

