Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank our brothers from
Peru for their work at the healm of the Security Council
during this month.

The past month has again reminded us why,
despite the many issues on the Security Council's
agenda, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must remain a
priority demanding the Council's attention. At least 37
demonstrators have been killed and over 4,900 wounded
due to the excessive and disproportionate use of force
by Israel, the occupying Power, particularly in response
to the Great March of Return demonstrations at the
Gaza Strip border fence with Israel. The Committee
urges that the Counciljoin and support the call made by
Secretary-General, among others, for an independent
and transparent investigation of the incidents. As the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court warned,
violence against civilians could constitute crimes under
the Rome Statute. Moreover, the continuing violence
foreshadows the deterioration of an already unstable
and tense situation, with serious repercussions. We also
condemn the attack on the convoy of the Palestinian
Prime Minister during his 13 March visit to Gaza,
which was a hostile and violent act at cross purposes
with Palestinian reconciliation. We urge all Palestinian
parties to continue working towards unity to peacefully
achieve their shared goals and realize the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people.

This coming May, we will commemorate the
seventieth anniversary of the 1948 war, which led to the
expulsion and flight of almost 800,000 Palestinian Arab
inhabitants from their homes in what was then the British
Mandate of Palestine. That legacy of expropriation,
known as the Nakba - the catastrophe - continues
to cast a shadow over the refugees of 1948 and their
descendants. The continued lack of a just solution
to that tragedy and the current plight of Palestinian
refugees have prolonged and exacerbated the conflict,
as well as its regional and global impact. In that
context, the Committee invites all Member States to
participate in its upcoming forum, entitled "Seventy
Years after 1948 - Lessons to Achieve a Sustainable
Peace", to be held at Headquarters from 17 to 18 May to
consider that history, as well as possible joint solutions
to promote peace.

The Committee urges donor countries to act quickly
in providing broad support for the activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, especially given the fact
that the humanitarian situation in Gaza is seriously
worsening and the needs of Palestinian refugees
suffering from the consequences of the Syrian crisis
are increasing. At this fragile juncture, we must meet
our humanitarian obligations vis-a-vis the refugees by
providing the Agency with the necessary support so
that it can fulfil its mandate and play its stabilizing role
in the region.

As was indicated in the fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), introduced
by Mr. Mladenov on behalf of the Secretary-General
before the Security-Council last month (see S/PV.8214),
we regret that the Government of Israel decided to move
forward settlement plans, which violate its obligations
as an occupying Power under international law and are
a clear indication of its indifference to the authority of
the Security Council. We encourage Member States to
follow the examples set by the Danish Parliament and
the European Commission, which decided to make the
distinction between the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967 in their respective dealings with
each, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016) and in adhering
faithfully to the Fourth Geneva Convention.

The unilateral decisions of some States Members
to move their embassies from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem,
in violation of resolution 478 (1980) and other relevant
United Nations resolutions, irreversibly slows prospects
for peace and puts in jeopardy the viability of the two-
State solution within the 1967 borders.

Faced with that prospect, we welcome and support
President Mahmoud Abbas' peace initiative presented
before the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183).
Visits by the Committee's delegation to Uganda in
February and Panama in early April elicited broad
acknowledgement of the outlook and efforts of the
State of Palestine, as well as the support for the full
exercise of the rights of the Palestinian people. That
reflects the international consensus that continues to
prevail concerning the just and peaceful resolution of
the question of Palestine that must be realized. Our
willingness - that of the international community - to
act rapidly and unwaveringly remains the best assurance
for achieving a peaceful solution to the conflict.

