Mr. Choi: During my most recent briefing to the
Security Council, I highlighted a major breakthrough
in the Ivorian electoral process: the establishment on
9 September of the voters list comprising over
5.7 million people, which I certified explicitly on
24 September. Starting on 7 October, Ivorians began
collecting their voters and identity cards from
distributions centres throughout the country. The
distribution operation was conducted successfully and
most of the people were able to collect their cards.
Everywhere, Ivorians were thrilled to finally be able to
have their identity and voters card, as the issue of
identification had been at the centre of the Ivorian
cr1s1s.

Meanwhile, electoral campaigning was launched
on 15 October and was conducted in a commendable
manner, with the Ivorian presidential candidates
adhering to the provisions of the code of good conduct
signed by the political parties in April 2008 in the
presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. The
candidates travelled in the various regions of Cote
d'Ivoire to present their electoral platforms. Electoral
campaigning aroused passions and emotions, but was
conducted in a peaceful environment throughout the
country thanks to the good sense of discipline and
mutual respect demonstrated by all.

After two weeks of campaigning, the presidential
election was held on 31 October, as planned. Election
day was marked as much by the enthusiasm of the
population as by the respect for democratic principles.
The population responded massively to the call of the
political leaders to cast their votes. The turnout was
over 80 per cent - one of the highest in the world. The
voting itself took place in a calm and orderly manner,
10-61808
and no major human rights violation was recorded,
which is impressive given that reunification is yet to be
realized. The Ivorian people rose to the occasion,
showing the international community their political
maturity and determination to put an end to the crisis.

According to the electoral timetable published by
the Independent Electoral Commission, the provisional
result of the election is to be announced today but is
yet to materialize. Here in Cote d'Ivoire, people are
eagerly awaiting the result of the election. Beginning
on the evening of 2 November, the Independent
Electoral Commission began announcing partial
preliminary results. As of this morning, more than
2.5 million voters had been publicly counted by the
Independent Electoral Commission.

The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) has provided and continues to provide
technical and logistical support to the Independent
10-61808
Electoral Commission, including the transport of the
crucial voting reports to the central Independent
Electoral Commission in Abidjan.

The final result of the election is planned to be
proclaimed by the Constitutional Council by
10 November. Should no candidate receive a majority
of votes in the first round, a second round will be
necessary. According to the current electoral timetable,
electoral campaigning for the second round would
begin on 12 November, and the second round of the
presidential election would be held on 28 November.

