Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to add my very warm thanks to Jan Eliasson and Salim
Salim for their efforts over the past 18 months. Their
statements today had something of the flavour of a
valedictory report, and we very much welcome the
intention of the Secretary-General to appoint a joint
chief mediator for the United Nations and the African
Union in the days ahead; he briefed the Council on this
point yesterday. We welcome this move and we fully
understand that the role of the two Special Envoys will
change and retreat a little bit. After the 18 months of
labouring in the Darfur vineyard, eating the sour grapes
and drinking the undrinkable wine, that decision is
fully understandable.

The Security Council visit, as my good friend
Ambassador Ettalhi has said, was quite revealing for us
all in terms of the real difficulties on the ground in
Darfur, in Khartoum and also in Chad. We came to
many of the same gloomy conclusions that the two
Special Envoys have reported to the Council today. We
briefed the Council on our findings, but I think it is
very striking that the six factors that Mr. Jan Eliasson
have identified are very similar to some of the factors
that we focused on as well.

I would like to take those six considerations in
turn, keeping in mind that they overlap extensively
with what Mr. Salim said in his own report.

First of all, I think it is quite right to put the
centrality of the peace agreement first, even in
discussion on Darfur. It was very clear to us all in
Sudan that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
is the cornerstone of peace in the Sudan. If the CPA
founders, then there is no hope in the short term or the
medium term for progress elsewhere. We have to do
everything we can to keep the CPA on track, and the
United Nations can do more in that respect. The events
in Abyei just a few weeks ago showed that the role of
the United Nations presence, the United Nations force
on the ground, could be more active and could be more
involved in preventing the sorts of clashes which led to
the forced displacement of up to 60,000 people and the
razing to the ground of one of the main towns of
southern Sudan.

Secondly, it was clear in visiting both Sudan and
Chad on consecutive days that the situations on either
side of the border are intimately linked. The Council
has vehemently condemned the attacks by the Justice
and Equality Movement into the suburbs of Khartoum.
It has also condemned the attacks by Chad rebels
towards N'Djamena. The fact is that rebels on each
side are backed by the other's Government. We have to
be very clear that the international presence on the
ground cannot be used as a shield behind which
Governments in Khartoum and N'Djamena make the
Council's goals in Khartoum more difficult to achieve.
I believe the focus that the two Special Envoys have
placed today on the centrality of establishing stable and
good neighbourly relations between the Sudan and
Chad is absolutely fundamental, because without that
we are not going to make progress in Darfur.

Thirdly, I was struck by what Mr. Eliasson said
about incentives and disincentives as being clearly
insufficient. This does not mean that we simply reach
for more sanctions, but we do have to consider whether
sanctions are not part of the mix against those who are
obstructing the peace process. We must also consider
what incentives we can offer to both parties to engage.
At the moment, they are not sufficient.

Fourthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The Secretary-General has spoken of a
target of 80 per cent deployment by the year's end. We
all know that UNAMID has been bedevilled in its first
year by the gap between the commitments the parties
have made and the reality. There is a gap in the
provision by the international community of key units,
which we need to continue to address. There is a gap
on the United Nations side in building up the capacity,
as my Libyan colleague identified, to receive new units
on the ground. Here, the United Nations has not done
as much as it could. There is a gap on the Sudanese
side where there is much talk about cooperation, but, as
we saw on the ground, the reality is continued low-
level difficulties and, at times, obstruction. UNAMID
is not going to be the single way to solve this problem
in Darfur, but is a crucial element which we need to get
right.

08-3959]

Fifthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the arms
embargo. It is very striking when one is in Darfur that
any local thug with some money can buy a pick-up
truck, some rocket-propelled grenades and kalashnikov
rifles and turn himself into a militia. We need to
address this free availability of weapons in Darfur if
we are to solve this problem. That means that all
members of this Council have to do more to address
the seriousness of the arms embargo that we have
placed on Darfur and to make sure that we do not idly
sell weapons which just happen to find their way there.
We are responsible for ensuring that weapons do not
reach Darfur. We may need to look at an extension of
the scope of the arms embargo if we are to address this
problem. That is one thing that needs to be on the table.

Sixthly, Mr. Eliasson focused on the people of
Darfur. I believe the efforts to bring together civil
society, community groups, traditional leaders and
tribal elders in Darfur are crucial. Too often the
negotiations on Darfur are seen as negotiations
between militias, whereas it is actually the people who
have to live together - they have lived together there
for centuries and they need to continue to live together,
albeit in stressful circumstances. If we can generate an
understanding from the bottom up, this will be a
crucial part of our efforts. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play a role to bring the parties together if and
when that would make a helpful contribution.

Lastly, one factor that Mr. Eliasson did not
mention is the question of impunity. After we were in
Darfur, the Security Council went to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which knows about the
problem of impunity. President Kabila said that one
cannot put justice aside and hope for a durable peace.
That applies as much in Darfur as it does in the Congo
and elsewhere in Africa.

So it is with these thoughts that I wanted to imply
that the Council has some very serious and difficult
business ahead on Sudan. It will remain the most
demanding topic on our agenda. I would say, once
again, how grateful we are for the efforts of Mr. Salim
and Mr. Eliasson over the last 18 months in trying to
move this dossier forward, and we are glad that they
remain available and on-call should we need their
services again in the future.
