Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would first
like to commend the Security Council's decision to
organize this debate, which fits well with its mandate
and the essential role it plays in international peace
and security. It is to the Council's credit that it has
invited Member States to further reflect on this vital
topic, and particularly on the place and role of regional
organizations in establishing a more balanced world.

Even if the concept of a threat to peace, as stated
in Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations, is
still regarded by some as ambiguous and elusive from
the point of view of international law, threats to peace
and security are no less real and have continued to
multiply and increase in intensity. That is why the
scope of United Nations interventions in the area of
peacekeeping has continued to expand. From the Palme
Commission to the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) via
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's Agenda for Peace (S/24lll),
there have been many United Nations initiatives aimed
at establishing an international consensus on the key
aspects of global security.
In recent decades, alongside traditional threats such
as the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, we have witnessed the development of a
whole range of new threats to peace. Whether they are
military, political, economic or in the areas of health or
the environment, whether they are inter-State in nature
or stem from non-State entities and actors working in
the international arena, there is no denying that these
new threats occupy an ever-growing place on the
international security agenda. They include the rise
of international terrorism, the proliferation of local
and regional crises, crimes against civilians, mass
atrocities, the expansion of organized crime, massive
population transfers and other global challenges such
as poverty and environmental crises.

The Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the political primacy of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, recent history has shown that in national
conflicts the Council's actions are often subject to
multiple political and strategic constraints that in some
major regional crisis situations have left it virtually
paralysed even when the circumstances warranted an
urgent intervention. Faced with this barrage of new
threats, the international community can only gain
from the closer involvement of regional organizations
in every possible effort to reduce threats to peace and
security, whether by preventing or slowing the arms
race, stemming the threat of nuclear proliferation or
resolving problems and conflicts that could jeopardize
strategic balances in various regions.

In the spirit of its fundamental responsibility,
and given the principle of subsidiarity that is implicit
in the Charter, the Security Council is called on to
encourage the peaceful settlement of local disputes
through regional organizations, either on the initiative
of the States concerned or by reference from the
Security Council. The Council is therefore taking a
new approach to peacekeeping operations based on
a comprehensive, coherent and integrated vision of
what is needed to fight threats to peace and security.
It reflects a growing awareness that no stabilization,
peacekeeping or peacebuilding mission, however well-
intentioned, can have an impact in resolving a conflict
it is asked to settle or produce lasting results if it does
not address the fundamental problems, including
poverty, that are at the root of the crisis. That is why the
Republic of Haiti welcomes the convergence of actions
by the Security Council and regional organizations, in
which development assistance and poverty reduction
combine with policy initiatives in the areas of security,
the protection of human rights, good governance and
the strengthening of the rule of law, with the aim of
increasing the effectiveness of United Nations efforts
on the ground within the framework of post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction activities.

My country also believes that development is
an essential response to the myriad threats that are
fuelled to a great extent by situations of poverty and
despair. In that regard, we believe that since sovereign
States must be the first responders in the face of
threats to peace, we should provide more substantial
international support to them, particularly the poorest
countries, which are often ill-equipped to exercise their
sovereignty responsibly and address their immediate
security challenges effectively.

In conclusion, by organizing today's meeting, the
Security Council has sought to reaffirm the importance
it attaches to the role of regional and subregional
organizations and to its cooperation with them in
order to maintain peace and international security,
in conformity with Chapter VIII of the Charter. I
am convinced that today's dialogue will make a
considerable contribution to achieving that goal.

