Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): At the outset,
allow me to recognize your presence here today with
us, State Minister Hoyer. I thank Special Coordinator
Robert Serry for his very useful briefing, and the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their contributions to today's
debate.

Portugal's position and concerns are well known.
We have been repeating them here month after month
as the overall situation has unfortunately not changed,
as Mr. Serry underlined. I can therefore be brief. We
remain gravely concerned at the prolonged, frustrating
and dangerous stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli
peace process and the lack of any credible negotiating
process. As a member of the European Union, we
naturally share the views that will be expressed by the
Acting Head of its delegation later in today's debate.

We regret that a way has not yet been found to
bring the parties back to direct talks, which have been
on hold since September 2010. We are still convinced
that negotiations remain the only way to achieve a final
settlement based on the two-State solution, with the
emergence of an independent, democratic and viable
Palestinian State, living peacefully with Israel and its
other neighbours.

To succeed, negotiations must be based on clear
parameters that reflect widely held principles. They
must also address all final status issues and ensure
tangible achievements within a set time frame. They
will demand the clear political will of both sides and
have to be conducted in good faith.

As developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the wider region continue to underscore,
time is of the essence. The developments on the ground
that Mr. Serry has outlined continue to be extremely
worrying. They constitute serious obstacles to peace
and undermine trust and the feasibility of a two-State
solution. This is particularly the case of the accelerated
settlement activities in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem; renewed land confiscation in the occupied
territories; and the unabated demolition of Palestinian
homes and the eviction of their inhabitants.

Once again, we strongly deplore that Staff
Sergeant Gilad Shalit remains in captivity and
continues to be denied any humanitarian access. This is
totally unacceptable, and we urge his immediate
release. Portugal is equally troubled by the marked
increase in security-related incidents in and around
Gaza after a period of calm. We vehemently condemn
the launching of rockets from Gaza into Israel and call
on all sides to refrain from provocative actions and to
exert maximum restraint. On the other hand, Portugal
urges the Government of Israel to end the closure of
Gaza and fully comply with resolution 1860 (2009).
We reiterate that all assistance and legitimate goods
destined for Gaza should be delivered, channelled
through official crossings and established mechanisms.

Palestinians have worked diligently in preparing
for their statehood and, as Mr. Serry reiterated, are
ready for it. Let me recall President Obama's words of
19 May:

"The Palestinian people must have the right to
govern themselves and reach their full potential
in a sovereign and contiguous State."

We therefore commend and strongly encourage the
ongoing efforts of the Quartet in pursuit of an urgent
resumption of meaningful direct negotiations that will
result in the establishment of a Palestinian State on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land
swaps as may be agreed by the parties. As I said, time
is of the essence. The status quo is not only
unsustainable but also very dangerous.

We had very useful consultations on Lebanon last
week, during which I stated our position fully. Here, I
wish to reiterate our condemnation of the terrorist
attack against a United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) convoy on 27 May. We also regret
the loss of life on 15 May during the Nakba
demonstrations in the south of Lebanon, and commend
the efforts of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
to prevent the recurrence of a similar tragic outcome on
5 June.
Portugal welcomes the formation of the new
Lebanese Government. Lebanon now has the
opportunity to address many challenges and fulfil its
international obligations, including those pertaining to
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004) and the
Special Tribunal. We also urge Israel to honour its own
commitments under resolution 1701 (2006) and to
swiftly complete its withdrawal from the northern part
of Al-Ghajar and to fully respect both the sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of Lebanon by air, land and
sea.

The situation in Syria remains of the utmost
concern. We are deeply troubled by the ongoing
repression of peaceful protestors across the country and
the dramatic death toll it has entailed. We regret that
the Syrian authorities have note yet responded to the
calls to immediately stop the violence. It is also
regrettable that Damascus has not yet allowed the
undertaking of a fact-finding mission, which is
expected to report back to the Human Rights Council.
We commend the neighbouring countries that are
providing assistance to fleeing populations.

The solution to the crisis lies in an immediate end
to the violence, a credible, genuine and inclusive
national dialogue, and meaningful political reforms
without delay. The only way to provide stability for
Syria in the long term is through a peaceful transition
to democracy based on national unity, territorial
integrity and respect for the rights of all its citizens.
We call, then, on the Syrian authorities once again to
cease the violence it has imposed on its citizens, and
we urge it to exert the utmost restraint and to allow for
humanitarian access.

