Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay consistently monitors the various
situations that make up the Council's agenda with
regard to the Middle East, all of them complex
and multidimensional.

We would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her informative briefing. We
would also like to recognize, as we routinely do, the
work of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, who has the
full support of Uruguay.

The few, if not non-existent, positive measures
taken by the two parties have been insufficient to
reverse the negative trends on the ground, which is why
the viability of the two-State solution is at serious risk.
We once again recognize the potential contribution of
multilateral, regional and unilateral initiatives, whether

in force, being proposed or not yet devised, but we are
still a long way from reaching a solution to the conflict.
More importantly, it is necessary to resume direct
negotiations in order to clarify the outstanding issues.
We know that this will not be easy, but remaining in the
state of paralysis and stagnation that we are currently
witnessing and which has gone on for too long, will be
even worse. The two-State solution continues to be the
only viable option; there is no plan B that can replace it.

Uruguay has strong ties of friendship with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders in an
environment of renewed cooperation and free from any
threat or act that undermines the peace. To achieve this
goal, the current negative trends on the ground must
be reversed. Otherwise it will be extremely difficult, if
not impossible, for Palestine to territorially consolidate
its State.

The intensified development, approval and
construction of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, as well as the legal measures underpinning
them, is extremely worrying. The evictions of Palestinian
families and the continued demolition and confiscation
of their properties, as occurred yesterday in Sur Baher
or in Wadi Yasul in April, exacerbate the situation and
increase the risk of plans for future annexation.

We condemn acts of violence and terrorism against
Israeli civilians, including the firing of rockets and
explosive devices from the Gaza Strip. We equally
condemn the increased settler violence against
Palestinian civilians, as well as the excessive use offorce
in Israel's response. The incitement and glorification of
all violent acts deserves our total condemnation.

For all the foregoing reasons, we would once again
like to call on both parties to adopt measures and take
steps to gradually de-escalate and alleviate tensions,
which is the only way to reach a mid- and long-term
definitive solution to the conflict and a just and lasting
peace amid the long-standing dispute between Israel
and Palestine.During the most recent open debates on
this issue, Uruguay has proposed a set of 10 measures
to that end, and we reiterate them today.

Seventy years ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (11). Thanks to the impetus of that
international legal act taken by the Organization,
Israel and Palestine have continued to consolidate their
identity, rights and obligations as States and recognized
legal entities. As was the case 70 years ago, when it
was eager to find a solution and favoured this one,
the international community today remains ready
and expectant.

It is not helpful when leaders take action contrary
to the path forward that the international community
has set out for them in good faith and promotes. We
disagree with those who rebuff international consensus
or reject provisions adopted in the Security Council,
the General Assembly or the judgments and opinions
of the International Court of Justice. International
law plays a critical role in the resolution of this and
all conflicts. It is the civilized way we have devised
to support and promote peace and development. We
should not forget that.

It is high time to begin to overcome hatred and
its incitement, disillusionment, despondency and
frustration. Any gain in territory or exercise of
misconceived sovereignty is worthless if it is achieved
at the cost of peace and prolongs the struggle of the
peoples that inhabit the region.

