Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to express our pleasure that heads of State of the
African countries concerned with the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have been present at this
meeting, along with the representative of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Their participation in this debate is an indication that the
present conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has the greatest potential for destabilization of any since the
end of the decolonization process. The persistence of that
conflict has an impact on peace and security in the Great
Lakes region, limits economic and social development
there, and above all thwarts the expectation of the more
than 50 million civilians affected by the war that they will
be able to live in dignity.

We believe that resolution 1234 (1999), which the
Security Council adopted unanimously, and the Lusaka
Agreement, which was signed by all the parties, constitute
the proper political and legal conceptual framework for
putting an end to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. But there has not been enough political will to
implement its provisions. The ceasefire has been frequently
violated since the Agreement was signed in July 1999, and
the redeployment of forces stipulated in the Agreement has
not taken place. The situation grows increasingly fragile. As
the Secretary-General has noted in paragraph 51 of his
report, contained in document S/2000/30 of 17 January
2000, there is no military solution to the conflict. The
present situation on the ground demonstrates this very
clearly.

Unquestionably, the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is essentially political in nature. But
we believe it cannot be analysed or effectively resolved
without consideration of other key principles of
international law such as respect for the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, non-interference in its internal affairs, the
withdrawal of all foreign forces that are on its territory
without its explicit consent, the inalienable right to
individual or collective self-defence, and the illegality of
the acquisition of territory by force. To these, let me add
another principal that has a long history both in Latin
America and in Africa: the inviolability of boundaries.

That said, it is clear that there will be no lasting
solution unless due account is taken of the legitimate
security concerns of all countries neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular Rwanda
and Uganda, and unless a system of explicit and objective
guarantees is agreed upon. In that context, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
various militias based mainly in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - generically known
as "negative forces" - is an essential and complex
element that must be carefully and wisely studied.

In addition to the external dimension to which I have
referred, the conflict has an internal dimension to which
most other participants have alluded today, and which is
recognized in the Lusaka Agreement: the inter-Congolese
dialogue with the ultimate goal of establishing a
democratic constitutional structure in which all sectors of
Congolese society will be represented. Here, the
appointment of the former President of Botswana, Sir
Ketumile Masire, as facilitator, with the assent of all
parties, is a first step towards national reconciliation.

We believe that the United Nations has a role to
play and a historical responsibility to shoulder in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We agree with the
Secretary-General, who said in his recent report that the
United Nations presence should come about gradually and
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be expanded.

At the same time, we wish to be clear on something
that is of particular concern to us: all the parties
concerned must give firm guarantees of the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel. We know that we cannot demand absolute
guarantees; that would place a nearly impossible condition
on the deployment of United Nations forces in a conflict
zone. But we require from the parties involved an
unambiguous commitment to the ceasefire and to the
granting of reasonable security guarantees, something to
which all the parties have made a commitment.

Let me repeat today in this open meeting what we
have said in the past, and what we reaffirmed on
Wednesday 19 January during the debate on the situation
in Burundi, in the presence of President Nelson Mandela:
there will be no stable solution in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo without the promotion and
consolidation of democratic institutions and good
governance in all the countries of the Great Lakes region,
and unless we recognize that the problems there are not
solely military in nature or security-related. They are also,
and in large part, problems of development. Thus, we

 

repeat again our support for the French idea - eloquently
reiterated today by the French Minister Delegate for
Cooperation and Francophonie - that, when the proper
circumstances exist, a general conference on the Great
Lakes should be convened under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity to
address the situation in that region as a whole.

As you observed, Mr. President, my country will
assume the presidency of the Security Council next month.
We stand ready to continue to work on this issue with the
Council and with other interested States, so that these
deliberations may bear fruit in the form of a Security
Council resolution that will facilitate the resolution of this
tragic conflict.

