Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by welcoming the presence of His
Excellency President Jose Ramos-Horta. My
Government recognizes his unceasing efforts to
develop and strengthen democracy in his country, as
well as his desire to promote an inclusive vision of
national life. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his message and to take advantage of the presence
of his Special Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, to thank
him and the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for their efforts to facilitate
dialogue among political actors, to lay the groundwork
for development and to consolidate the foundations of
democratic governance in Timor-Leste. My thanks go
also to the United Nations agencies present in Timor-
Leste.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/72)
presents a view of the process being experienced by the
citizens of Timor-Leste and of their efforts to achieve
their common goals and develop the institutions that
will help them to do so. But the report also describes a
number of obstacles hindering that process. Above all,
it expresses concern about the behaviour of some
political actors who have yet to fully accept the basic
principles of democracy.

The international community is waiting for all
political actors to display a mature attitude. Such
conduct is a necessary ingredient for other actions
urgently needed by Timorese society. Progress must be
made in improving understanding of democratic
governance and in preparing and adopting legal
frameworks aimed at consolidating it. In that context,
we believe that the work being done by the electoral
agencies, the political parties and the media is of
capital importance.

Also important is the progress that has been made
in improving security and strengthening the institutions
that guarantee it. The advances made with regard to the
exercise and guarantee of human rights are especially
satisfying. We are particularly encouraged by the
actions taken to reduce incidents of sexual and gender-
based violence, and we call on UNMIT to continue its
support for the formulation of a national gender policy
and strategy. In addition, we recognize all the efforts
being made and actions being taken to build a judicial
system that supports the progress made in maintaining
security and promoting human rights.

With regard to socio-economic development in
Timor-Leste, the encouraging news about economic
progress and growth and the improvement in health-
related aspects is somewhat overshadowed in the social
arena by the growth of poverty and unemployment. We
hope that the Government's activities to promote
employment - which President J 056". Ramos-Horta told
us about today - and other actions to improve access
to food staples will reverse the increase in the poverty
rate.

In addition, we are confident that the medium-
term strategy that has been adopted will guide the
country's socio-economic, political, institutional and
cultural development. We recognize the importance of
the benchmarks that have been adopted, which will
enable the country to gauge future progress and will
enable the Council to assess the quality and the
modalities of the support that the United Nations
system will have to provide to Timor-Leste in the
future.

Finally, I welcome the optimism about this
country reflected in the Secretary-General's report. We
hope that, with the support of UNMIT and the work of
its people under its leadership, Timor-Leste will
consolidate the foundations of peace and stability,
which will enable it to achieve sustainable
development for its inhabitants.

