Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): Regional and
subregional organizations in Africa are increasingly
contributing to complement the work of the United
Nations in maintaining peace and security on the
African continent, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Among the organizations
on the continent, the African Union (AU) is the most
representative, with 54 members, as well as one of the
oldest. The AU is also one of the regional organizations
with which the United Nations maintains the most
diversified and frequent contacts and cooperation.

Since 2002, the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA) has been developing a platform
for the prevention, management and resolution of
crises and conflicts, as well as for post-conflict
reconstruction and development. The APSA road map
for the period 2016-2020, launched in April, provides a
renewed strategic direction for the promotion of peace
and security in Africa. Over the past 10 years, we have
witnessed important institutional advances that have
set the stage for enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU.

The three recent reviews on peacekeeping
operations, on the peacebuilding architecture and
on women and peace and security provided us with
a singular opportunity to discuss peace and security
in Africa. In that regard, allow me to highlight the
adoption, on 27 April, of the landmark General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016),
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. Those three reviews on peace and security
emphasized prevention and the political solution of
conflicts through dialogue and diplomacy. In that
regard, we underline that prevention must not only be
carried out with full respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, but must also give due
consideration to the views of the leadership and the
organizations of a given region.

Let me refer to two past cases in Africa, where if a
prevention-oriented approach had been adopted, results
could have been different: the genocide in Rwanda in
1994 and the military intervention in Libya in 2011.
In Rwanda, early warnings were given on several
occasions, including by the then Force Commander of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda,
Rome'o Dallaire, but those fell on deaf ears. The
error was therefore one of omission. In the case of
Libya, had the ad hoc working group, created by the
African Union and composed of five Heads of State,
been given the political space to engage in finding a
way forward, perhaps an ill-fated intervention could
have been avoided and the Sahel region would be more
stable today.

In discussing the United Nations-AU partnership,
one should not avoid the question of adequate means
for the implementation of increasingly complex tasks.
Peacekeeping mandates must be accompanied by the
necessary resources. By the same token, regional actors
should spare no effort to progressively bring their
troops up to United Nations standards of performance.
According to the report of the High-level Panel on
Illicit Financial Flows from Africa, chaired by former
President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki, it is estimated
that Africa has lost $1 trillion over the past five decades
owing to illicit financial flows - a concept that includes
criminal activities, such as tax evasion, smuggling,
bribery and corruption. That sum is equivalent to nearly
all the official development assistance received by
Africa during that time. According to the same report,
illicit financial flows in Africa are increasing and now
amount to $50 billion a year.

As one of its main recommendations, the Panel
called for the African Union to elaborate a global
governance framework to determine the conditions
under which assets are frozen, managed and repatriated.
That could present an opportunity to discuss the idea of
using part of those resources to predictably fund peace
and security efforts, including peacebuilding on the
African continent. Let the Council bear in mind that
the last approved annual budget of the United Nations
for all peacekeeping operations was $8.27 billion
dollars, which is only 16.5 per cent of what Africa
loses annually through illicit financial outflows. We
should also consider the challenges posed by the illegal
exploitation of natural resources that not only fuels
conflict, including by financing armed groups, but also
has a devastating impact on sustainable development.

Again, from a perspective of enhancing prevention,
a more active role should be given to the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) regarding cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, on the one
hand, and between the PBC and the Security Council,
on the other. Today, all six countries on the agenda of
the PBC are in Africa. The diversified membership of
the Commission, currently chaired by Kenya, allows
for discussions with a broad range of views.

Allow me finally to refer to a crisis that has
remained without a satisfactory solution after
two decades and would greatly benefit from a
prevention-centred and holistic approach to conflict, as
well as from enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. In 2007, a study by the
International Rescue Committee concluded that the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
directly or indirectly claimed the lives of 5.4 million
people. Although the exact figure remains a matter of
debate, that conflict must be placed among the great
human cataclysms of our time. As one scholar on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has written, "The
mortality figures are so immense that they become
absurd, almost meaningless". Today, almost one decade
after that study, the country continues to face enormous
challenges. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, there are 7.5 million people in
need of humanitarian help and protection. That is 9 per
cent of the population.

Conflicts could have been avoided if we had
focused more on prevention. Strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU and
taking full advantage of the African Peace and Security
Architecture are indispensable steps. Developing a
better understanding of how illicit financial flows
impact areas subject to conflict is also essential.
Africa is a continent of great human and natural
wealth. Africans from all parts of the continent have
demonstrated leadership and pragmatism, as well as the
ability to inspire and innovate, from Nelson Mandela to
Kofi Annan.

Brazil will continue to work closely with African
countries within the multilateral and regional
structures at our disposal in the promotion of peace and
development, drawing upon our fraternal bonds.

