Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Mission of
Argentina upon its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, as well as to thank it for having
organized this public meeting on peacekeeping
operations. I should also like to congratulate the
Ambassador of the United States and her entire team
for their outstanding presidency during the month of
September.

I thank Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed,
Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations,
and the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for their
briefings, and welcome them among us today.

Peacekeeping operations are of great importance
owing to their contribution to safeguarding international
peace and security. They have undergone an evolution
from traditional missions, centred on ceasefire
monitoring, to multidimensional operations, with ever-
more complex tasks.

Over the past several years, intra-State armed
conflicts have added such threats as terrorism and
transnational organized crime, resulting in several
significant shifts in the context ofpeacekeeping.
I shall make some remarks on the protection of
civilians and the peacekeeping security environment
today.

I pay tribute to the peacekeepers, who spare no
effort to protect civilians despite scarce resources.
There is a crucial need for peacekeeping operations to
focus on rebuilding peace and security, so as to enable
other actors, including humanitarian aid workers, to
provide the aid needed and basic services.

We recently witnessed the protection offered by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
thousands of South Sudanese civilians through its mere
presence on the ground. However, to better protect
civilians it is necessary to go beyond simply being
present and to make greater investments in prevention,
mobility and active interventions. I take this opportunity
to commend the effectiveness of MONUSCO's early-
warning and rapid response mechanisms.

Moreover, in order to better tackle sexual violence
and abuses committed against women and children,
the number of female staff in peacekeeping operations,
including at the management level, must be increased.

Peacekeeping operations should prioritize the
disarmament of armed groups that continue to fight
and to attack and harass civilians, as in the regrettable
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The security environment in which peacekeeping
troops now operate has fundamentally changed, being
characterized today by confrontations with multiple
extremist and terrorist armed groups. In Mali, for
example, the difficulty of distinguishing between those
groups further complicates peacekeepers' mission and
raises legitimate questions about the right way forward.

Faced with such a challenging environment and
such asymmetric threats, MINUSMA must be equipped
with all means needed to protect the peacekeepers.
It is unacceptable that peacekeepers, and those of
MINUSMA in particular, are becoming the prime
targets of improvised explosive devices, mines, rocket-
fire, mortars and car bombs. We condemn all such
attacks against peacekeepers and MINUSMA, which
have claimed 31 lives and injured 90. We urge the
Security Council to go beyond issuing press statements
and letters of condolences, and to do everything
possible to promote the conduct of an investigation
to identify the perpetrators of those attacks and bring
them to justice.

We reiterate our support for the Algiers talks and
express our hope that they will enable progress on the
path towards peace and reconciliation in Mali.

With regard to UNDOF, notwithstanding the grave
violations of the 1974 Disengagement Agreement,
we denounce the forcible eviction of United Nations
staff members and their detention by armed groups.
UNDOF 's ability to uphold its mandate is being severely
tested, and that is unacceptable. The safety and security
of UNDOF staff and of the Military Observer Group
must be guaranteed.

I would like to conclude by asking two questions.
First, in the View of General Kazura, what would be the
most appropriate strategy to prevent any further attacks
against MINUSMA? Is he of the View that such a early
warning system as that in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo could be effective in the very different
setting of Mali?

Secondly, I would turn to General Singha. UNDOF
is one of the longest-standing United Nations field
missions, and its effectiveness is being severely tested
in today's ever-more complex environment. I wonder
what the General expects from the United Nations in
terms of adapting the mission to this new footing.

