Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for this initiative and for
your leadership. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

Change has come to the Arab world. It has come
because the peoples in the region, especially the youth,
have stood up for freedom, participation and dignity. I
want to congratulate the peoples of Tunisia, Egypt and
Libya, as well as those of Morocco, Yemen and Jordan,
on the progress they have made, each in their own way.

The League of Arab States has responded to calls
for reform. We applaud the constructive role it has
played over the past 12 months.

The changes in the Arab world reflect a beginning
globalization of values. People all over the world are
demanding their universal human rights. The values of
the United Nations are gaining ground. We are still
only at the beginning but, in the long term, all the
people of the region will benefit. And so will we, as
their neighbours in the European Union. As
neighbours, we are ready to help.

Germany took an early decision to assist the
countries in transition. Our support is guided by three
principles. First, reform must come from within. We
stand ready to support countries that choose democratic
change. Secondly, no two countries in the Arab world
are alike. Each country must choose its own path and
find its own pace. Finally, we know that the road to
democracy is not linear. It is a difficult passage, which
requires patience and persistence.

Liberty and democracy require a promising
economic perspective. We have offered transformation
partnerships to all countries in question. We stand
ready to support them with know-how, investments and
open markets in Europe. A focus of our international
support should be on education. A good education for
the youth is the key for any future economic success.

Many in the West fear the rise of political Islam.
But the notion that Islam and democracy are
incompatible is wrong. We have engaged in dialogue
with democratic Islamic parties.
We are ready to respect cultural transitions. At the
same time, we are looking for clear commitments to
human rights and to the rule of law, to a pluralistic
society, to respect for minorities, to religious tolerance
and to domestic and external peace.

Women have been a driving force for change in
the region; we urge all partners in transition to
strengthen their rights.

The changes in the region have made it even
more urgent to make progress towards a two-State
solution for Israel and Palestine. I therefore welcome
the meeting of the Quartet principals today. All parties
must do everything to ease tensions and to avoid an
escalation on the ground. I am deeply worried about
the flare up of violence around Gaza. The shelling with
rockets of innocent people is unacceptable and must
stop.

The Iranian nuclear programme challenges the
stability of the region and the international
non-proliferation regime. A nuclear-armed Iran is not
acceptable.

The E3+3 and Iran have expressed their
willingness to engage in talks. We want, and we work
for, a political and diplomatic solution. There is still
time for diplomacy. Irrespective of the nuclear issue,
we will not forget how the Iranian regime has failed to
respond the legitimate demands of its people.

In Yemen, the election of President Al-Hadi
marks an important milestone in the political transition.
I visited Sana'a two days ago. Yemen continues to face
tremendous challenges, but it is in a much better
situation today than it was a year ago. Today, there is a
genuine chance to achieve national reconciliation. The
people of Yemen deserve our full support.

We are all grateful for the peaceful transfer of
power. The Gulf Cooperation Council played a key
role. So did the Security Council and Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. Those joint efforts made the
Yemeni-led transition process possible. In many
regards, the case of Yemen may serve as a model for
political transition and for conflict resolution for this
Council.

This week marks an anniversary for the
beginning of peaceful protests in Syria. From the start,
Germany has called for the Security Council to act.
There has been much discussion on Syria in the
Chamber, but the Council has failed to live up to its
responsibility. Peaceful protest has been put down with
horrific violence and murder. Among the 8,000 dead,
there are hundreds of children. That violence must end,
and it must end now.

We have been watching with admiration the
growing number of Syrians who risk life and limb
every day for a better future. The people in Syria
overcome fear every day, in the face of overwhelming
repression and violence. Their courage arises from both
hope and despair. Let us here in the Security Council
give them more reason for hope than for despair.

Germany has been working tirelessly for a
political solution. We must prevent further escalation.
Too much time has been wasted. We see three
priorities: first, an end to violence; secondly,
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian aid;
and thirdly, a process of peaceful transition led by the
Syrians and based on the decisions of the Arab League.

It is my firm conviction that only the Syrian
people themselves can decide their future. They have
been expressing their will throughout the past 12
months, and no one can doubt their desire for change.
We extend our hand to all those working for peaceful
and democratic change, in particular the Syrian
National Council. In a new Syria, all Syrians must be
able to enjoy their full rights regardless of affiliation,
ethnicity, belief or gender.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Arab League,
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay, and Ms. Valerie
Amos for their untiring efforts. Germany will continue
to push for action in the Council, in other United
Nations bodies, in the European Union and with like-
minded partners in the Group of Friends of the Syrian
People. Sending a strong signal and taking effective
action is what we owe to the people of Syria. We owe it
to the people, to the children, to the families, and to the
victims. Upon it depends the credibility of the Council;
it is the only way the Council can live up to its
responsibility under the Charter.

