The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.

Let me start by thanking Council colleagues for
their support during what has been another busy month.
It has only been with their help that we have been able
to get through that business efficiently and effectively.

August has not been a quiet month for the Security
Council for some years now. This year was no exception,
with simultaneous crises in Gaza, Iraq, Ukraine, Syria,
Libya and South Sudan, to name just six. The Council
has addressed all of those conflicts this month. I hope
that the resolutions we have adopted, in particular in
confronting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
resolution 2170 (2014) and tackling Libya in resolution
2174 (2014), will have real and lasting impact on the
ground.

Much of that crisis work is a matter of public record.
I will therefore focus my remarks on a key thematic
priority for the United Kingdom presidency, which was
conflict prevention. I will also touch on the working
methods of the Council.

Let me start by recalling the Council's visit to
Belgium on 9 and 10 August, the first leg of the wider
visit we undertook to Europe and Africa. The aim of
the Belgian leg was to commemorate the start of the
First World War, to pay tribute to those who died and
to learn lessons from the past for our current work.
Our discussions in Belgium and The Hague came
back time and again to what more the Council can and
must do to effectively discharge its conflict-prevention
responsibilities.

As I said in last Thursday's debate (see S/PV.7247),
the Council needs to take conflict prevention more
seriously than it currently does. The moral, humanitarian
and political imperatives of early preventive action
are unarguable. The question is, how can the Council
better fulfil this role. Part of the answer relates to the
Council's working methods. The Council's agenda is
full and our capacity is stretched as we struggle to cope
with persistent and complex crises. But acting only in
crisis mode, responding and reacting, will never allow
us to get ahead of events and intervene early enough to
have a preventive effect.

Actions we can take to free up the Council's
workload and to ensure that we get through routine
business more quickly could help to create time for
more valuable overseas visits, more exploration of the
activities outlined for us in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, more time for horizon-scanning and
more time to act on the indicators of emerging conflict.

But time is not our only constraint. The perceived
tension between the principle of sovereignty and
conflict prevention also constrains Council action.
That has been used in the past to justify taking no
action for fear of offending a State or being seen to
impinge on sovereignty. My hope is that the lessons the
Council learned during its visit to Belgium, the debate
last Thursday, this week's briefing by the Department
of Political Affairs and the adoption of resolution 2171
(2014) will allow us to tackle that head on.

If we want to be more effective at preventing
conflict, we have to find ways of holding discussions,
public or private, on situations that may exhibit some
alarming indicators but might not yet constitute a full-
blown conflict, without that being seen to constitute an
encroachment on sovereignty.

The use of "Any other business" has provided one
useful vehicle to raise issues of concern privately and in
a timely manner. So far this month, 13 issues have been
raised under "Any other business" in consultations. I
take this as an indication of the Council's readiness
to respond quickly, even, on occasion, to the point
of discussing issues before a descent into full-blown
conflict. We should continue to use that particular tool
and consider whether we can raise issues even earlier as
indicators start to flash red.

Talking of flashing lights, sometimes the simplest
efforts can make a difference. Starting meetings
promptly, encouraging speakers to keep to time limits
and moving discussions on smartly have this month all
contributed to allowing us to get through large amounts
of business.

The open debate last Thursday included 59 speakers
but finished by 4.30 p.m. I hope that colleagues around
the table and in the wider membership will agree that
this has been a boon, and not an imposition. There

is much more that could be done by clustering some
discussions, spreading out the periodicity of others,
avoiding repetitive statements, et cetera, which could
free up more Council time for both tackling the crises
of the day and preventing the conflicts of tomorrow.

I thank Council members once again for the
support throughout our presidency. I look forward to
hearing their views on our collective work this month.
I wish the United States delegation every success in its
Council presidency in September.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

