Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): That is the first time that I have seen
a representative of a country interrupting the
representative of another country while reading his
statement to raise a point of order. That does not happen.
No one may interrupt an ambassador of another country
while delivering a statement. In any case, I recounted
facts and information and posed legitimate questions to
all members. Consider what I said regarding information
and factual events. Members can verify them. They are
not accusations, rather they are facts.

My delegation has taken note of the sixty-
first report on the implementation of supposedly
humanitarian resolutions aimed at supporting the
efforts of the Syrian Government and its institutions
to improve the lives and well-being of Syrian civilians
and to build their capacity to improve the difficult
humanitarian conditions that are the result of the civil
war imposed on my country. I will not address the
report before the Council in detail as it is intended to
deal with objectives that are not related to the interests
of the Syrian people or their security and well-being. It
is simply used to repeat obsolete things that may please
certain anti-Syrian Governments. The proof is that
most pages of the report focus on the situation in Idlib,
guided by the vision of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and its open sources. It uses
vague language and fabricated names that take us back
to an era that we thought OCHA had left behind, an era
in which it was exploited by certain agendas of States
that have influence in the Security Council. Those
countries sought to undermine the efforts of the Syrian
Government and to find pretexts to accuse it and to
make it an enemy rather than to establish a partnership
with it and fully cooperate and coordinate with it in
advance. Cities such as Raqqa, Hajin, Baghouz, Deir
ez-Zor, Tell Rifaat, Palmyra, Afrin and Manbij did not
receive any attention from those who draft such reports.
They always write short and ambiguous expressions,
refusing to use clear language and without attributing
responsibility for the war crimes and crimes against
humanity to the international coalition, the occupying
Turkish forces, the militias and affiliated terrorist
groups. They do not address the tragic plight of the
civilians, including in areas occupied by the United
States, such as Rukban and Al-Hol camps. Because
they claim to be neutral and professional, as we hope
they truly are, they had to say something about the
existence and enormity of those unquestionable crimes.

In light of the information contained in the report,
we have the right to ask about hundreds of foreign
fighters whom the report claims to have resided in
Al-Hol camp and were reportedly transferred to other
places. We have extremely important information about
that. Thousands of foreign terrorists residing in Al-Hol
camp were transferred to other places. We have the
right to ask about their destination. What will their
fate be? Will they be recycled through Turkish territory
back into Syria? We have seen that happen in the north-
east of the country and other areas in order to launch
attacks on peaceful civilian areas in the north-west of
Syria, such as the city of Kesab, or to enter Idlib and
its rural areas. On what basis were they released from
the camps? Who facilitated and funded this operation?
Are we going to see those terrorists in other targeted
countries, pursuant to the policies of certain countries
under fabricated names such as the Islamic State in
North Africa, like Da'esh in our region, Or the Islamic
State in the Caucasus and Central Asia? It would
seem that investing in terrorism is far more lucrative
for certain States Members of the Organization than
investing in the Sustainable Development Goals, the
environment, conflict containment, the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or
humanitarian work.

Ever since the first meeting of the Security Council
on the humanitarian situation in my country years ago,
we have stressed that a tangible improvement in the
humanitarian situation in Syria requires dealing with
foreign political, military and economic intervention
in the affairs of my country. Obviously, discussing
the details of these aggressive interventions requires
time that the Council is not willing to spend. I do
not believe that certain members of the Council are
willing to seriously engage in core issues leading
to the achievement of the noble objectives of real
humanitarian work.

Are the representatives of certain Western States
ready to discuss the terrorism that is targeting my
country? Some States are investing in this terrorism.
They collateralize their investment with tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters from more than
100 States Members ofthe Organization, providing them
with all kinds of support, finance and weapons. Are the
representatives ofthose Western States ready to discuss
economic terrorism and the collective punishment that
their Governments practice by imposing unilateral
coercive sanctions against the Syrian people? These
sanctions do not exclude children, the elderly, women
or the sick. Are those colleagues willing to discuss the
role their Governments are playing in prolonging this
crisis, which has lasted for more than eight years? These
Governments are hindering the political solution and
thereby increasing the suffering of the Syrian people.
We all know the answer very well. We realize that those
Governments are offering various fake excuses and
pretexts to avoid this discussion, which would highlight
their serious political, legal and moral failings.

I will refrain from reading certain paragraphs
contained in my statement so as not to be accused
of attacking the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We have made
great progress in spite of the enormous challenges we
face and we are confident that, together, we could have
achieved much more in the humanitarian field if some
of our United Nations partners had been committed
to the principles of humanitarian work, notably by
respecting the principles of sovereignty, neutrality,
non-politicization, full cooperation and coordination
with the Syrian Government, which is the key party
involved in meeting the needs of Syrians.

The Syrian Government, like every other
responsible Government in the world, including the
Governments of Member States, cannot sit idle while
terrorists control one of its regions and use the citizens
of Dara'a as human shields, targeting peaceful civilians
in neighbouring cities and towns with indiscriminate
missiles and rockets. It is obvious that the Syrian
Government must defend its citizens and has the right
to respond to terrorists launching missiles. It has the
right to fight terrorism, as stressed by international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the anti-terrorism
resolutions. Any allegation that the Syrian Government
and its allies are deliberately targeting civilians or
civilian infrastructure is purely baseless.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that my country's
Government will spare no effort to help the Syrian
people surpass these difficult times of the history of
their country by providing them with the support and
services they need to move forward to rehabilitate
and rebuild what has been destroyed by terrorism and
aggression. I also emphasize that the way to improve
the humanitarian situation in my country is clear to
everybody. It requires full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as the lifting of the illegal, inhumane and
unilateral coercive measures against it. The Syrian
State must be supported in the humanitarian and
development areas, in addition to the measures taken
by the Government to fight terrorism and put an end
to the illegal presence of United States, British, French
and Turkish forces throughout the entire territories of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

