Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): San Marino aligns
itself with the statement delivered previously by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate, and would like to thank
the briefers for their contributions. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
(S/2019/509). This year's report indicates once again
that an enormous number of grave violations persist
across the world. We firmly condemn such violations
and continue to support the children and armed
conflict agenda and mandate. We welcome the effective
implementation of existing action plans and the signing
of new ones.

While August marks the lO-year anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), it is regrettable that children
in armed conflicts continue to pay a very high
price 4 they continue to be killed, maimed, raped,
abducted and recruited as soldiers. In addition, more
and more children are living in areas of war. Because
of prolonged conflicts in densely populated areas,
civilians, including children, are under direct attack.
We express our deepest concern for the high number
of boys and girls killed and maimed by indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, and we urge all parties to
uphold their obligations under international law.

Many children have been killed, injured and
traumatized by the use of explosive weapons. The use
of such weapons in urban warfare is also destroying
their homes and vital infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools and water- and electricity-supply systems.
These attacks cause a disruption of basic services in the
daily lives of civilians. Boys and girls have to flee their
homes. They cannot go to school or receive the medical
attention they need. Furthermore, schools have been
targeted or used by armed forces for military purposes.
As a result, students have been denied their right to
learn and to have a better future. We firmly condemn
such acts, which deprive boys and girls of their right to
an education.

San Marino recently joined the Safe Schools
Declaration, a political commitment to better protect
students, teachers, schools and universities during war,
with the aim of enabling young people to continue their
education. We believe that education is a powerful tool
for peace. As such, it should be supported, respected
and promoted. We therefore urge other countries to join
this instrument.

San Marino believes that the most vulnerable
groups deserve special attention. We therefore
sponsored the recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019),
with its focus on the needs of children with disabilities
in times of conflict.

San Marino also supports the ACT to protect
children affected by conflict campaign, which seeks
to increase awareness about the six grave violations
against boys and girls, including how to stop and
prevent them. It is fundamental to raise awareness,
improve the conditions of affected children and prevent
future crimes against them.

Finally, this year San Marino signed on to the
Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers,
another important instrument for the prevention of the
recruitment of children as soldiers.

We are extremely pleased about the release of more
than 13,000 children from armed forces and armed
groups. We would like to commend the work of the
Office of the Under-Secretary-General for its dedication
and tireless efforts. We need to continue along this path
and raise awareness, free children from recruitment,
stop the horrific violations, support children's recovery
from conflict-related trauma and work systematically
for their rehabilitation.

Protecting children should be an integral part of
any peace process. We should not forget that we can
make a huge difference in the lives of these boys and
girls. By helping children in conflicts, we are sowing
the seeds for a better and more peaceful world.

