Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for this further opportunity to provide the Security Council with an update on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the issuance of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1150) before members today and prior to the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We are unfortunately going through a period of heightened political tensions, marked by ongoing differences among the members of the ruling coalition. Six weeks after suspending the Council of Ministers and announcing the launch of consultations with a broad range of representatives of the political forces and civil society, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi addressed the nation yesterday afternoon. In that speech, the President announced the end of the coalition between the Cap pour le changement and the Front commun pour le Congo (FCC) and maintained that, in view of the loss of the current parliamentary majority, he had decided to appoint an adviser tasked with identifying a new majority ready to support his reform programme. He also stressed that, if that adviser were unable to identify a new parliamentary majority, he would proceed to dissolve the National Assembly and ask the Congolese people to give him a majority at the ballot box. As we speak, while noting the end of the coalition, as decided by the President, the FCC has rejected the analysis of a crisis between the Government and Parliament and described the decisions of the Head of State as unconstitutional. Meanwhile, several civil society and opposition representatives welcomed the assessment of the country's political situation by the Head of State and expressed their support for his approach. Unfortunately, today we must deplore the clashes between militants of the two political forces surrounding and within Parliament. In the light of those tensions, over the past month MONUSCO met with numerous representatives of the political forces and civil society to encourage them to resolve their differences through dialogue and avoid any actions that could incite violence. The Mission also stressed the need to focus their efforts on reaching agreement on stabilization policies and institutional reforms, which are essential to improving the security and daily lives of the Congolese people. We will continue to use our good offices to facilitate a peaceful, early resolution of this sensitive political situation, which, if it persists, could have serious repercussions on the economic and security situation in the country in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. (spoke in English) As far as the security situation is concerned, I remain concerned about the continuing protection crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where insecurity, grave violations of human rights and displacement continue to affect civilians, notably women and children. Indeed, while armed group activities persist in the Djugu and Irumu territories of Ituri, albeit recently at a reduced level, very serious incidents of intercommunal violence and attacks against civilians were once again recorded in the past month in the Beni, Masisi and Rutshuru territories of North Kivu, as well as in the Uvira, Mwenga and Fizi territories of South Kivu. The deadly activities of national and foreign armed groups in those territories serve to highlight the crucial role that the MONUSCO force, including the Force Intervention Brigade, needs to continue to play to support national security forces in expanding State authority and deterring violence against civilians. The protection of civilians remains a central priority for MONUSCO, which it pursues through a whole-of-mission approach involving the civilian, military and police components. Given the deteriorating humanitarian situation in provinces affected by conflict, protecting civilians is also heavily dependent upon unimpeded access to those in need. I therefore strongly condemn recent unacceptable attacks against humanitarian workers who, despite numerous operational and security challenges, continue to assist vulnerable civilian populations. The ability of humanitarian workers to support the Congolese authorities is absolutely essential to relieve the suffering of victims of conflict and was key to ending the eleventh Ebola outbreak in Equateur province. Protecting civilians also requires closing the space for actors perpetrating atrocities, by ensuring accountability for their crimes. The recent trial and conviction of Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka for war crimes, including rape, sexual slavery and the recruitment of children, therefore represents an important step forward for Congolese military justice in combating impunity. Some of the most serious challenges affecting the Democratic Republic of the Congo - from the presence of foreign armed groups to the illegal exploitation of, and trafficking in, mineral resources - require regional and international efforts to achieve sustainable solutions. In that context, I salute the efforts undertaken by the Congolese authorities to engage constructively with the country's neighbours to resolve their differences, foster regional economic cooperation and consolidate regional peace and stability. As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi approaches the beginning of his chairmanship of the African Union, those efforts will most likely be sustained in 2021. MONUSCO will continue to work closely with the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa to support the Government in that respect, as one of the constituents of the United Nations Great Lakes regional stabilization strategy. The Mission also remains committed to working closely with the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community to ensure synergies and make certain that our joint investment in supporting regional stability brings about maximum results. The drawdown and ultimate withdrawal of MONUSCO from the Democratic Republic of the Congo figured prominently in our discussions with the Government in recent months. The result of those discussions is the joint strategy on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO, which was shared with the Council by the Secretary-General on 26 October. The joint strategy represents a common vision for the gradual, responsible and sustainable drawdown and exit of the Mission. That transition is not a process that started recently, but is, rather, a continuation of steps taken following the 2018 presidential elections and the subsequent peaceful transfer of power. Since then, MONUSCO has closed nine field offices and is currently present in only six provinces, in addition to the mission headquarters in Kinshasa. The joint strategy recognizes that the realities on the ground and security needs are different in each province where MONUSCO is still present. Therefore, it envisions a tailored approach through province-specific strategies that aim to progressively consolidate the Mission's footprint in the three provinces most affected by active conflict, namely, North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. By June 2021, MONUSCO will withdraw completely from the Kasais, and by June 2022, should gains in stabilizations persist, it will also be in a position to withdraw from Tanganyika. Ultimately, the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians lies with State authorities. The sustainability and tempo of MONUSCO's transition is therefore dependent upon the Government's capacity to assume security responsibilities and strengthen its institutional presence across the country. To that end, the Mission is already actively supporting the implementation of the Government's national police reform plan and the joint justice reform plan recently signed between the Government and the United Nations Development Programme. MONUSCO has also stepped up its engagement with relevant stakeholders to advocate for the establishment of the new framework to foster and supervise the disarmament, demobilization and community reintegration of ex-combatants and stands ready to increase its efforts to coordinate international support for security sector reform. My Deputy Special Representative and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator is leading our transition task force and has been charged with ensuring that the comparative advantages of all United Nations actors and partners are utilized to enhance complementarities, create positive synergies and avert possible gaps in programming and support for the Government. The global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has affected MONUSCO's regular activities, as has been the case in other peacekeeping contexts. As of today, a total of 173 MONUSCO personnel have tested positive for COVID-19, 153 have recovered and six have died after contracting the virus. In this difficult context, the Mission has made the utmost efforts to fulfil its mandate while continuing to ensure the safety and security of civilian staff and uniformed components. To make this possible, I have instructed the Mission to comply strictly with World Health Organization guidelines and put in place all possible measures to minimize the risk of contagion and to ensure that suspected and confirmed cases of COVID-19 are managed adequately. (spoke in French) As was mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, the current political situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is highly volatile. The Council can play a significant role in fostering a negotiated settlement to this political crisis so as to prioritize lasting solutions that place the interests of the Congolese people above short-term political goals that are liable to further heighten tensions. The Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot afford a grave institutional crisis. It needs stable and functional institutions that can get back to work as soon as possible, focusing on national economic recovery and stabilization in the eastern part of the country ahead of the general elections scheduled for 2023. To conclude, I wish to take this opportunity to thank all members of the Security Council as well as the troop- and police-contributing countries for their steadfast commitment and their support for stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO. MONUSCO is at a critical juncture in the provision of support to the national authorities in shoring up stability, so as to usher in a lasting peace and development. I wish to pre-emptively thank the Council for its guidance in the upcoming steps of this vital work for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
