Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which deal with
the issue of terrorism, I would like to give an update on
the continued cooperation among the three Committees
and their experts groups.

During the past six months, the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on Al-Qaida and Taliban, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and their respective
experts groups have increased their cooperation as
requested by the Security Council in recent resolutions
pertaining to the three Committees, notably in
resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008).

The three Committees attach great importance to
the coordination of the activities of and cooperation
among their expert groups, namely the Monitoring
Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee.
The Committees welcome the continuing efforts of the
expert groups to develop common strategies on areas
of common concern, to organize joint workshops, to
coordinate their participation in conferences and joint
country visits and to exchange information on their
activities. The Committees encourage their expert
groups to further enhance their exchange of
information and coordination with regard to capacity-
building, assistance requests and delivery of technical
assistance activities. In this context, I would also like
to recall that the cooperation and coordination would
be facilitated by the co-location of the experts in the
framework of the Capital Master Plan.

The three expert groups continued to implement
the common strategy on dealing with non- and late-
reporting States through exchange of information and
joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting Member
States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. In particular, the three
expert groups completed a series of three workshops on
reporting for African States by holding a workshop in
Kenya, from 11 to 13 November 2008, for North and
East African States. This was organized in cooperation
with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
Vienna. Similar workshops are being planned for
Member States in Asia, including the Pacific countries,
09-34898
the Middle East and Latin America and the Caribbean
region.

In addition to these workshops, the three expert
groups are exploring the use of common video
conferences. These would be conducted from New York,
interacting with officials in the capitals of Member
States - for example, as took place with officials from
the Central African Republic on 11 May - in order to
receive further information and updates on the status of
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Committees believe that such
workshops and interactive discussions with officials
from capitals are very important tools to enhance the
cooperation between the three Committees, and Member
States, to help improve the understanding of the distinct
though connected mandates of the three Committees,
and to assist Member States in the implementation of
the relevant resolutions.

In response to Security Council resolutions 1805
(2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008), the three expert
groups recently presented another common strategy to
engage with international, regional and subregional
organizations, entities and agencies. The objectives of
this new strategy are to increase coherence and
coordination in the counter-terrorism efforts of the
three Committees in their relations with such bodies
and to facilitate the Iatter's efforts to cooperate with
the expert groups of the three Committees. The three
Committees welcome the presentation of a second
common strategy as further evidence of the close
working relationship between the three expert groups,
and are currently considering their joint proposal.

The expert groups continue to coordinate their
visits to Member States and participation at relevant
conferences. CTED and the Monitoring Team also
exchange their schedules of visits to explore whether
these could be conducted jointly. When an expert group
does not participate in a visit, they exchange
information on the Member State that is to be visited.
In addition, the three expert groups also share their
reports on their visits whenever possible. The most
recent visit to Uganda was the twelfth joint trip of
CTED with the Monitoring Team to a Member State,
and more joint visits are envisaged later this year. The
three expert groups also jointly participated in a
regional ministerial meeting on organized crime and
terrorism, organized by UNODC in the Dominican
Republic in February, and a subregional workshop
organized by UNODC and the Organization for
09-34898
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Bucharest at the
beginning of April.

The expert groups also cooperate on issues
regarding the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions by States of the Pacific Islands
Forum. They attend periodic meetings with Pacific
Islands Forum missions to the United Nations in New
York on the implementation of the resolutions. The
three expert groups also continue to work together on
risk management and border security issues.

The three expert groups also continue to
contribute to and coordinate their work within the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, which was established to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism
efforts of the United Nations system and to help
implement the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

In addition to the aforementioned activities, there
are regular meetings of the expert groups in New York.
Moreover, when CTC organizes briefings in the
framework of its official meetings, the Monitoring
Team and the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee are
also invited to participate.

Finally, the three Committees and their Chairmen
have worked to enhance their cooperation. To this end,
we recently organized an informal exchange of views
among the Chairmen of the three Committees. I would
like to note that the 1540 Committee adopted the topic
of "Enhancing ongoing cooperation between the 1540
Committee and other international organizations,
including the 1267 Committee and CTC" in its
programme of work for 2009. For this purpose, it
recently established a working group on cooperation in
order to promote information sharing, coordination on
country visits and workshops, technical assistance and
other issues of relevance to all three Committees.

On the occasion of previous briefings, a
comparative table was issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees and of their expert
groups. That table has served as a useful tool for
Member States, and it has helped them to better
understand the specificities and complementarities of
our work. An updated version of the table is available
today.
3

Terrorism and proliferation continue to be a daily
reality and a threat to international peace and security,
faced equally by States and individuals alike.
Cooperation is therefore a crucial element in the efforts
to counter the threat of terrorism, including that from
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons for terrorist
purposes. The three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and their respective expert groups continue to
be committed to cooperating and coordinating their
work, within their respective mandates, in order to
contribute to an effective and efficient approach within
the overall United Nations framework and within
international efforts. In this respect, the Committees
look forward to receiving further guidance from the
Council on areas of common interest in order to better
coordinate counter-terrorism efforts. This concludes
the joint report.

