Mr. Malme (Norway): Transnational organized
crime represents a threat to peace, security and stability

in West Africa and the Sahel region, and ultimately to
the rest of the international community. That calls for
renewed and more coordinated international efforts,
with the United Nations in the lead. That is why
Norway supports the task force on transnational
organized crime set up by the Secretary-General last
year. We have provided earmarked funds for its start-up
phase, and Norway's support enables Vienna to have a
task force liaison officer here in New York.

Cocaine smuggled from Latin America through
West Africa may end up in Norway and elsewhere in
Europe, but it leaves drug abuse, corruption and
violence in its path. Pirates in the Gulf of Guinea may
target Norwegian vessels, but they also undermine
economic activity in the region.

Furthermore, the aftermath of the Libyan crisis
has accentuated some of those challenges and
highlighted the need to address and counter them, as
recently pointed out by the United Nations inter-
agency assessment mission to the Sahel region and the
report of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(see S/2012/42).

Several West African States have over the past
few years made important strides towards greater
political stability and freedom. Yet, the situation
remains tenuous. Terrorism and weapons proliferation,
increasing piracy along the coast and the drug trade not
only pose serious threats to the safety and lives of
individuals, they also seriously challenge the
governance, peace and stability of the States in the
region, of both fragile post-conflict States and stable
democracies.

Transnational organized crime is not just a
judicial matter. It undermines the very foundations of
States by penetrating deeply into the political sphere
and the public and private sectors through corruption,
money laundering and illicit financing.

Great efforts are already being made by the States
in the region, with international support, to address
those challenges. However, there is an urgent need for
much closer coordination and cooperation between
States in the region. There is also a need for stronger
political commitments from Governments in the
region. Law enforcement cooperation is important, but
there must also be sufficient political will to tackle
organized crime.

Important initiatives taken by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
need to be strengthened and supported by the
international community. The International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL) has a key role in
supporting the Member States in the region by
addressing the threats from transnational organized
crime. Norway welcomes the recent initiative to
strengthen the collaboration between the United
Nations and INTERPOL in West Africa and Sahel
region.

The heightened focus on threats posed by
organized crime deserves the place it has been given in
the Secretary-General's five-year action agenda. We
look forward to working with the United Nations to
mobilize collective action and develop new tools to
address this problem. We expect that the Secretary-
General's task force on transnational organized crime
will significantly contribute to integrating responses to
transnational organized crime into the peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, security and development activities of
the United Nations. We hope the Task Force and the
five-year action agenda will support relevant global
and regional initiatives and create a focus that is sorely
needed in regions such as West Africa.

Lastly, let me echo others in thanking Togo and
its President for organizing this meeting.

