Mr. Ndaruzaniye (Burundi) (interpretation from French): It is an honour and a privilege for me and my
delegation to be invited to the Council table to convey my
Government's modest contribution to our joint consideration
of a peaceful solution to the conflict that is tearing apart the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the outset, I should like to thank and congratulate
you, Mr. President. I should like first to thank you and,
through you, the entire Security Council, for opening this
discussion to delegations that, though not members of the
Security Council, are equally dedicated to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. Secondly, I should like to
commend you, Sir, for the excellent approach you have
taken to the subject: discussing a peaceful way of resolving
the conflict that is tearing apart the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the entire Great Lakes region.

If all those involved and all those who have spoken
share the same determination to find a peaceful way to
resolve this conflict, my delegation has no doubt that the
bases for a lasting resolution of this conflict will be
established in order to block the possibility of further
hostilities.

My Government is convinced that only a peaceful
approach and dialogue can initiate a lasting solution to
any armed or non-armed conflict. We are encouraged by
what we have heard: that all the parties are increasingly
resolved to adopt such an approach in order to resolve the
conflict that concerns all of us taking part in this
discussion. I should like to reaffirm that, if requested to
do so, the Government of Burundi will make its full
contribution and provide assistance to enable that
approach to triumph so that peace can be consolidated in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the entire
Great Lakes region.

For decades, the Great Lakes region of Africa has
been subjected to almost chronic instability. Cyclical
insecurity has produced refugee flows and a whole series
of problems that innocent people have been enduring for
generations. The ideology of extermination and genocide,
which in Rwanda led to the greatest genocide of the late
twentieth century, is, unfortunately, still spreading
throughout the region. While the violence of war scares
all of us, verbal violence gives rise to a war mentality and
an ideology of violence, against which we should all fight
to our last breath.

While earnestly calling for an immediate cessation
of armed hostilities and for the opening of dialogue
between the parties directly or indirectly concerned in this
conflict, it is just as necessary and urgent to initiate
throughout the Great Lakes region a genuine culture of
peace that will restore the universal values of human
rights.

As the President of the Republic of Burundi stated
to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session, we are
concerned about the persistence of a way of thinking that
sets people against each other on the basis of ethnicity
and about the use in the region of sinister militias and
rebels. President Buyoya also drew the attention of all the
parties to the conflict to the fact that they should not
pursue that path, because of the great risk of conflagration
in the region at large.

 

Unfortunately, in that part of the world entire defeated
armies and militias of all types are moving about
throughout the region, making short-lived alliances here and
there that spread terror and propagate the same ideology of
extermination and genocide. Bands of criminals do not
hesitate to proclaim themselves heroes of liberation beyond
their borders, and funds are set up to fuel these networks of
illicit arms traffic, which then foment continual cross-border
wars in the region.

The conclusions of the reports in documents
S/1998/777 and S/ 1998/ 1096 of the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry on the movements of
arms and of armed groups or genocidal militias in the Great
Lakes region are eloquent on the subject, and deserve the
close attention of the Security Council so that peace and
security can be restored in that part of the world.

The Congolese Minister for Human Rights referred us
to document S/ 1999/205 on human rights violations in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which he submitted to the Security Council. My delegation
has taken due note of that document and of the step taken
with the Security Council.

Nevertheless, it seems to us that it would have been
fairer and more constructive to submit a complete report on
human rights violations in his country rather than just
adding to the list of external aggressors, because the deep-
seated conflict that is raging in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is of an internal nature, and its lasting solution
depends to a great extent on the Congolese people
themselves.

Today's topic should orient us towards an approach of
peace, of security for all, of dialogue for peace.
Unfortunately, other forces are developing an approach that
glorifies crime, and the media, through modern technology,
are disseminating an approach of hate. The approach of
peace must win out over that of hate and violence. For
security to prevail, we necessarily have to stop crime,
because the instability of a neighbour not only does not
guarantee security for oneself but can also be a persistent
source of destabilization in the shared region.

We must create or restore State or inter-State
mechanisms in order to achieve the common objective of
peace and stability in the region, and here the support of
the international community is necessary. The achievement
of these goals requires a cooperation that should be dictated
not by a state of war but rather by a constant quest for
peaceful coexistence among States and peoples.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the support
of the Government of Burundi for regional initiatives as
well as those taken by the OAU for a peaceful solution to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
should like also to call upon the United Nations and the
international community to take additional and
complementary steps in areas where regional initiatives
will have limitations, especially in material and
organizational terms.

While the protagonists are responsible for the
outbreak of the conflict, they also hold the key to the
solution because they know its root causes better than
anyone. Only dialogue at a negotiating table can reduce
tensions initially and later lay the foundations for a
peaceful solution to the conflict.

New problems stemming from the complexity of war
require first and foremost the attention of States and then
that of the international community. These problems
include the forcible displacement of persons within and
outside countries, the unlawful movement of arms
throughout the region, distinguishing between combatants
and unarmed civilians, the increase in the number of
abandoned children, and the proliferation of militias with
various and divergent purposes, among others.

Along with dialogue among the protagonists with a
view to putting an end to the war and taking the path of
a peaceful solution to the conflict, we must give serious
consideration to these new phenomena in order to help
States establish adequate machinery to deal with these
problems. I would like to express support, on behalf of
my Government, for the serious consideration that
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Security Council
have undertaken to give to the resolution of conflicts in
Africa.

Perhaps Africa's traditional talent for settling
conflicts and resolving difficulties might help us out in
the process of establishing the appropriate modern
mechanisms to safeguard peace and security in our
countries and throughout the world.

