Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the convening of this public
meeting of the Security Council to discuss a pressing
problem related to the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We anticipate
that today's discussion will allow us to strengthen the
unity of the international community in facing this
threat. The Russian Federation was one of the initiators
of tabling a relevant draft resolution of the Security
Council. We believe that the subject of the non-
proliferation of WMD and means of delivery is
becoming one of the primary threats to international
peace and security.

The world community is called upon to
increasingly and actively address fundamentally new
challenges in this area and to counter heretofore
unknown but equally complex challenges. The tragedy
of 11 September 2001, as well as the terrorist attacks
that have occurred in Moscow, Madrid, Tokyo, and in a
number of other cities around the world, demonstrate
very clearly what is perhaps the primary threat of our
time - terrorism.

The Security Council adopted a proactive role in
countering this threat by adopting its well-known
resolution 1373 (2001). In this decision, the Council
highlighted the close relationship between international
terrorism, organized crime, and illegal trafficking of
nuclear, chemical, biological and other materials that
pose a threat to human life. It also called for
coordinating efforts at the national, subregional and
international levels in order to strengthen the global
response to the challenges and threats to international
security.

Particular attention should be given to the
problem of the existence of black markets of WMD,
which are the most dangerous markets. Terrorists are
inventive and will stop at nothing to acquire
components to produce WMD in order to strike totally
innocent people. The draft resolution directs States to
preventing WMD and materials that are sensitive from
the standpoint of proliferation from falling into the
hands of non-State actors, above all for terrorist
purposes. The draft resolution guides the development
of international cooperation efforts to counter this
phenomenon. Clearly, we believe that all the efforts in
this area should be based on international law and
national legislation, without impeding legitimate,
peaceful cooperation efforts.

It is here that we see the substance of this draft,
which was prepared after lengthy expert consultations,
both among the five permanent members and by taking
into account discussions with the non-permanent
members of the Council, as well as a broad range of
United Nations Member States. The sponsors did not
seek to supersede, by a Security Council decision,
international treaties in the area of non-proliferation
and disarmament. This is precisely why the draft
resolution contains provisions clearly pointing out that
its adoption in no way undermines or runs counter to
obligations that States may have under the international
treaties in the area of non-proliferation and
disarmament to which they are parties.

We believe that the Security Council is not only
entitled but also obligated to take appropriate measures
in the area of international security, to include those
that are legally binding. This draft resolution is no
exception. As such, exactly nine years ago, in April
1995, the Council adopted resolution 984 (1995),
which provided for security safeguards in the case of
an attack on States, including with the use of nuclear
weapons. This resolution, at the same time, took note
of the security safeguards provided by the nuclear
Powers with respect to the non-use of nuclear weapons.

Clearly, monitoring the implementation of the
draft resolution requires establishing an ad hoc
mechanism. We support the establishment of a Security
Council committee on this issue, which would be
engaged in collecting and analysing the responses of
Member States with respect to the measures they have
taken in implementation of the resolution and with
respect to possible assistance to those States, when
relevant requests are made. We believe that the
committee will need to work in close cooperation and
use the expert support of such agencies as the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
as well as of the United Nations Secretariat. The
duration of its work will, above all, depend on how it
implements the goals set for it. In this regard, we
believe that the minimum time period would be one
year

We call on all States to support the Security
Council draft resolution on countering the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

