Mr. McCully (New Zealand): It is with a sense of
dismay that we address the Council today on the lack
of progress in relations between Israel and Palestine
and the violence that has raged there in the past few
weeks. For the nine and a half months we have been
non-permanent members of the Council, we have made
clear New Zealand's view that concerted Council action
is required to jump-start the direct talks between
Israelis and Palestinians that are the only means by
which a durable solution can be found.

Over recent months, we have been concerned to
hear the ongoing repetition of a defeatist narrative that
is in danger ofbecoming self-fulfilling: "The conditions
are not right; the parties are not ready". But if the
conditions are not right for direct talks, then surely it is
the Council's role to try to create the right conditions. If
the parties are not ready, then surely the Council should
tell them to get ready, help them get ready and give
them a time frame within which to be ready.

No one can excuse the violence that has taken
place, but we should understand that it is at least in
part a result of a failure of the diplomatic or political
process. While those guilty of acts of Violence must
take responsibility for them and be held to account, the
Council must take responsibility for the failure of the
diplomatic and political process and move to resolve it.

We therefore welcome the opportunity for the
Security Council to focus on this matter today, and
hope that the Council can find a way to extend greater
protection to those under threat of violence, and hope
to those who currently have none. Ultimately, the
Council will be judged not by the quality of the words
that are spoken around this table, but by the quality
of the actions that follow. What actions should the
Council take in relation to the question of Palestine in
the circumstances that confront us today?

First, we must clearly and unequivocally call for
a cessation of the violence and for the leaders of all
parties to use all of their authority to end it.

Secondly, we should restate the unambiguous
commitment of the Council to a two-State solution as
the only acceptable basis for sustainable peace.

Thirdly, we should be clear that a sustainable
solution can be achieved only through direct talks
between the parties, supported by key stakeholders,
including the Council.

Fourthly, if the parties are not ready and the
conditions not right for those direct talks today, then
the Council should mandate a course of action allowing
the parties to get ready and making the conditions right
for those talks to commence within a realistic but early
time frame.

My country strongly welcomes the very clear signal
sent by the Secretary-General in undertaking his visit to
the region this week. We believe that the Council must
also send its own clear signal to the parties, to their
neighbours and close friends and to the international
community. This is a time to focus on what can be
achieved, rather than to lament what cannot.

Since joining the Council, we have been clear that
we will work cooperatively with other Council members
to advance any constructive proposals in relation to the
Middle East peace process. It has been six long years
since the Council adopted a formal resolution on the
matter. The events of recent weeks cry out for action.
While we remain ready to support any other reasonable
proposals for progress, we will, over the coming days,
share with colleagues the text of a draft resolution
giving effect to the four steps that I have just outlined.
We do so in the hope that the draft resolution will at
least stimulate a level of debate and engagement that
will enable the Council to chart a way forward.

New Zealand is pleased to note the increasing level
of activity by the Quartet. We are especially pleased to
see the Quartet moving to engage the leadership of Arab
nations through the so-called Quartet-plus format. We
see that format as being the appropriate vehicle through
which the Council can mandate the necessary actions
and receive regular reports of progress. It may be that a
parameters resolution will be required in the early part
of next year.

We appreciate the fact that, over time, the Middle
East peace process has absorbed the energy and attention
of many good people. In particular, we admire the huge
energy and commitment brought to the topic by United
States Secretary of State John Kerry. We hope that the

efforts of the Council will help create a space in which
the diplomatic leadership of Secretary Kerry and others
might succeed. If there is one lesson we can learn from
previous attempts to resolve this seemingly intractable
problem, it is that it will require the concerted support
of the entire international community for diplomacy to
find a solution. While no words from the Council will
themselves bring about a solution to the Palestinian
question, it is our duty today to find ways to stem the
violence and then to find a framework that creates
space for the diplomacy and political engagement that
are so seriously overdue.

