Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me to begin by
reiterating Italy's unwavering commitment to the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
aimed at preventing terrorist organizations from
committing acts that, sadly, still pose tremendous
threats to international peace and security. In voicing
our convinced support for the activities of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), we wish to
express our most sincere appreciation to their
respective Chairmen - Ambassador Verbeke,
Ambassador Arias and Ambassador Burian - for their
leadership on those delicate and important tasks. Let
me also thank the groups of experts that support the
action of the three Committees, and in particular
Assistant Secretary-General Ruperez, who will soon be
leaving the post of Counter-Terrorism Executive
Director.

Italy, while aligning itself with the statement that
the European Union presidency will deliver shortly,
will confine itself to addressing a few points
concerning the actions of the three Committees.

On the Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee, Italy,
one of the major contributors to the list, is fully
convinced of the continued value of that instrument in
preventing terrorists who belong to the Al-Qaida
network from committing more of the heinous crimes
we have too often experienced. In order to ensure its
continued effectiveness, the Committee should make
every effort to encourage other Member States to fulfil
their responsibility to contribute actively to the list.

Italy commends the steps in the right direction
that the Committee has taken in recent months -
particularly after the adoption of resolutions 1730
(2006) and 1735 (2006) - to improve the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime, while developing clearer and
fairer procedures for listing, delisting and humanitarian
exemptions. In particular, we welcome the fact that the
focal point for delisting is now established. We are
already at work in this field, examining with due care
all the relevant requests that are brought to our
attention.

Let me underline the need to keep the List
updated and consistent with the threat. That requires
constant action not only of Committee members but of
the entire membership of the United Nations. This is
particularly true for the Taliban section of the List,
where, as Ambassador Verbeke noted in his briefing, an
urgent update is needed, also in light of the complex
situation and of the most recent evolution of events on
the ground.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate are fully engaged in carrying out
their duties, with the huge responsibility of monitoring
the implementation of a resolution as broad as 1373
(2001). Many significant results and significant
progress have already been achieved - for example,
with regard to the ratification of the international
conventions and protocols against terrorism.
Nevertheless, if we want new and more specific results
in increasing the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) as a whole, we need to strengthen the action of
the Committee and its Executive Directorate. Italy
believes that much can be done to streamline the
internal procedures that may have overburdened
relations between the Council, the Committee, the
Executive Directorate, other Committees and the
membership at large.

Italy hopes that CTC can rapidly deliver on the
preliminary assessment of compliance with resolution 1373

(2001) by all Member States. That is the precondition for
starting a genuine and new interactive dialogue with the
membership, which is essential in the many cases where
technical assistance is needed. In this particular field we
have to explore new ways for the CTED and the Committee
to bring together recipient States that have expressed their
consent and interest, donor countries, relevant bodies
within the United Nations system, and other international
organizations. The review of the CTED mandate, which
expires by the end of the year, creates the opportunity for a
new reflection in that respect. Italy is willing to contribute
to this process.

We praise the results achieved by the 1540
Committee, in particular its extensive outreach
activities to raise the membership's awareness of the
scope and obligations of the resolution. The recent
debates on international assistance were also useful in
seeking synergic cooperation among States and
relevant international organizations aimed at fostering
compliance with non-proliferation standards of the
above resolutions.

Bearing in mind next year's review of the
mandate of the 1540 Committee, it is essential to step
up the initiatives to increase the number of national
reports on the implementation of the resolution. At the
same time, the matrices prepared by Committee's
experts - whose work we highly value - should be
used to identify loopholes in national legislation, to
draft best practices and to facilitate the matching of
assistance requests and offers. In responding to the
multifaceted nature of proliferation, the 1540
Committee should continue to focus on strengthening,
inter alia, the safety and security of dual-use items and
technologies, export and border controls and law
enforcement efforts to stop the trafficking and
brokering in those items. The Committee should also
pay due attention to the proliferation of illicit financing
networks. Combating those networks should be an
integral component of the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The programme of work for the Committee
expires in October 2007. We are confident that in the
coming months a new programme of work will be
agreed upon to enhance our common endeavour to
promote full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and to pave the way for a renewal, in spring 2008, of
the Committee's mandate.

Let me conclude by saying that the Security
Council's action against international terrorism will be
more effective if its fundamental objectives are
mutually shared by all relevant partners within and
outside the United Nations. In this regard, the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) is of particular importance. Among other
things, it may be crucial to the achievement of the
shared objectives of the organs of the Security Council,
because it can facilitate the delivery of technical
assistance through the resources available in the
various United Nations agencies represented in the
Task Force. This is why Italy is fully committed to the
process of implementation of the global strategy
approved by the General Assembly last September,
where all Member States have a direct responsibility in
elaborating projects so as to make its various
components move forward. At the same time Italy
reiterates its firm commitment to finding a positive,
swift conclusion to the negotiation of the global
convention.

