Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (European Union) and
its 28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey,
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, align
themselves with this statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko back to the Security
Council and in assuring him of the European Union's
continued support. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina and thank
him for his statement.

A year has now passed since the holding of the
country's general elections, and we note with grave
concern that governments are still not formed on the
state and Federation levels, and that the state Parliament
is not fully functioning. This state of affairs seriously
hinders the implementation of much-needed reforms,
which would allow Bosnia and Herzegovina to move
forward on its EU path. It further raises questions
regarding the willingness of political leaders to fulfil
the aspiration of their fellow citizens to join the
European Union.

In that context, the European Union once again
urges all political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to uphold their responsibilities and proceed with
government formation without further delay. We
strongly encourage them to start showing a spirit of
compromise and a determination to reach an agreement
on the remaining areas of discord. The agreement
reached last August contained positive elements in
that regard.

Moreover, we reiterate our call on all political leaders
to refrain from nationalist and provocative rhetoric. We
also recall that revisionism and glorification of war
criminals contradicts EU values and is incompatible
with the prospect of integration into the European
Union. The European project is built on reconciliation;
Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions and leaders need
to uphold their commitment to lasting reconciliation.

(spoke in French)

We recall once again that Bosnia and Herzegovina
was clear in its desire to become a member of the
European Union. The publication of the European
Commission opinion in May, with its key priorities
covering the Copenhagen political criteria,
demonstrates our profound commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina as long as it resolutely pursues the reform
agenda. The European Union expects the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities, once in place, to actively and
seriously proceed with those reforms.

(spoke in English)

The European Union insists on the need for the
authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of
law, in particular the independence and impartiality
of the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized
crime, countering radicalization, guaranteeing the
independence ofthe media and the safety ofjournalists,
promoting youth employment and education, and
ensuring the full and effective implementation of
socioeconomic reforms.

In order to prevent a humanitarian crisis during
the winter ahead, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
take urgent measures to ensure the management of
migration and access to the asylum system, including
closing the unsuitable site of Vucjak and increasing
reception capacities across the territory on the basis of
technical feasibility and security criteria. Coordination
among all competent authorities is key in order to make
good use of all the resources made available by the
European Union.

The European Union also reiterates that
election-related issues, including provisions for holding
local elections in Mostar and for the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency, should be addressed as soon
as possible, while taking into account the situation in
the country and in line with European standards and
decisions of the Constitutional Court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The European Union underlines that no
legislative or political steps should be taken that would
make the implementation of the European Court of
Human Rights Sejdic-Finci ruling and related rulings
more challenging. Bosnia and Herzegovina also needs
to implement the recommendations of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights in order to
improve the democratic quality of its electoral processes.

The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU
perspective as a single, united and sovereign country.
With regard to the political and security situation on the
ground and the importance of maintaining a safe and
secure environment, the European Union also reiterates
its firm support for Operation Althea and the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council.

In conclusion, five months after the Commission
adopted its opinion, the focus is now on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the credibility of its commitment to
the EU path. To make that commitment credible, we
need counterparts with whom to speak and engage
concretely on the reforms needed to advance towards
the EU. Beyond words, we now need tangible proof that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes
to become, one day, a member of the European Union.

