Mr. Kau (Fiji): Allow me to congratulate you,
Sir, on your country's presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to thank you for the
opportunity to speak on this important issue concerning
a member of our Alliance of Small Island States, an
observer in our Pacific Islands Forum and the youngest
member of our family of nations - Timor-Leste. I
should like also to thank Special Envoy Ian Martin for
his briefing and to commend the four countries -
Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Portugal - for
their briefings and their efforts on the ground.

Recent events in the country paint a picture of a
young nation struggling to stand up to the challenges of

S/l'V.5457

 

nationhood - challenges that are both vivid and
vague. It is the vague ones that we stumble over when
they manifest themselves. As in most developing
countries, it does not take a major riot or much wanton
destruction to upset the carefully planned Government
processes or rend the people's hope for the future.

Five years after attaining independence, events
have not proceeded as smoothly as many expected.
Efforts to reorient the mindset of the people and
redirect the energy to nation-building are never easy.
Nation-building takes time and resources and is subject
to a lot of internal and external considerations.
Prominent among those considerations is the issue of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. It is the
difficulties encountered during the demobilization and
reintegration of the Timor-Leste security forces that
caused the present impasse. When those difficulties are
embroiled together with a feeling of being
marginalized, a volatile mix is the result. All that was
required was for someone to fan the flame for the
volatility to explode.

Capacity-building and development and the
establishment of new systems and institutional
structures conducive to good governance and stable
democracy are fundamental to ensuring peace, security
and long-term stability and, ultimately, sustainable
development. The effort to curb spending and reduce
superfluous expenses has often met with opposition in
almost all nations emerging from conflicts.

Every country needs peace and stability,
including a stable, democratically elected Government,
and Timor-Leste is no exception. The United Nations
must be commended for its part in the start of Timor-
Leste's journey, and it behooves the Organization to be
seized with the development of its political and
economic well-being. That of course can happen only
with commensurate efforts from the people and
Government. In this regard, Fiji supports and would
welcome a sustained United Nations presence to guide
the journey of Timor-Leste. Such a presence would
also be indicative of the Organization's commitment to
build on its considerable investment in Timor-Leste of
more than six years.

With the provision of assistance through the
proposed new United Nations mission, as requested by
the Timor-Leste leaders, the Organization can better
enable the Government to make further advances in
fostering peace, stability and democracy. Should
assistance come from the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission at a later date, it must be
mindful of the sovereignty of the nation and
Government of Timor-Leste. Assistance must be
carried out in coherence with the United Nations
offices on the ground to ensure that it is all well
coordinated and in keeping with the wishes of the
people, and can be sustained by their Government
when the United Nations finally takes its leave.

Fiji participated in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
The Government of Fiji will be willing to participate in
a further peacekeeping role in Timor-Leste should it be
asked. We look to the Security Council to pave the way
for an extended United Nations presence and hopefully,
in due course, the assistance of the Peacebuilding
Commission to provide the much-needed advice and
support that can ensure long-lasting peace and stability
in Timor-Leste.

