Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): It is obvious that we are now moving towards
the end of this part of the Security Council's work without
the Council's adopting any specific measure. In view of
this, I should like to make the following remarks.

At the outset, we would like to extend our thanks to
you, Mr. President, and to the other members of the
Security Council. We extend our thanks also to all the
members of the Council and observers who have made
statements at this meeting today. This meeting and those
statements clearly demonstrate that the international

 
community is concerned at the dangerous situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories and throughout the region.

We have made serious efforts to ensure that the
outcome of this meeting would be the adoption of clear and
specific measures. We were supported by the Arab Group
in the United Nations and by the Movement of Non-
Aligned Countries in the Council, along with other Council
members. We extend our appreciation to them all.

Unfortunately, that outcome was not achieved, for
reasons to do with the situation in the Council and,
probably, I should say, with the position of one of its

 

permanent members. The outcome we did achieve seems
to have to do with a fear of repercussions on the ongoing
contacts aimed at achieving the desired progress in the
peace process. It is our understanding also that the
sponsors of the peace process - particularly the United
States of America - plan to intensify their efforts to
achieve the desired results.

We hope that this progress will occur: specifically,
that there will be an end to settlements and, that there will
be implementation of the agreements between the two
sides. In that event, we would be extremely happy and
would certainly not have further recourse to the Security
Council. But, if the current situation continues, and if the
ongoing efforts do not yield tangible results, we cannot
but turn to the Council once more in the hope of an
outcome different from today's.

I reiterate our thanks to all concerned.
