The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

We are discussing the situation in Afghanistan on
an important historic day. On this day 110 years ago,
15,000 female workers marched through the city of New
York demanding their rights. It is therefore a particular
honour for me to speak before the Security Council
today, which marks International Women's Day.

For a long time, the Council has been attentive to
women and peace and security. On 31 October 2000,
the Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on that very
subject. The Netherlands was then, too, anon-permanent
member of the Council, and we contributed actively to
its adoption (see S/PV.4213). The resolution is a political
framework, thereby making clear that without women,
peace will not stand a chance or thrive. It is a also clear
acknowledgement of how women and girls often suffer
and are particularly vulnerable in times of war and
conflict, but it is also concerns their role, leadership
and responsibility in bringing about lasting peace.

Every country was encouraged to draw up a
national action plan. A minority of 73 countries has
done so, including, notably, Afghanistan with its very
active Afghan women leaders' network. Worldwide,
however, a great gap remains to bridge between the
norms established for women and the bitter reality
that women face, especially, but not only, in conflict
situations. There continues to be an overwhelming lack
of negotiations in which women play a meaningful part,
let alone a leadership role, but resolution 1325 (2000) is
not only about political participation or representation.
It is also about the protection of women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence, especially in conflict
situations. That is the responsibility of us all - not
only that of Member States, the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, but of citizens in
general. There should be no room for complacency, let
alone impunity. There must be zero tolerance in every
situation regardless of the circumstances.

For women in Afghanistan, there are also rays of
hope. In the days of Queen Soraya, in 1919, Afghan
women were allowed to vote significantly earlier than
in many other countries. In modern-day Afghanistan,
First Lady Rula Ghani successfully has advocated
for women's rights. We hear of female judges and
women in Government as ministers, deputy ministers,
parliamentarians, and female police officers as was
mentioned earlier. From 2013 to 2017, the female
literacy rate nearly doubled. Statistics, however, also
show that much remains to be achieved, especially for
women and girls in rural areas.

The courageous filmmaker Roya Sadat sold her
wedding jewellery and an apartment to make a movie
that speaks to gender inequality and specifically brings
the issue of violence against women into the open,
which was a courageous decision. The brave women in
the film show us that with perseverance and will power
almost anything is possible. For many Afghan women,
however, their own situation remains too dire to
overcome by themselves. Facing Violence, exclusion and
discrimination, they will continue to need our support
and helping hand in pursuit of needed assistance.

It is clear that many positive changes, some ofwhich
were mentioned earlier this morning, have taken place
in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban regime. At
the same time, many of the reforms remain vulnerable,
occasionally fragile and by no means irreversible.
As we all know, Afghanistan continues to face many
problems, including high levels of violence, violent
attacks, poverty, corruption, discrimination and, above
all, the lack of opportunities for young people - the
new generation. Therefore, as we have just renewed
UNAMA's mandate through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2405 (2018), I should like to offer a couple
of recommendations.

First, we can build peace only through inclusive
negotiations led by an inclusive Afghan Government.
The right instrument - the Kabul Process - is in
place. It is both Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, and it
is a peace and reconciliation mechanism. It deserves
our support. Last week's gesture for peace made by
the Afghan Government at the second Kabul Process
conference was an important step in the right direction.
The message is clear. The Afghans are taking the lead,
and we will continue to support them. Afghanistan
needs a functioning security apparatus and a workable
and inclusive peace deal. That is no small task, and it
will require continued political courage, perseverance
and assistance.

Secondly, the international community should
focus its energy on supporting the peace talks. Clearly,
the solution has to be political. It will not be possible
without true commitment and constructive engagement
from all regional partners, and donor countries should
be expected to unify their efforts in this regard.
All too often, donors - and here we have to look at
ourselves - have parallel and sometimes conflicting
goals or objectives. Yet there is an obvious solution:
for the Afghan Government to set the priorities and
UNAMA to coordinate the One United Nations
response effectively, inclusively and efficiently.

Thirdly, for Afghanistan to emerge sustainably
from conflict, there is a need for a truly integrated
approach, one that strengthens coherence between all
sectors: political, security, development and human
rights, central to all endeavours. This requires creative
thinking, including in and by the United Nations
system, supported first and foremost by the Security
Council, but also the Member States. We should work
jointly in the prevention of conflict and in support of
durable peace and inclusive prosperity.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will remain a
reliable and constructive partner for Afghanistan,
focused not only on the security sector but also more
broadly, and we have done so for 17 years. We strongly
support the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund,
and we will live up to our promise to allocate 50 per
cent of our support on budget, in close cooperation with
other partners.

Having said all this, I will now conclude. The
progress made in Afghanistan over the past 17
years is impressive. I commend the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and the outstanding efforts and hard work of his
team. I also very much welcome the decision of the
Secretary-General to host the ministerial conference
on Afghanistan in Geneva on 28 November. I am
confident that the Council will continue to support
Afghan-led efforts to achieve peace, bring about and
nurture stability, and reinforce inclusive, rights-based
development in Afghanistan, a process that should be
aimed particularly at achieving all gender objectives
and goals.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

