Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): This has been
an especially rich and informative meeting on Haiti,
thanks largely to our briefers this morning. I think the
presence of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Chamber today reminds us all
that human rights are of vital importance, both in their
own right and across the other two pillars of the United
Nations. We know that States that violate human rights
are less prosperous, less stable, less able to meet the
demands of their people and more likely to pose a threat
to international peace and security. I want to focus on
three issues today.

First, I would like to address the issue of women
and peace and security. Ms. Viaud drew our attention to
the many barriers faced by women in Haiti, including
gender-based violence and a lack of access to health
care and justice. We strongly agree with the calls she
made this morning, in particular for improved services
to survivors of gender-based violence, especially
with regard to fair and safe access to justice, and for
ensuring that whatever United Nations entity succeeds
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), it must ensure that any gains made on
gender equality are preserved and should also support
women's protection and empowerment.

I would also echo the call that Ms. Viaud made for
improved participation by women in political life, a
point made by my Belgian and Dominican colleagues
as well. Surely that will help to accelerate progress
towards securing improved rights, justice and access
to services for women. I also agree that it is very
important that the United Nations, in its reports to the
Security Council, should focus on that issue and update
us on progress.

Secondly, turning to the human rights situation in

Haiti, we very much agree with other speakers that,
while there has been progress in the human rights
situation in the country, that progress has been uneven
and serious concerns remain. We welcome the work
that has been done on the development of a national
action plan on human rights and the appointment of a
ministerial-level human rights focal point. We welcome
the other improvements mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/198).

However, at the same time, we remain concerned
about the human rights abuses allegedly committed by
the Haitian National Police during the demonstrations
of October and November 2018, including allegations
of summary executions. It is also a concern that,
according to the Secretary-General's report, 74 per cent
of the prison population is still on pretrial detention
and the death rate of those in prison, according to this
helpful handout from the United Nations, has actually
increased from 11.8 to 14 per 1,000 inmates.

Those concerns remain. I want to emphasize
that, if Haiti is to accelerate on its path to stability
and prosperity based on a reinforced social contract
between the State and its citizens, then human rights
need to come front and centre, and that is a particularly
important element of the shift away from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding that we really hope can be given a
higher priority.

In the spirit of interactivity, Mr. President, you
encouraged us to ask questions. It would be useful
to know from the United Nations when the results of
the MINUJUSTH investigation of events at La Saline
will be completed and hopefully made available to the
Security Council.

Thirdly, and finally, on the question of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence
that many speakers have touched upon, the United
Kingdom broadly supports the Secretary-General's
proposal for MINUJUSTH to be succeed by a
special political mission. We especially welcome the
fact that human rights and women's protection and
empowerment will be at the centre of its mandate. I
hear the concerns of the Dominican Republic loud and
clear. It will be important to ensure that the transition
is conducted responsibly and smoothly, taking account
of the situation on the ground as we move from a
peacekeeping presence to a special political mission.
We would like to reiterate our appreciation for the work
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and encourage all States to cooperate
with it and offer it their full support. The United
Nations has a clear role to play to ensure an integrated
and sustainable transition, but it will ultimately be the
Government of Haiti's leadership that will make the
transition a success.

