Mr. Salam (Lebanon): The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories is indeed alarming. According
to the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the past two weeks have
witnessed the highest number of fatalities and injuries
in the West Bank since 2005. That in itself not only
justifies the call for this high-level debate, which we
would like to thank Spain for organizing, it also calls
for swift action by the Security Council.

Since the beginning of this month, on average two
Palestinians have been killed every day, and more than
1,000 have been injured, not to mention the increasing
number of attacks by settlers on Palestinian property.
Israeli provocations and assaults at the Haram Al-Sharif
have continued, in an obvious attempt to change the
agreed status quo by establishing a temporal if not
geographical division of the holy site, contrary to the
claims of Mr. Netanyahu.

Israel, the occupying Power, is once again acting in
total disregard of its obligations under international law
and international humanitarian law to protect civilian
Palestinians. That is why we are once again calling
on the Council to use all possible ways and means at
its disposal to ensure the protection of the endangered
lives and property of Palestinians living under Israeli
occupation, pending its assumption of its full duty and
responsibility to end the Israeli occupation and help the
Palestinian State to achieve its independence.

The events of the past month are only the tip of the
iceberg of the occupation, which has now lasted almost
50 years. In fact, the need to provide international
protection for the Palestinians who are under Israeli
occupation is self-evident when we recall the fate of
the most vulnerable Palestinians, the children living
under occupation. We have only to note that, between
2000 and 2013, one Palestinian child was killed by the
Israeli occupying forces every three days, and that
62 per cent of the 95,000 Palestinian children detained
by the Israelis since 1967 have probably been subjected
to some form of physical violence. And how can one
omit to mention the case of the two Palestinian children
who were recently burned to death by extremist
Israeli settlers - 18-month-old Ali Dawabsheh, who
was killed in July in an arson attack in Douma, and
Mohammed Abu Khdeir, a 16-year-old Palestinian,
who was kidnapped, beaten and burned alive by Israeli
settlers in East Jerusalem in August 2014.

Notwithstanding such acts of appalling savagery,
Benjamin Netanyahu, in total contempt for our
intelligence, dared to claim in his latest speech before
the General Assembly that "Israel is civilization's front
line in the battle against barbarism" (A/70/PV22).
Moreover, instead of facing the reality of the occupation
and its inherently oppressive structure and repressive
methods, Israeli officials and their propaganda
endeavour to represent the mounting violence in
the West Bank and Gaza as an eruption of so-called
terrorist hatred, motivated by nothing else but pure
anti-Semitism and bloodthirsty Islamic fanaticism.

I am sure that we all recognize a familiar situation
here - that of blaming the victim. We are reminded
of William Ryan's famous book, Blaming the Victim, a
1971 classic that shows how victim-blaming functions
as an ideology that is used to divert responsibility and
to justify racism and social injustice. In fact, blaming
the victim is so odious that it was rightly depicted by
one of the great twentieth century thinkers as "one of
the most sinister features of the fascist character".

In Israel, like elsewhere, racism is not only blind,
it is also deadly. We only have to consider how on
Monday, Haftom Zarhum, an innocent Eritrean asylum
seeker fleeing the scene of acts of violence, was shot,
then lynched. That dismaying attack is documented in
videos in which an angry Israeli mob is shown hurling
benches and chairs and kicking him in the head,
assuming he was an Arab terrorist just because he was
dark-skinned, all the while screaming things like "Death
to Arabs!" It is worth asking Mr. Netanyahu whether
that is another example of Israel as "civilization's front
line in the battle against barbarism". Obviously, we do
not have the same lexicon as Mr. Netanyahu, because,
in our lexicon, racism and xenophobia, let alone acts
of burning people alive and lynching, are examples of
barbarism and not of civilization.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories is very alarming.
Not only can the Council prevent the situation from
deteriorating, it can also unlock the path to a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East, provided that it
resolves to act on the basis of the principles and rules
of international law and international humanitarian
law. Here, to seek balance, where no balance exists or
can exist between the occupier and the occupied, is not
justice. It is not even a travesty ofjustice, it is injustice,
plain and simple. Conversely, pending the end of the
Israeli occupation, the Council can and must move now
to provide international protection for the Palestinian
people, the sooner the better, for the relevance of the
Council and, above all, for the just cause ofpeace in our
part of the world.

