Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Judge
Owada, Judge Meron and Chef de Cabinet Viotti for
their briefings.

The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
ambition to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind. Sadly, seven decades after
the Charter was signed, the scourge of war continues
to bring untold sorrow. Yet, the vision set out in the
Charter in 1945 was not naive. It embodies a clear view
of how to ensure a better path for the world. As stated
in its Preamble, it seeks

"to ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest".

That is, that international law and international
institutions should harness war. That vision holds
true today.

Sweden warmly welcomes Poland's initiative to
convene today's meeting. We believe that it is a timely
discussion, taking place at a moment when severe
strains are being placed on international law.

International law is an essential part of modern
international relations and, although invisible to most,
is an essential part of modern life. Almost everything
we do is dependent on international agreements and
international cooperation - the ability to talk to
friends and family overseas by mail, phone and email;
to travel and discover one another's cultures; to engage
in international trade; and to protect our societies from
global health risks or through criminal law cooperation.
The list is a very long one. This tapestry ofinternational
rules and institutions enables international cooperation
and in many cases prevents and manages conflicts. It
creates stability, predictability and regularity while
allowing for peaceful change. Most rules are followed
by most actors most of the time. Such is the moral
expectation; violations are the exception to the rule.
Compliance is also our only enlightened and civilized
option, the alternative being indiscriminate chaos, with
the most powerful intervening at their whim.

We have created these mechanisms to protect the
rights and interests of States, peoples and individuals.
They are not only essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security but also confirm the
duty of all States to settle disputes by peaceful means.

In today's debate, many will reaffirm, and
have reaffirmed, their commitment to respect for
international law. Yet we need to be clear-sighted. The
implementation of international law is being challenged
in many quarters, and efforts to undermine the legal
fabric built to protect us are threatening international
peace and security.

No State can be above the law. Yet all too often
the Council deals with situations in which international
law has been violated. Such breaches aim to undermine
a system that, ultimately, is there to protect us all.

In Syria, seven years of war have borne witness to
some of the most egregious and sustained violations
of international humanitarian law in modern times.
Civilians are consistently targeted, and humanitarian
agencies are regularly denied access to those in need
of assistance. When such conditions prevail, it is our
duty to act. It was for this reason that, with Kuwait, we
submitted resolution 2401 (2018), adopted unanimously
by the Council in February (see S/PV.8188). In
Backakra, Sweden, the summer residence of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold, the Council
confirmed that the use of chemical weapons is a
violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and is unacceptable.
We also reaffirmed our commitment to establishing an
independent and impartial attribution mechanism.

In Ukraine, Russia's continuous aggression and
illegal annexation of Crimea is an ongoing breach of
international law. The redrawing of borders backed by
military power represents a threat that goes beyond
Ukraine; it is a challenge to the international legal
order and the United Nations Charter as such, and thus
a threat to all States.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has lasted for
more than half a century, and flagrant violations of
international law, such as illegal settlements, continue.
The prolonged occupation of Palestine has an extended
negative impact on the daily lives of the Palestinian
people and undermines respect for international law.
As repeatedly stated by the Secretary-General, the only
sustainable way forward is a two-State solution based
on international law.

Finally, in Myanmar, just weeks ago, Security
Council members witnessed the appalling situation
of the Rohingya minority. Systematic, widespread
and coordinated acts of violence strongly indicate
that crimes against humanity have been committed.
Impunity for such crimes cannot be tolerated, and the
Council cannot abdicate its role in ensuring that those
responsible are held to account.

These are examples of situations where conflicts
and suffering could have been prevented or mitigated if
international law had been respected.
We must ask ourselves how it can be that we
succeed in using the tools of international law in most
areas yet fail in this most critical one, protecting the life
and dignity of our fellow human beings. The Council,
which the Charter entrusts with the ultimate power,
has a duty to meet its responsibility to hold those who
violate international law to account and to bring justice
to the peoples whom the Charter was promulgated to
protect. Our credibility depends on it.

The Security Council essentially has all the
tools necessary to respond and to maintain peace in
accordance with the Charter. We, its members, acting
on behalf of all members of the United Nations, have
an obligation to shoulder this responsibility, and the
permanent members have a particular responsibility.
That is why the use of the veto to protect narrow
national interests in situations of serious violations of
international law is totally unacceptable. I call on all
members to adhere to the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct and the
Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint in the use of
the veto. Three points are particularly important.

First, on early warning and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Council needs to do more than react to
violence. It must use the early-warning tools available
to it to the fullest extent possible. Early-warning
mechanisms and relevant and independent information
from the ground play a crucial role in enabling the
Council to effectively assess, address, prevent and
respond to conflicts and threats to international peace
and security. The Council must make better use of the
tools at its disposal to advance the peaceful settlement
of disputes provided for in the Charter, including the
legal mechanisms available.

We have a Secretary- General who is very committed
to conflict prevention and peaceful settlements. We
encourage him to integrate the relevant international
law perspectives and tools more clearly in reporting to
the Council.

Secondly, the role of international law in sustaining
peace must be further developed. International
law and the institutions that uphold it provide a
common basis for addressing the root causes of
conflict, including violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law; environmental and
climate change; justice-related issues and inequality.
It provides frameworks for inclusive development and
the empowerment and full and effective participation
of women, as well as other prerequisites for peaceful
societies. As such, international law is not only
fundamental to bringing an end to conflicts but also
imperative in order to prevent them in the first place
and to build sustained peace.

Finally, the Council needs to come back to
addressing the entire spectrum of the peace and justice
agenda. Accountability is not only justice done and
reparations, it also deters and prevents crime and abuse.
The national responsibility for addressing violations
must be emphasized. But where that is lacking, the
international community, including the Council, must
use the means available under international law to act.

The universal jurisdiction of States and the
complementary mandate of the International Criminal
Court should be used when national authorities are
unable or unwilling to prosecute those responsible for
mass atrocities.

In this regard, we are pleased that the crime of
aggression in the Rome Statute will soon be activated.
It is a historic event when not only States but also
individuals can be responsible for this crime.

We need to effectively achieve the purposes and
principles of the Organization by faithfully adhering
to international law as set out in the Charter. This is
not just a legal and political imperative; it is a question
of common interest. Those who seek to undermine our
common legal protection should be wary of doing so;
the longer-term and wider consequences of weakening
any single instrument can be hard to predict.

