Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for his
briefing today. I have also taken note of his report to

the Security Council submitted pursuant to paragraph 7
of resolution 1970 (2011).

India, as members know, is not a signatory to the
Rome Statute or a member of the International
Criminal Court, for reasons that are well known. In our
explanation of vote on resolution 1970 (2011) on
26 February (see S/PV.6491), I noted that of the 192
States Members of the United Nations only 114 are
members of the ICC. Five of the 15 members of the
Security Council, including three permanent members,
are not parties to the Rome Statute. But we voted in
favour of resolution 1970 (2011) because several
members of the Council, including our colleagues from
Africa and the Middle East, believed that the referral of
the situation in Libya to the ICC would have the effect
of causing the immediate cessation of violence and the
restoration of calm and stability.

Unfortunately, the situation in Libya has
continued to deteriorate, and widespread violence
continues. We remain seriously concerned at the
developments in Libya and condemn the use of force
against civilians. We reiterate our call on all parties to
immediately cease attacks on civilians and engage in
political dialogue to resolve the crisis. The longer the
conflict continues, the greater the harm caused to the
Libyan people, their economy and society.

We have noted that, after his preliminary
investigation, the Prosecutor, on the basis of available
information, has decided that are reasonable grounds to
believe that crimes against humanity and war crimes
have been committed and continue to be committed in
Libya. We have also noted that the Office of the
Prosecutor will submit its first application for an arrest
warrant to a pre-trial chamber in the coming weeks.

The Prosecutor should carry out a thorough and
impartial investigation and not be influenced by any
non-judicial considerations. All those responsible for
committing crimes covered under the Rome Statute
should be held accountable, irrespective of which side
of the conflict they may belong to and even if they
have changed sides. Political considerations should not
exonerate anyone from prosecution for crimes
committed. Any action by the ICC should fall strictly
within the ambit of resolution 1970 (2011), particularly
paragraph 6, which concerns States that are not parties
to the Rome Statute.

