The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I first want to thank Special Coordinator Serry
not only for his briefing but especially for his abiding
commitment to the Middle East peace process. My
comments will focus on the Middle East peace process,
Syria and Yemen.

I want to say categorically that the road to peace
in the Middle East is becoming increasingly slippery.
We note that Israel has announced that it is suspending
its participation in the talks owing to the reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. Coming as it does just two
days before the 29 April deadline set in July 2013 by
United States Secretary of State John Kerry for the
talks to conclude, we must state that it is a considerable
setback for the peace process.

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
has given assurances that as part of the new unity
Government in Palestine, Hamas will recognize
Israel, commit itself to non-violence and adhere to
previous agreements. President Abbas has expressed
his continued commitment to peace negotiations with
Israel. We expect Abbas to keep the faith. We hope that
these pronouncements will reassure Israeli authorities
and encourage them to return to the peace talks.

We have heard concerns expressed by well-
meaning world leaders about a lack of political will on
both sides to make the necessary tough decisions. We
are convinced that peace between Israel and Palestine
cannot be imposed by the international community.
We can only facilitate. Peace must emanate from both
parties. It requires the traditional give-and-take that is
inherent in peace negotiations. Without equivocation,
we want both sides to demonstrate greater flexibility in
their long-term strategic interests. In our times, it has
become axiomatic that there is no alternative to a two-
State solution with Israel and Palestine living together
side by side in peace, stability and security.

Turning to Syria, we note the accelerated movement
of chemical weapons material to storage sites in the
port of Latakia over the past month. With the recent
movements, Sigrid Kaag, the Special Coordinator of
the joint mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations,
confirmed yesterday that the Syrian Government has
removed or destroyed in-country approximately 92 per
cent of its declared stockpile of chemical weapons
material. This renewed commitment on the part
of the Syrian Government appears to be a positive
development that would facilitate the completion of the
task of the Joint Mission of the OPCW and the United
Nations.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
precarious and unstable nature of the security situation
underlines the critical importance of expediting the
removal of chemical weapons material from Syria as
quickly and as safely as possible. At this opportune
moment, we encourage the joint mission to continue
to engage the Syrian authorities in order to sustain the
momentum to complete the removal operations in the
coming days.

On the humanitarian situation, it is clear that it
is becoming ever more dire as the civil war in Syria
intensifies. Repeated calls by well-meaning nations
across the world for the warring parties to lay down
their arms and embrace dialogue have gone unheeded.
The parties to the conflict and their supporters must
ensure that civilians are protected regardless of their
religion, community or ethnic affiliation. Both the
Syrian Government and the armed groups have the legal
obligation and moral responsibility to do so. They must
take all necessary measures to put an immediate end
to violence against civilians, including indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. We want to urge all parties to take
all necessary measures to provide safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the country, thereby
ensuring the full and immediate implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014). A military option would leave
in its trail the victors and the vanquished. It would shut
the door on a durable peace. That is why we urge the
warring parties to return to the peace talks without
preconditions.

Regarding Yemen, we take positive note of the
progress so far recorded in the political process in the
country. The commencement of work by the Constitution
Drafting Committee is an indication that Yemen is on
the path to sustainable peace, security and stability.
The efforts of the Government to put into effect the
agreement mediated by the Gulf Cooperation Council
on the implementation mechanism for the transitional
process is a visible demonstration of its commitment
to injecting positive change into the Yemeni domestic
arena.

Regarding the report of the National Dialogue
Conference, we believe that the speedy implementation
of its provisions would engender confidence-building
among the different segments of Yemeni society and
foster peace among the warring parties. Within the
framework of the National Dialogue Conference, the
Government now has a unique opportunity to address
those issues pertaining to relations between the northern
and the southern regions, engender greater inclusion for
women and youth, and indeed lay a credible foundation
for lasting peace and prosperity in Yemen.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statement
to no more than four minutes in order to enable to Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
those texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

