Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting, which comes at
a time when the challenges and tensions in the region
are increasing.

We are grateful that Member States have this
opportunity to participate in this discussion on the
Middle East at a time when we are witnessing extremely
important developments. We would also like to express
our deepest appreciation to your delegation, Sir, for its
presidency of the Council this month, and congratulate
the delegation of the brotherly State of Kuwait on its
successful Council presidency in June. Finally, we
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her
excellent briefing.

The importance of the role of the international
community in implementing these resolutions on peace
and stability in the Middle East, as well as in preparing
the necessary conditions to provide greater chances
for a successful political settlement is more evident
today than ever before. This role includes providing
protection to the aggrieved, refraining from interfering
in the internal affairs of States and ensuring that
States are able to preserve their sovereignty, security,
independence and regional integrity.

We strongly condemn the actions of the Israeli
authorities in Sur Baher, in occupied Jerusalem. In that
regard, we reaffirm that a comprehensive, just and final
peace in the region will be achieved only by resolving the
Palestinian question, enabling the brotherly Palestinian
people to recover their legitimate rights, like other
peoples of the world, by building their independent State
within the borders of4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We call for the preservation of the status
and historical secular character of this city based on
the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and all
relevant international resolutions,

The Kingdom of Bahrain hosted a conference
entitled "Peace to Prosperity" in June, in partnership
with the United States ofAmerica, which was attended by
many Heads of State, as well as civil society and private
sector representatives from the region. The conference
aligned with Bahrain's efforts and commitment to
realizing the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people in terms of development and prosperity and
in support of initiatives to strengthen the Palestinian
economy. Indeed, the next steps in the process will
require a convergence of all international efforts to
ensure a bright economic future that is committed to
peace and to supporting development for all peoples of
the region. The conference achieved these objectives
by encouraging investment in the brotherly Palestinian
State to strengthen the economy and ensure prosperity
and development for its people. In that regard, we
welcome the great efforts made by the United States of
America towards achieving a just and comprehensive
peace in the region.

In conclusion, achieving international peace and
security requires us to join ranks and work towards
the development of innovative mechanisms to face new
challenges. The Kingdom of Bahrain, for its part, will
continue to work within the regional community to
resolve disputes peacefully in order to achieve security
and stability in the region and throughout the world.

