Mr. Gohar (Pakistan): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
We are very grateful that you, the Foreign Minister of
Poland, are here to chair this meeting. We also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings today.

Protracted and emerging conflicts, coupled with
changing war dynamics and operational tactics,
continue to unleash unimaginable horrors. Children
continue to be the principal sufferers. They are killed
and maimed, abducted to fight, used as human shields,
enslaved and sexually abused and denied humanitarian
aid. Their rights are violated, dreams crushed and
hopes for a better future vanquished.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509)
confirms these horrors, as 2018 recorded the highest
number of casualties as a result of killing and maiming,
with the increase in the number of violations being
attributed to international forces. For children
experiencing enduring distress, conflicts continue
to impact their physical and mental health, including
feelings of fear, anxiety and depression.

All parties to armed conflicts have a responsibility
to protect children from violence, and yet all too often
Violations and abuses of international law affecting
children are rampant. In conflict zones and occupied
territories, we are witnessing a deeply troubling
breakdown in humanity and a diminishing respect
for human life and dignity. Such practices present
formidable obstacles to the normative frameworks of
humanitarian and human rights laws, in particular the
rights of children.

Although a number of steps have been taken since
the adoption ofthe children and armed conflict mandate,
and the past 20 years represent significant progress, a
great deal needs to be done. There are still gaps in its
implementation and obstacles to monitoring the steps
already taken. More needs to be done to ensure that the
fight against impunity is effective and that those who
violate the rights of children are held accountable.

This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Pakistan, as one of the earliest signatories of the
Convention and its Optional Protocols, remains fully
cognizant of their importance. We have established
the National Commission for Child Welfare and
Development, which coordinates, monitors and
facilitates its implementation.

Let me underscore four specific points that will
help us improve the situation.
First, the goal of the protection of children and
preventing from them being put at risk can best be
achieved by stopping the outbreak of armed conflict.
The most effective way to protect children is by
preventing and resolving conflicts, ending foreign
occupation and working to sustain peace. That must be
the top priority of the Council.

Secondly, international law and standards must be
upheld. Parties to conflict, including non-State groups,
should abide by their commitments under international
laws and ensure mitigation measures, in compliance
with international law, to prevent grave violations
against children.

Thirdly, perpetrators of violence against children
need to be identified and brought to justice through
national judicial systems.

Fourthly, Government interventions are needed
to fund and invest in programmes aimed at rebuilding
shattered lives.

Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, but we also believe that it should not
become a tool to achieve political gains and objectives.
The legal parameters of that mandate, as provided for
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, must be
respected. We hope that this principle will be kept in
mind in future reports.

