Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation would like to thank you for
having taken the initiative to organize this debate on a

question that constitutes one of the major challenges
that humanity will be facing for some time to come.

We share the concerns expressed by the Non-
Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Group of 77 with
regard to the respective domains of the various organs
of the United Nations when it comes to dealing with
issues of sustainable development. However, over and
above the issue of the competence of the various
bodies, we must recognize the seriousness of what is at
stake - namely, the need for and the urgency of
appropriate responses to a major risk to international
peace and security.

The Security Council, therefore, is very well
placed to help us become aware of this threat in the
prevention of conflicts, which very often have deep
and wide-ranging effects. Congo chairs the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, and we will very
much benefit from this debate.

We share the call to act without delay launched
by the United Nations Secretary-General on 6 April
2007. This call was issued to all Governments to
encourage them to adopt major measures to reduce the
most extreme consequences of climate change. The
report published in Brussels on 6 April by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is
unequivocal with regard to the consequences of climate
change in various parts of the world and on different
sectors of the world economy. It clearly indicates that
the areas the most affected will be the Arctic, sub-
Saharan Africa, small island developing States, the
major Asian deltas, as well as coastal areas.

Even more worrying, the report states that it will
be the poorest who will suffer the most, because they
have the fewest resources to be able to adapt.

The twist of fate, therefore, will be that it will be
the poor who will be paying for the excess
consumption and carefree attitude of the rich.

Africa has become aware of this major risk, and it
debated the question of climate change during the
recent Summit of the African Union (AU) of Heads of
State and Government held in Addis Ababa last
January. So, I think this tells us how important this
debate is for a country such as Congo, which is already
facing some negative factors of climate change, despite
the ecological reservoir with which we are blessed.
Certainly, this will not be the first time in the history of
humankind that men and women will have to fight for
land, water, food and living space; but, this time, it will
be on a greater scale and with disastrous effects that
will dwarf the invasions and raids of ancient times.

Here, the borderline between the responsibility of
man with a pattern of consumption that is increasingly
destructive and what we can qualify as a natural
disaster will become increasingly blurred. It is,
therefore, significant and useful that the main body of
the United Nations responsible for the maintenance of
peace and security should galvanize universal
awareness of the need for concrete action and should
keep this matter on its agenda over time. We expect the
Council to sound an alarm bell. However, the forum for
consultation and the drawing up of norms and
strategies is to be done elsewhere.

With regard to strategies, we have all the
necessary instruments at our disposal, such as the
Framework Convention on Climate Change and its
Kyoto Protocol. The countries that are primarily
responsible for pollution should therefore set an
example by reducing their greenhouse gas emissions.

For their part, several countries of Central
Africa- given their function as the world's second
"lung", after the Amazon rainforest - have adopted a
strategy based on an international partnership, with a
view to promoting the sustainable management of the
ecosystems and natural resources of the forests of the
Congo Basin. That broad initiative already involves
several international and multilateral partners; its goal
is the participation of as many actors as possible. We
hope that, immediately following today's debate, a
greater commitment on the part of the international
community will emerge with regard to this vital issue
of climate change and its consequences and will be
expressed at the United Nations Climate Change
Conference, to be held in Bali next December.

Finally, I should like to stress the urgent need for
individual and collective action on the part of States
and other bodies, because, as was pointed out by a
representative of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, we may see

"conflicts over water, the spread of diseases, and
a big increase in worldwide migration unless
adequate adaptation measures are adopted and
integrated into long-term development planning."
The Security Council will therefore be making an
important contribution if it can create the necessary
awareness of the need for urgent action.

