Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Once again, we are witnessing the escalation of Israeli
military attacks against the Palestinian people. There
appears to be no end to the barbarity.

Under the pretext of the kidnapping of an Israeli
soldier by the Palestinian resistance to occupation, in
the early hours of 28 June Israel launched a large-scale
military attack on the Gaza Strip, mobilizing nearly
5,000 soldiers, hundreds of tanks and other military
means. The occupying forces attacked the main power
plant of the area, cutting off electricity from nearly half
of the territory, indiscriminately bombing a number of
bridges that connect the various sections of the Strip,
re-occupying large areas in the southern part of the
territory, and arresting numerous prominent individuals
from the Government of the Palestinian Authority and
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council.

That inhuman and criminal aggression was
unleashed at a time when an agreement had been

reached between the Palestinian political forces that
would have contributed to relaunching the peace
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

Cuba also vigorously rejects the violation of the
airspace of the Syrian Arab Republic by Israeli military
aircraft. That, together with the barbaric actions carried
out against the Gaza Strip, has exposed the region yet
again to a dangerous escalation of violence that
endangers international peace and security. As in the
past, Israel has acted with the arrogance and impunity
that it derives from the economic and military support
and the permanent veto power of the United States in
the Security Council.

On 29 June, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Cuba issued a statement expressing its
strongest condemnation of this most recent Israeli
military aggression. It called upon the international
community and peace-loving forces to demand the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli
troops, an end to Israel's State terrorism, respect for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, the return
of refugees, and the unconditional restoration of all
Arab territories occupied in June 1967. Those steps
represent the only way to achieve a fair and lasting
peace for all the peoples of that stricken region.

Israel's new escalation further aggravates the
already critical humanitarian situation in the illegally
occupied territories, further exacerbating the financial
blackmail of the Palestinian authorities and people,
which is an element of political pressure to gain
concessions.

The Security Council must act without delay.
This body cannot remain a silent accomplice in the
light of these grave developments.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
unwavering commitment of the people and
Government of Cuba to the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and all Arab peoples, and by
reiterating our firm belief that, sooner rather than later,
the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State will become a reality.

