Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation is pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this important meeting of the Security
Council. This is clear proof of the great importance that
Norway attaches to the question of the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I would like to express our appreciation to Mr.
Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General, for his lucid
statement, which provided a framework for our debate
today. We also thank him for the report that he
presented to us.

In addition, our thanks go to Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also express our appreciation to Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his detailed briefing on the achievements of the
United Nations in that country. I cannot but welcome
the decision of the European Union to appoint
Lord Ashdown as successor to Mr. Petritsch. We wish
him every success in his task of achieving peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like to express
our deep appreciation to Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-
General of the Council and High Representative of the
European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy,
for his efforts to achieve peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

My delegation welcomes the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 6 December 2001. At that meeting the Board
adopted a draft plan, presented by the High
Representative, on streamlining the work of the
international civilian organizations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It coordinates policies in the fields of the
rule of law, the building of economic institutions, the
return of refugees, and reconstruction.

We thank the High Representative for his efforts
aimed at the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. The year 2001 witnessed more than 92,000
returns of minorities to the country. This fact will have
a clear effect on the social, economic and political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We look forward to the general elections to be
held in October this year. We join the High
Representative's call to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to accelerate the preparations for these
elections. Their success will have a major effect on the
political, economic and social life in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enabling the political administration to
assume its responsibilities after the end of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), on 31 December 2002.

In this regard, there is an urgent need for the
reform and strengthening of the defence forces and the
army in order for Bosnia and Herzegovina to be able to
discharge its security and defence duties after the full
transfer of power to the Government at the end of this
year. There is also a need to streamline the
international civilian presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as a need to study the High
Representative's plan for the partnership between the
international community and the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in various fields.

A cause for concern is the pace of economic
recovery in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continues
to be extremely slow. This could cast shadows on the
overall development process in the country. However,
Bosnia and Herzegovina's endeavour to join the
European Union could represent a political and
economic objective that can be achieved through the
implementation of the plan provided by the European
Union. I agree completely with Mr. Petritsch's
statement a few moments ago that the leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have the responsibility to develop
their Government and administration by themselves, in
a manner consistent with the reality prevailing there. In
my opinion, this is the inevitable result of the process.

We welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's
normalization of its relations with neighbouring
countries, in particular its exchange of ambassadors
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is our hope
that an appropriate solution to the question of the
border between the two countries will be found. The
1999 Treaty on the State Border must be fully applied
along the whole border. This would undoubtedly
facilitate the rapprochement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the European Union in the Stabilization
and Association Process.

