Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Welcome back to New York, Sir, and thank you for
presiding over this discussion of a topic that is
important to the work of the Council and to the United
Nations as a whole.

May I begin by expressing my appreciation for
the thought-provoking presentations by the
distinguished experts who have shared reflections on
the Council's role in the peaceful settlement of
disputes. In the near future, members of the Council
will depart on a mission to West Africa to witness first-
hand the situation in several areas where peace is
precarious. The trip should deepen the Council's
understanding of the factors that give rise to the dispute
in cote d'Ivoire and will hopefully lead to progress in
resolving it. It is also an opportunity to learn what has
gone right in Sierra Leone, where concerted United
Nations and international interventions have produced
progress in building lasting peace.

The Council has often stated its concerns about
the threat posed by Liberian support to elements of the
Revolutionary United Front and other rebel groups in
C6te d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone. It did so again last
week when it renewed sanctions on the regime of
President Taylor. The Council mission will travel to
Monrovia and meet with regional leaders who, with
help from the Economic Community of West African
States, are working to end Liberian-produced
instability in the region. The mission will examine how
regional mediation and sanctions are working to
change Liberia's behaviour and end threats to security
in the region.

That is a very current example of the Council's
implementation of Chapter VI of the Charter, which
provides that the Council may investigate any dispute,
or situation that might give rise to a dispute, in order to
determine whether it is likely to endanger international
peace and security. The United Nations Charter gives
the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
sets forth a formula for fulfilling that charge, which
focuses on the core chapters, Chapters VI and VII.

The link between the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the maintenance of international peace
and security is obvious. There is a logical progression
from Chapter VI, which provides for the use of
peaceful means such as negotiation, mediation and
judicial settlement to deal with disputes that may
endanger the peace, to Chapter VII, which provides for
measures taken to restore it.

We might ask whether that sequence is being
followed or whether there is a tendency to react to
events rather than make a more proactive use of
preventive diplomacy in order to defuse disputes
during their early stages. It is interesting to note that
Chapter VII was invoked in only a handful of situations
during the Organization's first 45 years. Today, it is
frequently cited in Council resolutions.

This does not, however, signal that the Council
has abandoned Chapter VI. The actions prescribed in
Chapter VI are less likely to require robust measures.
Much has been achieved through the efforts of the
Secretary-General's envoys and representatives in hot
spots around the world, through the work of the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville and through
the combined efforts of the Secretary-General and the
International Court of Justice to bring peace to the
Bakassi peninsula, among recent examples. Over the
years, mechanisms have been developed to enable the
Council to prevent some disputes from reaching the
stage where Chapter VII action is required. Chapter VI
has stretched to accommodate the emergence of
peacekeeping, a concept not mentioned in the Charter
but one which has been a valuable tool in dispute
settlement.

Earlier missions in which unarmed military
observers monitored international disputes have been
expanded to include armed infantry to provide force
protection and logistical support and to carry out
specific tasks such as disarmament and demobilization.

A very significant contribution to the Secretary-
General's good offices role has been through his
appointment of special representatives, who remain on
the ground to work with the involved parties to find
and implement peaceful solutions. More recently,
special representatives have taken on staff to assist
their activities and to coordinate the range of United
Nations activities in the target countries. Strong,
capable and experienced special representatives can
provide an extremely important link between
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building as a
country moves from conflict to ceasefire and, finally, to
reconstruction.

The legal Committee of the General Assembly -
the Sixth Committee - has considered the subject of
the peaceful settlement of disputes for many years and
has produced a number of important resolutions related
to the topic, including the Manila Declaration on the
Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes and the
Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of
Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten
International Peace and Security and on the Role of the
United Nations in this Field. The latter Declaration,
adopted in 1988, includes specific suggestions for
Security Council action, such as sending fact-finding or
good offices missions at an early stage and encouraging
efforts at the regional level by concerned States,
regional arrangements or agencies to prevent or remove
a dispute. The Declaration also recognizes the roles
played by the Secretary-General and the General
Assembly in preventing and removing disputes.

From the examples that I have mentioned, it
seems that the Security Council is frequently faced
with the choice of whether to act alone or to act in
concert with another body. The Council has cooperated
with regional organizations and with other United
Nations organs. In one case, a group of States
comprising the Friends of Haiti worked through the
Security Council with the Organization of American
States, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council in the process that restored stability in
Haiti following a period of intense crisis.

Last July, the Economic and Social Council
established a mechanism to set up ad hoc advisory
groups for African countries emerging from conflict.
The United States supported the establishment of such
a group for Guinea-Bissau and sent observers from our
embassy in Dakar to join with the group in November.
We believe that such a mechanism, if requested by a
State which has actually emerged from conflict, can
help to bridge the gap between relief and
reconstruction and thus enable the United Nations
system to respond coherently to conflict. It can be an
important element in the complete dispute-settlement
process.

Finally, I should like to stress that full and
effective implementation of the Charter provisions
related to the peaceful settlement of disputes requires
an approach tailored to the needs of each situation that
recognizes the potential contributions and utilizes, as
appropriate, the capabilities of all United Nations
bodies.

