Mr. Vieira: I would like to start by thanking you,
Sir, for the invitation extended to me in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As you are aware,
Brazil is currently Chair and a State member of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
an organization that closely follows the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. The CPLP endorses the remarks I am
about to make.

It is our firm belief that increasing synergies and
complementarities among the relevant international
partners will be beneficial to an effective peacebuilding
endeavour in Guinea-Bissau. I take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/111)
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also welcome
the briefing made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNIOGBIS,
Mr. Modibo Toure, on the situation on the ground, and
wish to commend his good offices in the search for a
solution to the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau.

Since the last time the Security Council deliberated
on Guinea-Bissau, in August 2016 (see S/PV.7764),
there has been a major positive development: the
adoption of the six-point road map and the Conakry
Agreement, which were endorsed at the fiftieth African
Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government.
There should be no hesitation with regard to the
implementation of such landmark agreements. In that
regard, I wish to commend the engagement of regional
actors with Guinea-Bissau aimed at providing a road
map for achieving political stability.

The international community must stay united
in supporting the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and in
reaffirming that the Conakry Agreement is the only
framework for a peaceful resolution of the political
and institutional instability in Guinea-Bissau. The
international community must also remain united in
providing all support needed for the full and effective
implementation of that Agreement in close coordination
with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. We welcome,
in that regard, the contribution of the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) to the ECOWAS-led mediation efforts in
September and October. We have to continue identifying
concrete measures that can be taken to further facilitate
the full implementation of the six-point road map and
the Conakry Agreement.

The key actors involved in the stabilization process
of Guinea-Bissau - the African Union, ECOWAS,
the CPLP, the European Union and the United
Nations - will have an important role to play. In
that regard, I welcome the declaration on the political
situation in Guinea-Bissau adopted by the CPLP Heads
of State and Government at the eleventh Summit in
Brasilia in November last year. We are considering
reconvening the International Contact Group. I also
plan to Visit Guinea-Bissau. Political will, constructive
and consensual dialogue, coupled with courageous
leadership, which, as we know, the people of Guinea-
Bissau are capable of, are needed now more than ever.
It is important to highlight that a solution to the current
institutional and political situation is in the hands of the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves.

In 2014, the development of the Terra Ranka
programme for the sustainable development of the
country marked a high point and provided hope for
all citizens of Guinea-Bissau. In March 2015, the
international community responded positively to the
efforts of the Government with strong pledges of support
at a donor conference to fund that national peacebuilding
programme. We encourage the national stakeholders in
Guinea-Bissau to commit to re-establishing momentum
for progress in the areas outlined in the Terra Ranka
development programme and to invite partners to fulfil
their pledges made there.

I also would like to take this opportunity to express
the configuration's support for the proposed measures
that have been recommended with a view to enhancing
the operational posture of UNIOGBIS. We welcome the
strengthening by the General Assembly of UNIOGBIS
through the establishment of a post of Political Affairs
Officer to improve coordination with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on drug trafficking
and another post of Rule of Law Officer. An effective
and well-integrated presence of the United Nations on
the ground is essential for coordinating international
initiatives and supporting national actors in their efforts
to achieve stability and development.

We note the recommendation of the strategic
review mission deployed to Guinea-Bissau from
4 to 14 December 2016, led by the the Department
of Political Affairs, that mentions an exit strategy
for UNIOGBIS. We also acknowledge the challenges
posed by transnational organized crime and other
emerging threats, as well as the risks posed by the
security challenges in the West African subregion, as
underscored by the Secretary-General in his report.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace require long-
term engagement and a commitment to prevention.
As per the 2016 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the enhanced United
Nations engagement with peacebuilding should aim
also at preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict, addressing its root causes,
ensuring national reconciliation and moving towards
recovery, reconstruction and development. The United
Nations and relevant international partners should
remain engaged in their support for Guinea-Bissau's
peacebuilding efforts to build a common Vision of a
society and ensure that the needs of all segments of the
population are taken into account.

Let me reassure you, Sir, that the Commission
is committed to continuing its assistance towards
national reconciliation, recovery and the development
of Guinea-Bissau. Tomorrow, we will hold a meeting
of the PBC country-specific configuration to review
the outcome of the deliberations of this meeting of
the Security Council and to elaborate on concrete
initiatives to support progress in Guinea-Bissau, in
close consultation with ECOWAS and UNIOGBIS and
the relevant international partners within the Guinea-
Bissau P-5.

I would like to reiterate the configuration's support
for the National Conference and its programme for
the consolidation of national peace, which would be
entitled in English "Paths towards a consolidation of
national peace". In addition, I commend UNIOGBIS
for the support that it has provided to the Organizing
Commission for the National Conference with resources
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund. The aim of that
dialogue is to provide a platform that will give a voice
to all stakeholders on the key issues of development and
reconciliation. That inclusive dialogue can be a positive
element in a broader process aimed at developing the
long-term peacebuilding policies that the country
requires. The PBC country configuration could assist
those and other efforts. The upcoming legislative and
presidential elections scheduled for 2018 and 2019,
respectively, will require a consistent preparatory
process and the full engagement of all stakeholders. We
must also examine possible actions to support security-
sector reform and institution-building. In that context,
special attention should be given to the empowerment
of youth and women. The configuration will continue
to work to assist in the implementation of the current
Peacebuilding Priority Plan of the PBF in Guinea-
Bissau, which already encompasses those priority areas.

I wish to note with appreciation that the overall
security situation in Guinea-Bissau has remained
stable. We should also highlight the position of the
armed forces. The PBC acknowledges the relevant role
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau.

Local authorities need to put the best interest of the
nation above all other considerations. The message that
we bring today is simple: all parties must swiftly agree
on concrete steps that will enable the implementation of
the six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement. I
have full confidence that the political actors in Guinea-
Bissau will demonstrate the needed leadership and
determination to work together to build a true consensus
in support of the aspirations of their people and nation.

