Mr. Waxman (Israel): Allow me, Mr. President,
to commend you for your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month.

I would like to begin by offering Israel's
condolences to all those affected by the appalling
attacks on United Nations Headquarters in Abuja,
Nigeria, last week.

Israel welcomes the adoption of resolution 2004
(2011) and the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). UNIFIL
plays a vital role in promoting stability in our region. I
would like to convey Israel's appreciation to the
UNIFIL troops, their commanders, the troop-
contributing countries and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Israel is committed to
cooperating with the United Nations to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

Yet, as we convene here today, serious threats to
peace and security in Lebanon stand in the way of the
full implementation of that resolution. I would like to
highlight four of those challenges this afternoon.

First, Hizbullah continues to rapidly build up its
arsenal of advanced weaponry and expand its military
presence throughout Lebanon, including south of the
Litani River. Tens of thousands of sophisticated
missiles and rockets are now in the hands of that
terrorist organization. Its growing arsenal places the
majority of Israeli civilians under the spectre of attack.

Hizbullah seeks to acquire even more advanced
weapons through joint and coordinated transfers of
illegal arms supplied by Iran and directly facilitated by
Syria across the Syrian-Lebanese border. The United
Nations and others in the international community are
aware of the scope and magnitude of those transfers.
Yet the existing arms embargo has not been enforced
11-48376
and there has been a lack of progress in the
disarmament and disbandment of Hizbullah and other
militias, as mandated by Security Council resolutions.
Israel views this stagnation with great concern.

Israel's second issue of concern relates to the
cynical Hizbullah tactics that use Lebanese civilians to
further their terrorist activity targeting Israeli civilians.
Since the deployment of UNIFIL forces in 2006,
Hezbollah's modus operandi has shifted towards
intentionally embedding its military infrastructure
within civilian villages and residential areas. These
developments are occurring in UNIFIL's area of
operations and throughout other densely populated
areas of Lebanon. Hizbullah terrorist bases, firing
positions and missile storage centres are located
adjacent to - and sometimes within - schools,
hospitals, homes and mosques.

Such exploitation of civilians as human shields
stands in grave violation of international law. On
numerous occasions, Israel has provided the
international community with detailed information
about these violations, yet they continue. More
concerted efforts must be made to fully implement
paragraph 8 of resolution 2004 (2011), just adopted,
which calls on all States to

"fully support and respect the establishment
between the Blue Line and the Litani River of an
area free of any armed personnel, assets and
weapons other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and UNIFIL".

The Lebanese authorities bear particular responsibility
for putting an end to these serial violations of
resolution 1701 (2006).

Thirdly, Israel remains concerned by the violence
directed at UNIFIL and Hizbullah's continued attempts
to obstruct the movement and work of the force. From
the periodic reports on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), it is clear that Hizbullah has
long used so-called civilians to impede UNIFIL's
ability to operate. It employs a range of tactics,
including throwing stones, threatening the Force with
weapons and confiscating equipment. The recent
terrorist attacks against UNIFIL on 27 May and 26 July
marked a serious escalation of the violence directed at
the Force and should be taken very seriously.

The United Nations and the international
community cannot stand by as Hizbullah continues to
11-48376

obstruct UNIFIL's work. While Hizbullah's
fingerprints are all over these clear obstructions, its
name is hardly ever mentioned in United Nations
reports. The international community must also ensure
that the Force has the tools and soldiers necessary to
carry out its mandate effectively.

Finally, despite its obligations under resolution
1701 (2006), the Government of Lebanon continues to
take provocative actions along the Blue Line. On
1August, a soldier from the Lebanese Armed Forces
(LAF) fired on Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) situated
south of the Blue Line. This was not an isolated
incident, and it was only by chance that the event did
not result in casualties. Let me remind the Council that
on 3 August 2010, in a similar incident, the LAF shot
and killed reservist IDF Battalion Commander
Lieutenant Colonel Dov Harari.

We expect the Government of Lebanon to prevent
such incidents from occurring in the future. The
international community must also take action to
prevent further provocations and convey a clear
message to Lebanon that such attacks carry serious
potential for escalation. In that respect, Israel
welcomes the renewed calls in today's resolution on all
parties to respect the Blue Line in its entirety, and will
continue to work with UNIFIL to visibly mark the Blue
Line in its entirety. These efforts are integral to
ensuring regional stability, and we call on Lebanon to
uphold its clear international obligations in this regard.

The presence of UNIFIL in southern Lebanon
serves an indispensable role in advancing stability in
our area. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our support
for today's resolution, to extend our deep appreciation
to all troop-contributing countries, and to emphasize
our sincere gratitude to the men and women of
UNIFIL, who are performing a difficult task in a
difficult environment to promote peace and security for
all in our region.

