Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2323 (2016) today, which renews the
mandate ofthe United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). It sends a strong signal of Security Council
unity and commitment to resolving the situation in
Libya. As the penholder on this issue, I want to thank
all Council members for their support today.

This is a vital renewal at an important time for
Libya. Almost a year since the signing of the Libyan
Political Agreement in Skhirat, the Agreement and
the Government of National Accord remain the only
credible pathway to peace and stability in Libya. Some
progress has been made with the establishment of the
Presidency Council in Tripoli, and in the fight against
terrorism with the Government's announcement
today of the completion of military operations against
Da'esh in Sirte. But as we heard from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General earlier this
month (see S/PV.7827), Libya continues to face a
daunting set of challenges - on security, on the
economy, on human rights and on criminality, such as
migration traffickers. It is crucial that the international
community continue to speak with one voice in support
of Special Representative Kobler and UNSMIL's work
to build on this consensus, to encourage all Libyan sides
to compromise, to continue to support the Government
of National Accord to deliver, and to urge military
de-escalation.

I therefore again warmly welcome the clear message
sent through this resolution of continued international
support to Libya at such a crucial time. Through the
resolution, we have empowered the Mission to redouble
its efforts to support the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement and to use its convening power
under the good offices of the Secretary-General to
support all Libyan stakeholders, including those not
currently fully engaged in the process, so that they can
work together with the Presidency Council to chart the
way forward.
In extending the time period from six to nine
months, which was the point that my Russian colleague
just made, we have also sent a clear message of the
United Nations continued commitment in Libya as it
takes forward work to re-establish a permanent presence
in Libya in the new year. We also look forward to the
outcome of the Secretary-General's strategic review in
2017 and stand ready to make substantive adjustments
to the mandate of the Mission if needed.

I thank Council members for their engagement and
support on the mandate renewal. Our combined efforts
will continue to play an important role in Libya in
2017 and beyond. At a time when other issues divide
us, I am pleased that we continue to work together
constructively to support the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement.

