Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank Mr. Sevan for the very complex and
comprehensive information that he provided to the
Council, and I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank him and his team for the very good
cooperation that he has extended to the committee
established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990), to me
personally and to my team. I also thank him for the
friendly words addressed to me and to my team.

Mr. Sevan started by quoting paragraph 16 (f) of
resolution 1483 (2003). This paragraph aims at
maximum transparency and continuity in the process of
transition. This is the goal that we are trying to achieve
in these last few weeks of the oil-for-food programme.
Whereas the programme will be terminated on 21
November, everything possible has to be done to
enable a maximum of continuity in order to avoid
disrupting deliveries and creating a difficult situation
for the people in Iraq.

Taking into consideration the high importance of
transparency and continuity in the transition of the oil-
for-food programme, I would like to encourage the
parties involved to consider the following steps to be
included in the exit strategy, as we have discussed this
many times in the 661 Committee and also with the
Office of the Iraq Programme (OIP).

First of all, we feel that the OIP should define a
mechanism for early information to suppliers of non-
prioritized contracts. We would suggest publishing
such non-prioritized contracts by early November
because it is only fair to tell the suppliers whose
contracts have not been prioritized, so they can know
about this as early as possible.

Secondly, we also feel there should be clear-cut
criteria as to why contracts have not been determined
to be of relative utility. This is of particular importance
for high-priority sectors and I think this is also a
priority for transparency, to tell people what the criteria
are for relative utility and for not giving contracts this
stamp of approval with respect to relative utility.

Thirdly, the renegotiation of all contracts and
their amendments might well not be completed by 21
November. Only 52 per cent of the prioritized contracts
have been amended so far. In saying this, I do not mean
to criticize the involved United Nations agencies,
which are, to our knowledge, doing everything possible
to complete this task on time. However, given that
there are only three weeks remaining until 21
November and taking into account the need for
suppliers to make arrangements for deliveries in a
timely manner, we have to inform now all concerned
on how to proceed as of 22 November.

Maintaining continuity in the delivery pipeline
and having clarity about procedures vis-a-vis suppliers
are different sides of the same coin. Only if the
suppliers know in time which procedures to follow can
disruptions be avoided. Obviously, deliveries for 22
November are being prepared now, not on 21
November. If we do not want to risk delivery
disruptions, the Coalition Provisional Authority will
have to come forward with clear information in the
very near future, rather than waiting until the end of the
programme.

We have heard from Mr. Sevan that the OIP has
internally decided to already stop the amendment of
prioritized contracts in general on 3 November and in
exceptional cases on 10 November. Given the relatively
low rate of amended contracts so far, we have strong
doubts that this decision will allow us to complete the
amendment process.

We would like to raise the question as to whether
it would not be much better to show more flexibility
towards the internal deadline for renegotiations by
United Nations agencies.

In the last meeting of the 661 Committee, the
United Nations Treasury informed members of the
Committee that it will continue to also amend letters of
credit of amended contracts after 21 November. I
wonder why we should not give the United Nations
agencies the same flexibility to complete the process of
renegotiation and amendment of contracts if necessary.

Such flexibility would not require an extension of
the deadline set by resolution 1483 (2003). Nor would
it be in contradiction with the concept of transfer of
operational responsibility to the Coalition Provisional
Authority. But it would allow us to execute this transfer
in an economical manner. The United Nations agencies
could complete the amendment of contracts in
coordination with the Coalition Provisional Authority
after 21 November, as, by the way, the Treasury will do
anyway with regard to the necessary amendments to
letters of credit. Remaining paperwork would thus not
have to be transferred to the Coalition Provisional
Authority, thus avoiding further probable delays. The
OIP, of course, would no longer be involved in this.

As regards authentication after 21 November,
from our point of View and again for reasons of
continuity, we would also encourage the Coalition
Provisional Authority to continue using the services of
Cotecna and the newly established alternative entry
points after the termination of the programme.

As regards payment arrangements as of 21
November, here we see two possible developments. In
the best case, which I understand still forms the basis
for the Coalition Provisional Authority's related
planning, all prioritized contracts will be amended by
21 November. The funds allocated to all prioritized and
amended contracts will then remain in the United
Nations escrow account and payments to suppliers will
then be executed as in the past.

However, if this best case does not materialize -
and nobody can exclude that possibility - then not all
prioritized contracts will be amended by the end of the
programme. We should then proceed in a fair and
transparent manner, and that means, in particular, that
payment arrangements for suppliers in this case should
not depend on the status of renegotiations of their
contracts.

I think it would be important for a smooth
transition of the programme if we could agree on the
principle that all funds allocated to prioritized contracts
will remain in the consolidated United Nations escrow
account after 21 November irrespective of their status
of renegotiation. In general, it is not the supplier's
responsibility if his prioritized contract is not amended
in time. Therefore, he should not be confronted with
modified procedures and uncertainties that he cannot
influence and that are not a consequence of his own
actions.

Lastly but not least, I should like to comment
briefly on the problem of the transfer of funds. The
volume of the necessary transfer requires maximum
transparency. At the last formal meeting of the 661
Committee, the United Nations Treasury was not in a
position to inform us as to when, how many and
specifically which funds were to be transferred. We
believe that a response to those questions is essential
for a transparent termination of the oil-for-food
programme. We look forward to receiving the
requested information.

