Mr. Carmon (Israel): I wish to begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for addressing us this morning,
and by taking this opportunity to make mention of his
10 years of service, specifically as it pertains to our
region. It is, of course, impossible in the allotted time
to fully reflect on the Secretary-General's legacy.
Nonetheless, I want to thank him for his many years of
dedication to this Organization and to the nations of the
world.

Allow me to commend the Secretary-General on
his remarks this morning, where he comprehensively
addressed the conflicts in our region in an unbiased,
balanced manner, turning to both sides
constructively - which, I must add, is not a traditional
narrative we hear at the United Nations and its various
organs, as the Secretary-General himself has stated. We
offer him our deepest appreciation.

The analysis of events in the Middle East offered
by Member States and heard in statements delivered in
this world body tends to be misleading. Symptoms are
routinely mistaken for causes, and decisions are made
based on rhetoric rather than reality. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is erroneously identified by some
as the source of all instability in our region. And yet,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is actually the
consequence - not the cause - of extremism and
radicalism, of incitement and intolerance, of hate and
terrorism, all poisoning our region.

Our region - our world - is challenged by
warring ideologies. It is no surprise then that the road
to peace runs directly through the battlefield, between
moderates and extremists. Unless the international
community is willing to stand up and confront the
enemies of peace, progress will never be made, no
matter how much we yearn for peace, no matter what
we are willing to sacrifice for it.

The extremist-moderate divide can be heard in
the different voices in our region. Let us listen to what
the Hamas Palestinian Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh
said while visiting Iran a few days ago:

"We will never recognize the Zionist
Government and will continue our jihad-like
movement until the liberation of Jerusalem. We
have a strategic depth here in the Islamic
Republic of Iran and throughout the Islamic Arab
world."

Let us listen to what the First Vice-President of Iran,
ParViz Davoudi, told Prime Minister Haniyeh during
the same visit: "The Iranian Government and nation
will continue their all-out support for the Palestinian
Government led by Hamas."

Now let us listen to the other voices in our
region, telling Palestinians and Israelis to return to the
negotiating table in order to guarantee security and
stability for the people of the region.

The vast difference between those voices is
precisely the reason why we must insist on the
international community's three conditions for Hamas
to recognize Israel, renounce Violence and abide by
previous agreements. Without meeting the three
conditions, the Palestinian Authority will continue to
support violence and terror, not peace and prosperity.
The vast difference between those voices is also the
reason why the international community must insist on

the full implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Without fully ensuring the end of
Hizbollah's State within a State, the region will remain
in danger of extremist influence.

The vast difference between those voices is the
same reason why the international community cannot
tolerate a nuclear Iran. It is with particular indignation
that, as we sit here in this Council, on the other side of
the world - on our side of the world - in Iran, in a
country whose President has threatened to wipe
another Member State off the map, we hear of a
conference under way with its own "experts and
scholars", concluding that the Holocaust never
happened. As offensive as this is to the State of Israel
and to the Jewish people, it must be equally as
appalling to the States Members of this world body,
whose founding principle and noble mission were the
world's answer to the horrors and extremism of the
Second World War and the tragedy of the Holocaust, as
reflected in the very first clauses of the United Nations
Charter.

Iran's denial of the Holocaust, its pursuit of
nuclear weaponry, and its strategic backing of Hamas
and Hizbollah - and who knows what next? -
threaten peace and security. Iran cannot and will not
rewrite history. It cannot deny the Holocaust, yet it
remains the duty of the international community to
make sure that those extremists do not write the
world's future and the future of our children.

The international community must, then, do more
than convene repeat debates and initiatives. It must
make it abundantly clear throughout the region that
supporting coexistence is what is needed, while
supporting terror has its price. Being soft on the
extremists and placating them in exchange for
insincere commitments will not buy us their patience
or even their compliance. It will merely guarantee their
triumph.

The formula for peace has already been
prescribed. It is found in the road map and in various
forums of the international community, some of which
the United Nations itself is part of. At its very heart is
the principle of two States, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security. That vision has been
consistently reaffirmed over the years, particularly in
the past few months, by Israel's leadership.
Sadly, however, the Vision remains unmatched on
the Palestinian side. Israel embarked on the painful

course of disengagement from the Gaza Strip last year
to show the Palestinians its commitment to peace. In
return for disengagement, we received terror. Over the
past year, more than 1,000 Qassam rockets and mortar
shells have been fired by Palestinian terrorists at
southern Israeli communities and towns. Weapons have
also been and are still continuously smuggled into
Gaza. Corporal Gilad Shalit was kidnapped by
Palestinian terrorists and is still being deprived of his
freedom. Those are not overtures of peace and
moderation. These are the overtures of terror and
extremism.

The ceasefire two weeks ago was once again a
sign of our willingness to try our hand at peace. Israel
wishes to maintain the ceasefire as a means to end the
Violence and enable progress in political negotiations.
For that reason, Israel is exercising restraint and
maintaining the ceasefire despite repeated violations by
Palestinian terrorists.

Our commitment to peace is also the reason why
resolution 1701 (2006) must be fully implemented in
southern Lebanon. The full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) remains a test for this Council.
It can bring stability to the region, but in order for that
to happen, our kidnapped soldiers Udi Goldwasser and
Eldad Regev must be released immediately and
unconditionally. An active and efficient United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon is also needed, as is the full
deployment of the Lebanese army over all its territory.
The arms embargo must be enforced and the border
with Syria must be monitored for trafficking.
Secretary-General Annan has made it a personal
campaign to support the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), and we trust that the incoming
Secretary-General will continue such efforts.

We understand that engaging in our region does
not come without frustrations, but the solution is not to
bypass essential steps in order to create the illusion of
progress. It is not to find forums that allow abuse of
the automatic vote. It is not to construct a one-sided
narrative in which only side, Israel, has obligations,
while the other side, the Palestinians, have only
inalienable rights. Those venues, sometimes hosted by
the United Nations, simply show that they are good
only for highlighting differences, not for resolving
them.
If we have not yet turned the Vision of peace into
reality, it is not for lack of meetings in this Council or
the Assembly. It is not for lack of agreements or
resolutions or international conferences. It is simply
for the lack of an appropriate partner on the other side
to confront the seeds of extremism and embrace
moderation. In answer to your question, Mr. President,
a partner is one who will at least abide by the very
basic fundamental conditions set forth by the
international community itself. Direct negotiations
with partners willing to make concessions, as Israel has
already demonstrated in the historic peace made with
two of its neighbours, is the only way forward. As the
Secretary-General said in his statement this morning,

"it is the parties involved who bear the primary
responsibility for peace. No one can make peace
for them, impose peace on them, or want peace
more than they do".

I hope that the moderates in our region
understand what needs to be done in order for peace to
be realized, and where the real threat to our region lies.
There have been far too many victims in this
conflict- Victims from both sides, neither of which
has a monopoly on that status or on human suffering.
Israelis, Lebanese and Palestinians all deserve better.
They deserve to see real efforts in our region.

Recent developments in the past month show
what will happen if we refuse to engage moderates and
allow extremists to cast their dark shadows of
influence. We must join hands in fighting extremism
and radicalism, incitement and intolerance, terrorism
and hate. Only then will the parties find themselves on
the road to peace - a road wide enough for all citizens
of the Middle East - resulting in the revitalization and
fulfilment of real peace in our region.

