Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Edmond
Mulet for his briefing today on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif by
video teleconference in this meeting today.

We welcome Foreign Minister Jeremie back to
the Council and thank him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement.

From the outset, my delegation reiterates its
position that resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force
and forms the basis for the resolution of the situation in
Kosovo. It is therefore incumbent on the international
presences in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), to maintain a status-neutral
position in the execution of their mandates, in line with
presidential statement S/PRST/2008/44, adopted by the
Council in November 2008.

South Africa supports the dialogue process
facilitated by the European Union between the two
sides, Pristina and Belgrade, as mandated by the
General Assembly. We are pleased by the resumption
of this dialogue and that the seventh and eighth rounds
of negotiations took place in Brussels late last year.
This regular direct contact between the parties is an
important confidence-building measure that, we hope,
will improve trust and allow the parties to address their
outstanding and contentious issues. The recent
discussions in Brussels have proven that, through
dialogue, the parties are able to agree on a number of
important issues, such as the management of crossing
points.

South Africa remains concerned, however, that
since the previous reporting period, the situation has
continued to be tense and potentially unstable,
particularly in northern Kosovo. We condemn all forms
of violence by all sides, including attacks on KFOR
and EULEX. This violence threatens the peace and
stability of the region. All parties should exercise
restraint and refrain from the unnecessary use of force.
Violence and the use of excessive force will only
undermine the gains made by the parties in their
dialogue processes, ultimately making reconciliation
more difficult to achieve.

My delegation is also concerned about the
deterioration of inter-ethnic relations throughout
Kosovo. Inter-ethnic trust remains vital. Public
reconciliatory pronouncements from leaders on both
sides are welcome, positive contributions towards
reconciliation.

We have noted with appreciation the commitment
shown by the Kosovo Police in the fight against
criminal activities, such as organized crime, human
trafficking and drug trafficking. As a result, by and
large there has been a reduction in common crime from
the previous year.

We would like to echo the concern expressed by
the Secretary-General that "progress appears to be
slowing on two major issues essential for
reconciliation: voluntary returns of the displaced and
determining the fate of missing persons" (S/2012/72, para. 55). In this regard, my delegation urges all
parties to demonstrate cooperation and flexibility in
finding solutions to these outstanding issues.
Negotiations remain the only approach to producing
reciprocally beneficial and sustainable solutions.

Regarding the allegations of organ trafficking, we
reiterate our position that a credible, thorough,
impartial and independent inquiry into these
allegations should be conducted.

South Africa once more urges both sides to
refrain from any action that could undermine the
achievements attained in the dialogue process. We
therefore call on the parties to exercise flexibility in
order to enhance their engagement, resolve outstanding
matters and ensure that reconciliation prevails.

Finally, I would like to express South Africa's
appreciation and support for the role of UNMIK, under
the able leadership of Mr. Farid Zarif, in
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

