Mr. Zerihoun: As the Ebola outbreak enters its
forty-second week, there is growing concern about its
impact on peace and security, not only in the affected
countries but also in the wider region of West Africa.
The outbreak has hampered the efforts of regional
groupings in implementing cross-border security
strategies and in taking steps to strengthen regional
economic and monetary integration. Nationally, it
has delayed progress in a number of key electoral and
constitutional review processes. At the local level,
weak Government structures and mistrust between
communities and authorities have led to violent
incidents resulting in a number of fatalities.

As some have correctly observed, in a subregion
emerging from protracted conflict, the danger Ebola
poses to social unrest and violence is ever present.
Moreover, far-fetched or not, some in the counter-
terrorism field have begun to mention Ebola and
terrorism in the same sentence.

In the three most affected countries - Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone - the implementation
of critical Government programmes has slowed
considerably, as national authorities have been forced
to refocus their energies and resources on stopping,
treating and preventing the spread of the Ebola outbreak.
The role of Governments has also been affected, as
some elected officials and civil servants have become
victims of the disease.

Ebola is significantly disrupting the economic
sustainability ofthose countries, with dire consequences
for the delivery of essential State services. As work
disruptions continue in the construction, mining,
manufacturing, tourism and transportation sectors due
to concerns over the spread of the disease, the effect
on the economies and the development prospects
of the affected countries could be devastating and
destabilizing. There are also concerns about the
continuity of critical projects focused on building peace
and ensuring sustainable stability in the three countries.
Moreover, the adverse consequences of isolation and
stigmatization on peace and security in the affected
countries should not be underestimated.

In Sierra Leone, in the face ofthe outbreak, political
parties have been relatively unified in efforts to fight
the disease, making appearances on national television
and radio in support of sensitization efforts. However,
consultations in the constitutional review process
have been delayed. It remains to be seen whether the
referendum that is expected to take place before the
next elections will be affected.

In Liberia, the political challenges arising from the
Ebola outbreak are daunting. In the past few months,
the constitutional review process was temporarily
suspended due to the ongoing state of emergency, and
senatorial elections scheduled for October may be
postponed. Those delays, coupled with preparations
for the next general elections in 2017, will significantly
stretch the capacity and resources of the National
Elections Commission and could compromise the
integrity of the electoral processes, raise tensions and
even threaten political stability.

In Guinea, little progress has been made in the last
few months in preparing for municipal elections that
were planned to take place this year. Major political
activities of the ruling and opposition parties have
slowed as both sides continue to focus their efforts on
fighting the outbreak. That has also delayed crucial
efforts to bridge the political divide between the
Government and opposition parties.

The security situation in the three most affected
countries has also suffered significant impacts since
the outbreak of the disease. The Governments of
the three affected countries have declared states of
emergency, passed restrictive laws and taken measures
aimed at restricting the spread ofthe disease. They have
also imposed curfews, cordoned off and quarantined
communities and robustly deployed security forces,
with the objective of enforcing Ebola response measures
designed to protect health workers and quarantine
facilities and to maintain public order. The states of
emergency were also temporarily accompanied by the
closure of schools and restrictions on public meetings
and gatherings. Since the outbreak of the disease, there
have been incidents of violence perpetrated against
health workers and public officials. We have also
witnessed community riots fuelled by mistrust and
ignorance of, or misinformation about, the disease, as
well as threats of strike action by health workers and
burial teams.

In south-eastern Guinea, the security situation
remains tense in the regional capital of Nzerekore',
following last month's murder in the nearby town of
Womey of a team of Guinean health and Government
officials who had been distributing information about
the outbreak. There have also been riots in Nze're'kore'
itself following rumours that people were being
contaminated by health workers trying to decontaminate
a market area. Since February, treatment centres and
health workers have also been sporadically attacked by
communities accusing medical workers of bringing the
virus to the region.

In Sierra Leone, lack of information about the
medical facts of the disease has fuelled resentment,
leading to low-level public disturbances, attacks on the
police and attempts to vandalize treatment centres in
Freetown. In Liberia, attacks on security forces, the
looting of clinics and the deployment of riot police to
quell demonstrations by angry crowds have also been
witnessed. Over the past weekend, Liberian nurses
have also threatened strike action. These actions and
reactions have heightened political tension and have the
potential to cause a descent into violence and undermine
public security and safety.

The Ebola outbreak has isolated Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone from the wider region. Except for
Mali, all neighbours have closed their common land
borders and are maintaining restrictions on incoming
flights from the three affected countries. Their isolation
is projected to have grave economic consequences for
the three countries and for the subregion. The World
Bank has assessed that economic growth rates in the
three countries would decline by the end of this year
and that the region could face a substantial loss of gross
domestic product output by the end of 2015, depending
on the spread of the virus. That would undoubtedly
have a detrimental impact on struggling populations, on
domestic politics and, critically, on stability. The longer
the Ebola outbreak continues, the more it threatens to
tear at the countries' social fabric, arouse political
divisions and threaten to unravel hard-won gains in
democratic practices and good governance.

There has been an encouraging engagement of
regional peace and security mechanisms in efforts
against the outbreak and to help mitigate its adverse
consequences. The recent decision of the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council to authorize
the deployment of an AU military and civilian
humanitarian mission was an important contribution.
The African Union decision involves the deployment
of medical, paramedical and military personnel to the
affected countries, working in partnership with the
United Nations system to enhance the international
community's response to the disease and its potential
consequences for political stability and the peace and
security of the affected countries and the subregion.

On their part, the heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
have directed the Commission, in liaison with the
West African Health Organization, to adopt a regional
approach aimed at containing and managing the Ebola
outbreak, and requested the Commission to mobilize
armed and security forces to strengthen the regional
response against the disease.

The Mano River Union is also working to ensure a
coherent regional approach in tackling Ebola. The Union
is working with the United Nations and other partners
to develop field activities in response to Ebola as part of
its strategy for cross-border security in the subregion.
This will include increased support for the Mano River
Union joint border security and confidence-building
units in border communities between the three affected
countries.

The outbreak of Ebola has exacerbated the peace
and security challenges faced by national institutions
and Governments in the West African region. As we
have seen in the cases ofNigeria and Senegal, swift and
effective action by national authorities has succeeded
in containing the spread of the virus. The international
community must continue to provide support to the
subregion and affected countries in their efforts to
effectively stop, treat and prevent a looming pandemic,
to ensure that the hard-won peace and security gains
made in the subregion are protected and preserved.

