Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): When this Council
took up the issue of children and armed conflict as one
of its thematic debates and subsequently adopted
resolution 1261 (1999) in August 1999, it signalled the
renewed international commitment to reverse the
growing and tragic victimization of more than 300,000
children under the age of 18, some as young as 7, who
are currently fighting in conflicts around the world, as
well as thousands of others who have been recruited
into armed forces and who could thus be sent into
combat at any time.

Those who recruit children do not distinguish
between boys and girls, both of whom are used not
only to commit atrocities but also serve as sexual
slaves of military commanders. Many are physically
abused and driven to suicide when they cannot cope
with the stressful demands put on them. Those who
survive some of these harrowing experiences pose
serious challenges with regard to their rehabilitation
and reintegration into civilian life. What future can
these children hope to have when they were denied
educational opportunities and left physically and
mentally scarred and disabled, thus posing a danger not
only to themselves but to other children?

The time has come for the international
community - this Council and other agencies - to
join hands in taking appropriate measures to address
the problem of the recruitment of children, particularly
girls, into armed forces.

It is in this context that we welcome the
opportunity to share our views on these issues and to
commend you, Madam President, for your leadership
of the Council during the month of July and for your
efforts in arranging for this timely debate. It is
particularly timely following the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of two protocols - on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography - both of which are important tools in
fighting the exploitation of children.

This Council's strong endorsement of the
protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict will no doubt enhance international efforts
aimed at curbing this scourge, which has become a
feature of armed conflicts in every region of the world.

There is no doubt that international law
governing the use of children as soldiers has advanced
over the years. In addition to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child - which, inter alia, defines a child
as anyone below the age of 18 years - other
conventions which set 18 as the age limit for
recruitment and participation in conflict include the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
and the ILO Convention No. 182, which characterizes
forced and compulsory recruitment of children under
18 as being amongst the worst forms of child labour.
This Council has previously condemned targeting
children in armed conflict and called for the speedy
conclusion of the Optional Protocol aimed at
strengthening the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

With the recent adoption of the Optional Protocol
to the Convention and the confirmation of 18 as the
minimum age for participation in armed conflict, the
stage has been set for this Council to take proactive
measures in its areas of competence to ensure that
international humanitarian standards and human rights
instruments that regulate the recruitment of children as
soldiers are vigorously enforced. In addition to
endorsing the protocol on children in armed conflict
and calling for its signature and ratification, this
Council has the moral, political and legal duty to call
on States to ban all recruitment of children under 18
and to require all States to put in place appropriate
safeguards for proof of age and voluntarism in
recruitment. No effort should be spared in rectifying
the situation on the ground and ensuring that this
protocol and other international humanitarian and
human rights laws fulfil the purposes for which they
were drafted, that is, to protect the rights of the child
and to eradicate the use of children as soldiers.

What is needed is our collective effort and
commitment to end the abuse of children as soldiers, to
demobilize any children already serving in armed
forces and to ensure their reintegration into civilian
life.

This delegation is amongst those who remain
particularly concerned about the plight of women and
girl soldiers in armed conflict, an issue which does not
seem to attract as much attention as we believe it
deserves. Recently, this Council took steps to address
the scourge of HIV/AIDS in general, and in particular
as it relates to peacekeeping. Closely linked to this are
the special needs of girl soldiers, whose role is not
limited to combat, but who in many cases are recruited
primarily to perform sexual services as sex slaves or
concubines.

These abuses not only result in the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, but
also lead to pregnancies and births of infected children
and/or uncontrolled abortions. Unless the special needs
of girl soldiers are recognized and concrete steps taken
to address them, the girl child of today will never grow
up to be a woman of tomorrow.

Resolutions of this Council should call for
concrete measures to redress discriminatory policies in
the armed forces, to address problems of sexual
harassment and to ensure that demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes take the
special needs of girl soldiers into account.

While conflict prevention is no doubt the best
way to protect children, the link between poverty and
the recruitment of children cannot be overlooked. A
disturbing dimension of this scourge is that the
majority of the most vulnerable are the poor - the
least educated and the most marginalized members of
society, who have either experienced abuses or have
come from disrupted families either as refugees or
internally displaced persons. The need for a holistic
approach and for common strategies for prevention and
protection, particularly in the application of
international norms and standards, has thus become a
priority.

To this end, the commendable efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary General, Mr.
Olaru Otunnu, and of UNICEF under its very able
leader, Ms. Carol Bellamy, require this Council's full
recognition and support by, inter alia, facilitating
stronger coordination through the establishment of an
inter-agency task force to undertake field visits and to
prepare reports for Council debate with a view to
putting countries on notice and, where necessary,
naming and shaming them.

The Special Representative is to be particularly
commended and supported in his efforts to open lines
of communication with all the stakeholders and to
impress upon them their primary responsibilities for
the protection of children in conformity with
international human rights and humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I wish to commend all relevant
actors at the national and international levels, and in
particular our partners in civil society, for their
commitment to the issue of children and armed
conflict. Through their experience, expertise and
continued involvement, possibilities for solutions to the
problem of children in armed conflict have been
greatly enhanced.

