Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank the
Nigerian presidency for putting on the agenda the issue
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also want very much
to thank the Secretary-General and the representatives
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their presentations.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has been on the rise
and is affecting economic and security interests in the
region and beyond. Early and coordinated actions are
needed in order to avoid an escalation to similar levels
as those off the Horn ofAfrica.

We welcome the initiatives taken so far by
different actors in the Gulf of Guinea and by
international partners. Those measures are very
important steps to enhance regional joint anti-piracy
efforts, information sharing and capacity building.
Regional organizations, such as ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission have a
decisive role to play.

In 2010, the European Union (EU) began to
assess the situation with regard to maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea. Current EU projects at the early
stage of implementation aim at capacity-building
support for ECOWAS and ECCAS, in cooperation with
the International Maritime Organization. Germany is
pleased to be associated with efforts to assist the Gulf
of Guinea Commission.

A dual approach should be followed in order to
increase maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. First,
the maritime security capacities of the States in the
Gulf of Guinea - that is, coast guards, navies, et
cetera - should be strengthened. In doing so, the
capacity to actively fight piracy should be a priority.
Secondly, a holistic concept of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea should be developed. Such a concept
should consider the questions of preventing and
deterring piracy, as well as the legal and political
framework to deal with pirates.
In that regard, lessons can be learned from the
fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia. The same
goes for best practices with regard to self-protection
measures for the shipping industry. However, the
success of that approach will very much depend upon
the capacity of affected States to ensure the rule of law
and effective security forces and institutions.
We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to deploy an assessment mission to examine
the situation and explore possible options for United
Nations support. We look forward to the results of the
mission as a possible basis for further action.

We are confident that the combined expertise of
different United Nations offices and agencies - such
as the United Nations Office for West Africa, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization - can be used
effectively to assist in the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. In order to enhance the effectiveness
of the different anti-piracy efforts, we encourage
further coordination and exchange of information
among all partners engaged in this area.

