Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with
this statement.

Due to time constraints, I shall read out a slightly
shorter version of my statement. The full version, as
agreed, has been distributed in the Chamber.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/189). I thank also
the Special Representative and Ms. Samar for their
briefings today.

First, I wish to convey the condolences of the
European Union to the Afghan authorities and the
Afghan people in connection with the tragic attack
on a military hospital that took place a few days ago
in Kabul.

I should like to start by reiterating our full support
for the important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community's assistance.

The Warsaw conference held in July and the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan of October 2016
made clear the strong international commitment
to Afghanistan. At the Brussels conference, the
international community sent a clear signal in support
of a process towards peace, security and stability.

All international security, political, economic,
development and regional efforts should now be
aligned to further such a political process. Terrorism
and violent extremism are fundamental threats to all
State actors, just as terrorism and the use of violence
undermine regional peace and stability.

The EU remains fully committed to supporting
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
that includes all Afghan citizens and their legitimate
interests and preserves Afghanistan's unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity as well as equal rights for all
Afghans under the Constitution of Afghanistan.

After the signing of the Hizb-i Islami peace
agreement, for which the parties deserve credit, it
will now be important to implement it and open the
way for future peace agreements. In this regard, we
welcome the Security Council's decision to de-list
Hizb-i Islami's leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, as an
important step towards the full implementation of the
peace agreement. The EU is ready to support further
the implementation of this agreement.

We welcome the undeterred willingness of the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan groups opposing
the Kabul Government to reach a lasting political
settlement. We welcome all initiatives to create an
environment conducive to such a process and call on all
parties to engage so as to devise constructive solutions.

We welcome the further work that has been done by
the Afghan Government since the Brussels conference
to advance the implementation of its commitments
and the progress made in anti-corruption, election
preparation, revenue collection and budget execution as
an example that must now followed by further, tangible
results in the implementation of the reform agenda. The
EU will remain attentive to the next steps.

I would like to highlight the importance of and
the need for continued focus on ways and means of
empowering Afghan women to build a stable and
prosperous Afghanistan, as well as reinforcing the
political and human rights of Afghan women and the
realization of the full enjoyment of those rights in
everyday life.

The EU welcomes the priority that the Afghan
Government places on fighting corruption, which
remains a major obstacle to development and stability,
and stresses the need to further strengthen efforts
to tackle corruption. The EU further welcomes the
important results already achieved and looks forward
to further follow-up.

We also support the reform of the security sector,
with a focus on making advances in civilian policing
in Afghanistan, building on the achievements of the
European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan. The
establishment of the new EU Special Representative
police advisory team will contribute to the
implementation of the new Afghanistan security-sector
reform plan.

At the Brussels Conference, the international
community welcomed the Afghan National Peace
and Development Framework and its ambitious
development vision.

The EU and its member States welcome the adoption
of the new election law and the appointment of the new
commissioners to the electoral management bodies.
These must now work in a professional and transparent
manner to rebuild public confidence in the electoral
processes. While technical aspects of the elections
play an important role, the political will of Afghan
stakeholders and a strong and cohesive leadership are
necessary to deliver credible elections. The EU supports
an early engagement with the electoral-management
bodies and UNAMA's coordinating role. Any assistance
must be forward-looking, leading to the implementation
of meaningful electoral reforms as well as to the
sustainable development of electoral institutions and
improved electoral processes.

On 18 February, the signing between the EU and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan of their first
contractual relationship, the Cooperation Agreement
on Partnership and Development, sent a strong political
signal of the EU's enduring support for the country
through the transformation decade and beyond. The
Agreement will also provide the basis for developing
a mutually beneficial relationship in an increasing
range of areas such as the rule of law, health, rural
development, education, science and technology, as well
as actions to combat corruption, money laundering, the
financing of terrorism, organized crime and narcotics.
It also foresees cooperation on migration.

On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would like to reiterate that joint State-building
and development efforts in Afghanistan need to
build on reinforced regional cooperation. Regional
cooperation remains key to lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the region. Threats of terrorism
affecting all countries of the region can be confronted
only with increased security cooperation. In the same
vein, it is indispensable for sustainable development.
In this regard, the EU strongly supports regional
forums such as the Heart of Asia or the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan to
continue to be used to facilitate cooperation among all
regional actors.

To conclude, the EU and Afghanistan continue with
the implementation of the EU-Afghanistan joint way
forward agreement on migration issues and the bilateral
member States' memorandums of understanding. In
this process, the European Union puts strong emphasis
on ensuring sustainable reintegration and providing
substantial support to the Afghan Government to
facilitate return and reintegration.

The EU has also continued its efforts to
promote a regional approach and intends to focus on
sustainable reintegration, local development, social
cohesion in host communities and durable solutions
to protracted displacement. UNAMA has played an
important role in coordinating the international efforts
to that end. We would encourage UNAMA to continue
that work and the dialogue with the Afghan Government
on the inclusion of internally displaced persons and
returnees. The EU aims to develop a comprehensive
EU response to bridge the humanitarian-development
nexus and promote durable solutions to the challenges
posed by the protracted nature of that crisis.

UNAMA's report on civilian casualties in
Afghanistan documents a record number of civilian
casualties in 2016, the majority of which were due to
insurgent attacks. We call on all parties to do their
utmost to protect the civilian population, especially
Afghan women and children. We also need to continue
to protect the vital role of humanitarian agencies and
respect their impartiality and humanitarian space in
addressing the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable.

It is important that the international community
remains strongly committed to supporting Afghanistan
towards long-term progress and stability. The EU
continues to consider UNAMA to be a key partner in
achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan. UNAMA
has an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned process. For that reason, we support the renewal
of UNAMA's mandate, as proposed by the Secretary-
General in his most recent report.

