The Secretary-General: Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important
meeting at this time. Before beginning, I would like to
join you as President of the Council in welcoming His
Excellency Ambassador Nishida as the new Permanent
Representative of Japan. I wish him great success in
the future.

Before I turn to the topic of our collective efforts
to combat piracy, allow me to express my
condemnation for yesterday's deadly attack on the
10-49378
Muna hotel in Mogadishu. This attack, in the holy
month of Ramadan, is an affront to Muslims and
peace-loving people everywhere. It is a sad but pointed
reminder of our collective responsibility to support the
Somali Government in bringing stability to this war-
torn nation. I join the Security Council in extending
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Government of Somalia.

In the past seven months, there have been 139
piracy-related incidents off the coast of Somalia. Thirty
ships have been hijacked. Seventeen ships and 450
seafarers are being held for ransom. I therefore
welcome the Security Council's continued engagement
on this issue.

Over the past three years, the international
community has made concerted efforts to combat the
problem, including by establishing a contact group and
deploying significant naval assets to the region.
Nonetheless, we can do more. In particular, we need to
implement the existing legal regime so that the fight
against piracy in international waters is effective. My
report is now before the Council (S/2010/394). It sets
out seven options. My Legal Counsel, Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, will describe these options in detail, but I
would like first to outline them.

The first option is to enhance ongoing efforts to
assist regional States to prosecute and imprison those
responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
The second would involve locating a Somali court
applying Somali law in a third State in the region. The
third and fourth options would involve assisting a
regional State or States to establish special chambers,
embedded in the State's or States' national court
structures, to conduct piracy trials. Option 5 would
require active engagement by the States of the region
and the African Union to establish a regional tribunal
to address the scourge of piracy. Option 6 would be an
international tribunal analogous to existing hybrid
tribunals, with national participation by a State in the
region. Option 7 would be a full international tribunal,
established by the Security Council acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. All
these options present serious issues for consideration,
which Ms. O'Brien will introduce in her detailed
briefing.

Let me now turn to broader challenges. The
Council has clearly emphasized the need to achieve
and sustain substantive results in combating piracy. To
do so, whether it be through a new or existing judicial
mechanism, will require political and financial
commitment from Member States. We will need both to
establish the mechanism and to ensure that it has the
capacity and resources to prosecute a large number of
suspects while ensuring due process.

Furthermore, in considering the establishment of
such a mechanism, a host State will need to be
identified, which in turn will require adequate
arrangements for transferring those convicted to third
States for their imprisonment. This aspect is
particularly relevant given the large number of suspects
apprehended at sea. To further explore these issues, I
intend to appoint a special adviser on legal issues
related to piracy off the coast of Somalia.

In recent months, the international community
has made great strides in strengthening the capacity of
other States in the region, such as Kenya and
Seychelles, to respond to piracy. I welcome indications
from Tanzania and Mauritius that they will also
contribute to this effort. I am also encouraged by
investigations and prosecutions in 11 Member States,
which are prosecuting or have convicted nearly 600
Somali men of piracy in the past 18 months.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) have developed several programmes
to assist States in the Horn of Africa, including
Somalia itself, and the regional authorities of
Somaliland and Puntland, in order to strengthen their
criminal justice systems to cope with the added burden
to prison and court systems. The UNDP's long-term
assistance programme to the Somali courts and police
is now complemented by the UNODC's work in the
corrections sector. Such efforts depend heavily on
partnerships. Our collaboration with the African Union,
the European Commission, INTERPOL and NATO has
been indispensable.

I would also like to thank the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional authorities of
Somaliland and Puntland for establishing a technical
cooperation mechanism on counter-piracy. It is
important that such initiatives are fully integrated into
our overall efforts to boost Somalia-based solutions to
this problem.

In January 2010, the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia established a trust fund. It has
already provided resources to several counter-piracy
projects, both in the area of prosecution and initiatives
on land. I am grateful to all Member States that have
generously contributed to this fund, and I call on the
international community, including the shipping
industry, to continue to support these crucial projects.

Let us always remember that reducing and
eliminating piracy in the region means a sustained
response not only at sea but also on land, where piracy
originates. The security of international navigation
requires that we continue to support peace and stability
in Somalia. I therefore thank the Security Council for
convening today's meeting.

While I am here, I would also like to say a few
words about the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The recent savage rape of and assault on at least 154
Congolese civilians is another grave example of the
levels of sexual violence and insecurity that continue to
plague the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is one more brutal reminder of the challenges of
keeping the peace and protecting civilians in conflict
zones.

Meeting these challenges is our collective
responsibility. I have called on the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to investigate this
incident and bring the perpetrators to justice. I have
also called on the Government to renew efforts to bring
security and stability to the people of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for all armed
groups in the country to lay down their weapons and
join the peace process.

Yet I am compelled to ask: what more can we do
to protect civilians from such wanton violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law?

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo does
what it can within its mandate, working with limited
resources in an exceptionally difficult environment.
But at such times we should always ask if we could
have done more. I am dispatching Assistant Secretary-
General Atul Khare of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to work with Special Representative Roger
Meece and report back. And I have asked my Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, to lead the United Nations
response. But I also request that you, the members of
the Security Council, seriously consider what more we
can do - in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
elsewhere - to ensure the successful protection of
civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations.

Last year I met some of the victims of appalling
crimes of sexual violence in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Women and children should not
have to live in fear of rape. Communities should not
suffer the indignity of knowing that human rights
abusers and war criminals can continue to behave with
impunity. We must speak out and we must act.

