Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I should like to
start by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing
today, for his work and for the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as a whole. I would like to welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime
Minister of Kosovo. I would also like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacic', Prime Minister of Serbia,
to today's Council meeting, and to congratulate him on
his appointment. The United Kingdom looks forward
to working closely with the new Government in Serbia.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2012/603). There
continues to be steady progress in Kosovo on the
political level, as reflected in the International Steering
Group's decision to work towards an end to supervised
independence in September. That step recognizes the
positive steps Kosovo has taken over the past four years,
especially its adoption of laws complying with and
implementing the Comprehensive Settlement Proposal.
Of particular note are the laws on Prizren and Velika
Hoca, the appointment of a language commissioner
and moves to appoint a director for a new Serbian TV
channel, RTK2.

The momentum created by Kosovo's desire to end
supervised independence must be maintained through
its European Union (EU) accession path. Regional
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations are an
integral part of EU accession. It is understandable that
the election period in Serbia and the subsequent business
of Government formation have created a hiatus in the
process of EU-facilitated dialogue. With the formation
of the new Government in Serbia, however, we hope
to see a resumption of the EU-facilitated dialogue
with Kosovo as soon as possible - and, indeed, not
just resumption but, to use the Special Representative's
word, reinvigoration.

It is crucial that Belgrade implement technical
agreements already reached on regional cooperation,
the freedom of movement and, in particular, integrated
border management. I welcome to the commitment to
that end that we have just heard from Prime Minister
Dacie, and hope to see rapid follow-up. Pristina
must also maintain its active commitment to those
agreements and put in place the measures necessary
for implementing the agreement on cadastre records.
We support the development of the Pristina-Belgrade
dialogue to address key political challenges, including
northern Kosovo.
On the situation in northern Kosovo, Pristina
and Belgrade must engage with each other in order
to tackle key outstanding issues. It is important
that they act responsibly, cooperating with both the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR). The United Kingdom is
grateful for the professional way in which EULEX and
KFOR have continued to carry out their mandates in
demanding circumstances. Attempts to inhibit their
freedom of movement - and instances of this are set
out in the Secretary-General's report - are of course
unacceptable.

It is the responsibility of Pristina to identify
a way forward, but that responsibility has to be
supported by Belgrade in line with the EU conditions
set in December 2011 for a visible and sustainable
improvement of relations with Kosovo. We want to see
an approach from both sides, and from all members of
the new Government in Serbia, that creates space for
compromise and cooperation. That must be supported
by action to address the illegal parallel structures that
exist in the north.

The Kosovo Government must demonstrate its
commitment to minorities across Kosovo. It must set out
its strategy for the north, including a socio-economic
vision. In that regard, we welcome the opening of the
northern Mitrovica administrative office, a crucial first
step towards providing practical support to Kosovo
citizens in the north. We hope that the international
community will demonstrate its support for sustainable
governance in northern Kosovo by assisting Pristina in
consolidating that initiative.

The United Kingdom is concerned about recent
ethnically motivated violence. The incidents during
Saint Vitus Day celebrations were unacceptable. Visible
measures aimed at preventing inter-ethnic incidents
will be key to engaging the Kosovo-Serbian community
in the north.

We welcome efforts by the Special Representative
to focus on returns and the challenges faced by
minorities in Kosovo. Security is an important
factor for returnees but, in our view, the overriding
considerations are socio-economic, including access to
employment and education. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees attributes a
recent drop in returns to the lack of available land for
returnees and the limited number of houses being built.
It is essential that funding be maintained to support the
continuation of the returns process, both by the Kosovo
Government and by the international community. The
United Kingdom is the largest bilateral donor, having
contributed £400,000 to returns projects during 2012.
We encourage others to offer their support.

The United Kingdom welcomes the thorough and
vigorous work being carried out by the EULEX Special
Investigative Task Force, which is looking into the
allegations relating to organ trafficking made in the
Marty report. We remain strongly of the view that
EULEX is the right body to take that work forward. It
has the necessary authority and jurisdiction, and it has
established close cooperation with key stakeholders,
including the authorities in Albania and Serbia. We are
confident in its capacity and determination to take that
important work forward.

The United Kingdom will continue to support
the irreversible progress of both Kosovo and Serbia
towards EU membership. We look forward to their
EU perspectives being embedded further in the
Commission's enlargement package this autumn. We
hope that both Pristina and Belgrade will underpin
their EU progression with a spirit of cooperation and
constructive reconciliation when the EU-facilitated
dialogue resumes.

