Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank you very much,
Madam, for agreeing to have this meeting at such short
notice. I thank Mr. Eliasson for his comments and
for presenting to us the statement of the Secretary-
General, which is very promising. What I am going
to say now, including the recent information about the
developments in Ukraine, in particular in Crimea, was
sent to all the missions this afternoon,

The situation continues to deteriorate. As I said
yesterday (see S/PV.7123), Russian troops illegally
entered the territory of Ukraine in the Crimean
peninsula on the ambiguous pretext of protecting the
Russian-speaking population of Ukraine. A few hours
ago, the upper house of the Russian Parliament, the
Federation Council, unanimously authorized the use of
military force against Ukraine upon the request of the
President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin,
but the troops are already there and their number is
increasing every hour.

However, such action by the Russian Federation
constitutes an act of aggression against the State of
Ukraine and a severe violation of international law,
posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of our country, as well as peace and stability
in the whole region. The Russian Federation is not
complying with its obligations as a State guarantor of
Ukraine under the Budapest Memorandum, obliging
Russia, as well as other permanent members of the
Security Council, to refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity of Ukraine. It is a
dangerous challenge to the very principle of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Russia officially rejected the Ukrainian proposal to
hold immediate bilateral consultations under article 7 of
the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership

between Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.
The Russian Federation has brutally violated the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
obliging all Member States, inter alia, to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State.

Facing the announced military intervention in
Ukraine, the Government of Ukraine requested that this
meeting of the Security Council be held. We call upon
the Security Council to do everything possible now
to stop aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine. There is still a chance.

Ukraine calls on the guarantor States to react
immediately in order to prevent intervention. We call
for international monitors of the situation in Ukraine
with regard to the aggression of the Russian Federation.
We urge all States Members of the United Nations to
demonstrate solidarity with the Ukrainian nation to
protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
country and the very basic principles of the United
Nations, currently brutally violated by a permanent
member of the Security Council.

