Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the States members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). This open debate takes place at a difficult juncture characterized by daunting challenges and a marked deterioration of the situation on the ground. Regrettably, Israel's illegal policy of settlement expansion and de facto annexation of Palestinian lands, especially in and around East Jerusalem, has intensified. This policy includes repeated, hostile threats to annex parts or all of the occupied West Bank outright, in contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. As many have stressed, such threats and violations cannot go unchallenged. It is incumbent upon the international community to take concrete actions to compel Israel's respect for and compliance with Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Israel must cease all illegal settlement and annexation measures in the State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. In this regard, we reaffirm our rejection of the most recent illegal Israeli decision to establish so-called nature reserves in the West Bank. That must be prevented, and the announcement condemned. The OIC reiterates that the lack of accountability for Israel's ongoing violations has only encouraged such impunity, which is undermining any possibility for achieving a just peace based on the vision of a solution of two States existing within the pre-1967 borders, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. In this regard, the OIC welcomes the International Criminal Court's decision to open an investigation into Israel's crimes against the Palestinian people and hopes that it will be expeditiously pursued. Moreover, the OIC reaffirms that the unilateral measures and attempts to unlawfully alter the legal, historical and political status of East Jerusalem constitute a flagrant violation of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The OIC calls on all States to abide by their political, legal and moral obligations to uphold international law and ensure its respect, including under the Fourth Geneva Convention. We urge all States to act with urgency and contribute to international efforts aimed at ending the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. Additionally, we call for Israel's full withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions. We further affirm the need for all external parties to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria and reiterate our support for a political solution of the Syrian crisis, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015). The OIC remains gravely concerned about the deterioration of socioeconomic and humanitarian conditions in the Palestinian territories, particularly in the Gaza Strip. We must urgently alleviate the humanitarian needs and suffering of the Palestinian people, including the Palestinian refugees. We encourage Member States to provide funds or to increase their contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the United Nations Development Programme and other United Nations entities that areworking diligently to provide the needed assistance to the Palestinians. Additionally, the OIC condemns the announced plans to integrate UNRWA-run schools in East Jerusalem into Israel's education system. In conclusion, the OIC urges the international community to uphold its obligations and engage constructively in facilitating a just peace, including by sponsoring a multilateral political peace process based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and the internationally agreed terms of reference, including the Arab Peace Initiative. Allow me now to make a statement in my national capacity. Yet another turbulent year of despair has passed for the people of Palestine. An overview of the year shows that aggression by Israel, the occupying Power, has become the new normal in the Palestinian territory. The high number of Palestinian casualties, including of children, flagrant violations of the human rights of Palestinians, severe restrictions on their movements and the closure of the Gaza Strip all speak to the dismal situation on the ground and explain the mounting pressure on already enormous humanitarian needs. While the renewal of UNRWA's mandate (General Assembly resolution 74/83) is a welcome development, we are still concerned about its budgetary shortfall. The international community has to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable funding for its operation. The unabated expansion of Israeli settlements and demolition of Palestinian homes in the occupied West Bank are changing its demography. Israel's intention to extend the settlements and its recent pronouncement on the annexation of Palestinian territories raise the spectre of change even more. All those actions by Israel constitute egregious violations of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention, and are in direct contravention of all relevant Security Council resolutions. We join the _ international community in condemning these acts and ask Israel to refrain from such actions. We also ask for the maintenance of the sanctity of Islamic and Christian holy places at all costs, in particular the Al-Aqsa. The international community has to turn the culture of inaction around and compel Israel to end its occupation of Palestinian territory. We look upon the Security Council to fulfil its Charter obligations and enforce its resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016). The implementation of the road map for peace in the Middle East, the Arab Peace Initiative and the efforts of the Quartet are crucial building blocks. Ensuring accountability and justice for Israel's atrocities and human rights violations would serve to end the entrenched culture of impunity. Developments in the International Criminal Court are critical in this regard. Our own struggle for independence and the painful experience of enduring the worst form of genocide in 1971 inspire us to always advocate for the oppressed people of the world. This has been the very premise of Bangladesh's unwavering support for the Palestinian cause. We will continue to firmly stand by our Palestinian brothers and sisters in their just and rightful struggle for self-determination, until the State of Palestine is established on the basis of the two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as its capital. As we move towards the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the resolution of the Palestinian crisis will remain a litmus test for retaining people's trust in multilateralism and in this body.
