Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres for
their comprehensive briefings. We listened carefully
to the information provided by our Security Council
colleagues. We are grateful to the humanitarian workers
and agencies who are working under fire in Syria,
risking their lives in an attempt to alleviate suffering.
We understand the heavy burden that neighbouring
States are bearing with the overflow of Syrian refugees
into their countries.

It is clear to all that the difficulties encountered at
present by Syrian civilians in terms of access to urgent
humanitarian assistance are due to the complex security
situation, especially the activity of terrorist groups. We
are especially alarmed by the situation of people in
the governorates of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, which are
controlled by the so-called Islamic State. We would say
that in those areas 600,000 people in need are deprived
of access to humanitarian assistance. The situation has
worsened with the closing of humanitarian offices in
Raqqa, which were providing medicines and medical
supplies.

We were extremely disturbed to hear that Islamic
State is stealing humanitarian assistance from United
Nations agencies and then distributing it under its
banner. We understand that we must try all possible
legal means to deliver humanitarian assistance to
civilians who are under the control of terrorists, while
ensuring appropriate safeguards to prevent any more
such blatant incidents.

Turning to the most recent report of the Secretary-
General on the humanitarian situation in Syria
(S/2-15/124), we would like to call for an appropriate
assessment of the terrorists and their actions. It is
unacceptable refer to entities that are on Security
Council sanctions lists, including the Al-Nusra
Front and the Islamic State, as "the opposition". It is
categorically unacceptable and politically incorrect. It
cannot happen again.

We continue to be shocked by the blatant and
reprehensible actions of terrorists. Yesterdaythe Security
Council unanimously and strongly condemned the
Islamic State's kidnapping of more than 100 Christians
in north-eastern Syria. The terrorists are blocking
humanitarian deliveries into Yarmouk refugee camp.
Also unacceptable are the crimes being committed by
other groups fighting against the Government, which
are intentionally firing on residential areas of Syrian
towns using mortars and highly destructive weapons.
In the past month, such bombings have killed 1,440
people, including children, and wounded more than
200.

We call on both parties to the Syrian conflict - the
Syrian Government and the opposition - to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to observe
international humanitarian law. We share the concern
of the Security Council regarding the state of the
educational system in Syria. It would be desirable for
United Nations agencies, which are doing a great deal to
alleviate the humanitarian situation, to become actively
involved in the process of rebuilding schools and post-
secondary institutions for teacher training. This is very
important for the cities to which refugees and internally
displaced persons are returning, including Horns and
Ayn al-Arab.

We call on United Nations agencies to support
constructive cooperation with the Syrian authorities. We
are convinced that this is one of the major preconditions
for constructive humanitarian engagement and
assistance. We also encourage the Syrian Government
to be in close contact with United Nations humanitarian
agencies.

In conclusion, we agree with the view of the
Secretary-General that the solution to the Syrian
conflict can be neither military nor humanitarian but
must be political. That is what the Russian Federation
has been working towards since the beginning of the
crisis, together with the Syrians, in the framework
of an inter-Syrian dialogue based on the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). This is our goal in
the context of the extremely complex efforts under way
with the parties and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We expect the Syrian
Government and the Syrian opposition to go the extra
mile to ensure the success of the efforts of the Special
Envoy and thereby take the first steps towards the
restoration of peace in the Syrian Arab Republic.

