The President: I thank the representative of
Cuba for his kind words addressed to my country,
Brazil.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of Brazil.

I would like to thank all the delegations that have
taken part in this wrap-up meeting on the work of the
Security Council for the month of March 2005.

My delegation believes that exercises of this
nature, which seek to enhance interaction and to
promote constructive debate between members and
non-members of the Council, should be encouraged
and embraced as a regular practice. On the one hand,
the Council greatly benefits from the exchange of
views. On the other, the wider membership is exposed
to a variety of opinions, concepts and stances that
influence and shape the Council's decisions. It is
therefore an exercise in exchange of views,
transparency and accountability.
The reason the delegation of Brazil chose this
subject - the African dimension in the work of the
Security Council - is quite clear. African issues
currently add up to more than 60 per cent of the
Council's agenda. While, until 1997, most United
Nations operations were deployed in Europe and the
Middle East, we have, since 1998, been witnessing a
steady increase of peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in Africa.

The work of the Council during the month of
March, highly concentrated on African issues, is not an
exception to this trend. In no other matter can the
Council's work as a whole be better assessed or
evaluated.

Secondly, we chose this subject because of our
historical and cultural ties with the nations of the
African continent, which make us particularly sensitive
to their aspirations and concerns about living in peace,
prosperity and security. Brazil has the second largest
population of African descent in the world - the
largest outside Africa.

All told - including both consultations and
formal meetings - the Council held some 25 meetings
on African issues during March: 25 meetings in 24
working days. These figures give us an idea of the
time, attention and resources that the Council devotes
to Africa, and they reflect the fundamental interest of
the United Nations, as a universal Organization, in
tackling conflict situations on that continent.

However, this strong trend may also be
interpreted as the simple result of the Council's not
being effective enough in early crisis identification and
conflict avoidance. It has been argued that the Council
must evolve from the logic of resolution to that of the
prevention of conflict. The delegation of Brazil
supports that evolution.

The mixed picture offered by the results of the
Security Council's engagement in Africa should lead
us to further reflection. Side by side, there are success
stories and textbook cases of the re-emergence of
conflict. While the Council can benefit from past
experience, it must accept that the international order is
in a state of flux. As a principal organ of the United
Nations, the Council must also be ready for a
permanent process of evolution. We must never cease
to question and to improve our methods of work, our
political perceptions, our cost-benefit analyses and our
structure. The Council must look forward to major
improvements on all these and many other fronts.
The statements delivered today covered a wide
range of important issues, and I would like to mention
just a few of them. A number of delegations pointed
out the importance of strengthening interaction with
the African Union and regional organizations on the
basis of more intensive cooperation and coordination
with regard to conflict prevention and management.
Some delegations underlined the root causes of African
conflict and the need to combine peace and security
efforts with long-term development strategies. There
were many references to institutional dialogue among
the principal bodies of the United Nations, in particular
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Some delegations also acknowledged the need
for other concerted efforts, including fair trade and
development assistance, as well as the greater
involvement of international financial institutions,
programmes and agencies to that end. Delegations also
referred to the recent recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in the report entitled "In
larger freedom" (A/59/2005), especially with regard to
the establishment of a peacebuilding commission.
Some delegations made concrete proposals in that
regard.

Other aspects were also covered in this rich
debate. There were even comments relating to the
subject of the wrap-up meeting on the African
dimension itself to the effect that it should be
undertaken on a regular basis.

It is my delegation's intention to provide, at a
later stage, a summary of the ideas discussed, which
we will be pleased to circulate all Members of the
United Nations.

I wish now to make some comments related
specifically to Brazilian national views on these
matters. First, addressing the deep-rooted social and
economic causes of conflict in Africa, as a way to
prevent either their outbreak or their resurgence, seems
to be a vanguard task to be tackled by the United
Nations as a whole. We welcome the greater
involvement of the Economic and Social Council in
this task, in particular by means of the creation of ad
hoc working groups such as those established for
Burundi and for Guinea-Bissau.

Nevertheless, we believe that these joint
efforts - placing the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council on the same board -
still lack the formal institutional frameworks and
adequate channels necessary to maximize the quality of
their responses.
My delegation has consistently advocated, over
the years, the adoption of rules and procedures to put
Article 65 of the Charter fully into force, in order to
explore its many potential benefits. We are also eager
to discuss proposals, in the context of the reform of the
Organization, on the establishment of a peacebuilding
commission that would help bring together the
objectives of peace and security on one hand, and
sustained development on the other.

After working in the Council for 15 months now,
and having accompanied it from this chair for one
month, I daresay this Chamber needs a new
perspective. A new dimension should be added to our
approach - and that, of course, is sustainability. The
Council is responsible for peace and security, not for a
year, not for two years, not for the short while when
there is a peacekeeping operation deployed to distant
countries and provinces. No: the Council is
consistently responsible for a peace that can be
sustained in time.

Military action is needed and is crucial if we are
to provide security and ensure that fragile peace
processes can flourish. However, in parallel, we need
concrete action to lead people out of the vicious circle
of hopelessness and immediate gain, thereby providing
for a sustainable peace.

The international community - meaning all of
us - has to help provide the alternatives. We have to
cooperate for stable and democratic institutions to be
built and for primary humanitarian needs to be
attended to. We have to alleviate poverty and provide
education through direct assistance, and ensure
development and employment through fair trade. It is
only when the peace dividends are palpable for the
people in countries in conflict that the probability of
recurrence of conflict will subside.

Secondly, the decision-making process within the
Security Council would be substantially improved by
making use of first-hand information regarding
conflicts in Africa. For instance, only two days ago, the
Council was briefed by the representative of the
African Union mediators on the crisis in C6te d'Ivoire,
who provided the Council with vivid testimony of the
challenges before the Council as it seeks to achieve the
goals of promoting peace and security in that country.

Certainly, members of the Council benefit from
high-quality information provided by the Secretariat -
which is very useful - as well as from individual
members of the Council. Yet, the views of those
directly linked to conflicts under review and their
particular assessment of the constraints on, and the
possibilities for, the action of the United Nations must
be duly taken into consideration. Nor should the
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, such as the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Southern African Development Community in the case
of Africa, be in any way disregarded.

In that context of amassing tools for decision-
making, the delegation of Brazil is also highly
supportive of regular Security Council missions to
countries in conflict. Missions of the Security Council
provide a unique opportunity for members to engage in
the realities of the conflicts the Council is seized of.
The Council has been carrying out regular missions to
Africa, and we believe that the practice should be
maintained and even increased.

As well, resorting to alternative means of
dialogue with non-governmental institutions, whether
international non-governmental organizations or local
representatives of civil society, should be stimulated.

The closer cooperation between peacekeeping
operations and political missions deployed in the same
region, as well as coordination among United Nations
offices and agencies in different countries, is yet
another recent and very positive development in
peacekeeping that must be further supported and
advanced. The various United Nations presences in
West Africa, and those in the Great Lakes region, are
demonstrating the gains that can be obtained through
their coordinated efforts and joint activities.

Another fact to be stressed is that peace processes
currently being undertaken in Africa rely on growing
regional and subregional African diplomatic efforts and
military components, thus demonstrating the strong
and increasingly effective commitment of African
States to intra-African solutions. Nevertheless, we
should not expect the region to provide all the
resources it needs to keep and build peace. The larger
international community must do its share.

In that regard, we also believe that the interests
and general views of Africa would receive greater
consideration if the Council were to count on the
permanent membership of African countries. Brazil
supports the proposal that two new permanent seats be
conferred on the African regional group and welcomes
the prospect of that occurring.

Thirdly, and finally, on the highly important issue
of combating impunity, my delegation believes that
primary responsibility for bringing perpetrators to
justice belongs to local courts and tribunals. However,
in some cases, local institutions do not have the
capacity to investigate and prosecute, and, in other
cases, the fight against impunity may be hampered by
reluctant authorities. In such cases, we believe that the
Council should look to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), given its international status, permanent
structure and mandate.

With two investigative processes already under
way, and another under consideration, the ICC is
proving to be an effective tool of deterrence and, as
such, will greatly contribute to international security.
Ultimately, the full credibility of the Court is directly
proportional to its universality. We therefore encourage
States that have not yet done so to accede to the Rome
Statute.

In closing, I would like to thank all delegations
that participated in this debate, in particular the African
delegations. Their insightful comments and suggestions
and their constructive contributions have greatly added

to the liveliness of this valuable debate. I certainly
hope that the many rich and articulate ideas contained
in those statements will provide food for thought for all
of us as Members of the Organization.

The United Nations finds itself on the verge of
major reform. It should draw on the views and opinions
of the majority of its Members to make itself more
capable of dealing with the ever-changing challenges
and threats on the international scene.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.
