Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2356 (2017). The Security
Council has today sent another message of unity and
determination against the repeated provocation of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law
and a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security. We thank the United States and China for
moving the resolution forward in a constructive spirit
of active collaboration with all the relevant parties and
actors, which remains crucial to the overall efforts to
bring peace and stability to the Korean peninsula.

Italy reaffirms its strong condemnation of North
Korea's recent missile- and nuclear-related activities.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea must end
its blatant disregard for its international obligations and
take immediate steps to abandom its defiant and self-
isolating policies. It can do that by first committing to
completely ceasing its missile and nuclear programmes
in a verifiable and irreversible manner.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), we continue to work
tirelessly with other members in order to ensure the
full implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including the resolution that the Council has
just adopted, by the entire membership. A rigorous and
effective sanctions regime is essential in order to make
the leadership of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea calculate the price of its defiance of the Council
and of the international community as a whole.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Italy believes that sanctions must remain a tool used
to further a wider strategy aimed at achieving lasting
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula. Sanctions
regimes are not an end in themselves. We must avoid
negative consequences for the civilian population and
a humanitarian situation in the country. The ultimate
objective is to produce a change of behaviour by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which might
frame a parth towards the achievement of a peaceful
and comprehensive solution for the Korean peninsula
and the region as a whole.

