Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed report (S/2003/ll3).
We also welcome the presence of Mr. Steiner at our
meeting today, and we thank him for his statement.

At the end of last year, the Security Council
mission, led by Ambassador Kolby of Norway, made a
successful visit to Belgrade and Kosovo. We express
our appreciation to Mr. Steiner, as well as to a number
of other parties, for their efforts, which made the
Security Council mission a success. The visit was very
helpful in enabling the Security Council to make a
comprehensive and objective assessment of the
situation in Kosovo.

It should be recognized that a great deal of
progress has been made in many fields in Kosovo.
Municipal elections were carried out successfully, and
Provisional Institutions and municipal structures at
various levels are functioning smoothly. We believe
that that is the result of the joint efforts of various
parties in Kosovo and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and we
express our appreciation for those efforts.

At the same time, as Mr. Steiner pointed out, the
international community and the various parties still
have a great deal of work to do before a number of
benchmarks can be met in the establishment of a
harmonious and multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. We
hope that the local leadership of Kosovo will
effectively carry out its responsibilities and fully
respect the mandate of UNMIK, establishing a stable
regime and cooperating with UNMIK and the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro so as to jointly
promote the establishment of the rule of law, facilitate
the process of refugee return, guarantee the interests of
minorities - especially their safety, security and
freedom of movement - effectively crack down on
organized crime and bring about economic
development and national integration.

The Chinese delegation is particularly disturbed
about recent comments regarding independence for
Kosovo. We believe that resolution 1244 (1999)
remains the basis for the final status of Kosovo. Any
attempt to redefine the borders will seriously damage
the security and stability of the region. We support
UNMIK'S strict and fair implementation of its mandate.
We call upon the parties concerned to continue their
cooperation with UNMIK in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) in a
comprehensive and thorough manner with a view to
ensuring the long-term stability and security of Kosovo
and the of region as a whole.

