The President (spoke in Spanish): I have the
pleasure to acknowledge the presence of our new
colleague, Sir Emyr Jones Parry of the United
Kingdom. On behalf of the Security Council, I wish to
extend to him a warm welcome. We are very keen to
work closely with him. Welcome, Ambassador.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Colombia, India, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Liechtenstein and Ukraine, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr. Giraldo
(Colombia), Mr. Nambiar (India), Mr. Mekel
(Israel), Mr. Spatafora (Italy), Mr. Haragachi
(Japan), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein) and
Mr. Kachinsky (Ukraine) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Heraldo Munoz,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Munoz to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/669, which contains a letter dated 7
July 2003 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), containing the first report of the Monitoring
Group, submitted in accordance with resolution 1455
(2003).

I now give the floor to the representative of
Chile, who will brief the Council in his capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).


