Mr. Eler (Turkey): I thank the Korean presidency
for organizing this meeting on such a crucial issue and
would like to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Oh Joon for his able chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and their means of delivery constitutes a
vital threat to peace and security and hampers social
and economic development. Located in a region with
particular challenges with respect to proliferation,
Turkey values all initiatives aimed at preventing such
activities. Turkey will continue to support mechanisms
designed to prevent WMDs and their material from
falling into the wrong hands.

In that spirit, Turkey has thus been fully supporting
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
extending the mandate of the Committee. Turkey
possesses the necessary legislation to fully implement
the resolution and is party to all relevant international
instruments and export control regimes to that effect.
To date, Turkey has submitted national reports and
matrices to the Committee on more than one occasion.
Our latest national report and matrix are currently
being updated. Turkey also joined the joint statement
on promoting a full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), at the Nuclear Security Summit
held in the Hague.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a solid and compelling
basis for the universalization of efforts to prevent WMD
proliferation, complementing existing international
treaties and conventions. Over the past decade,
resolution 1540 (2004) has become a key component
of the global security architecture. We welcome the
efforts exerted in the past decade to implement and
raise awareness on resolution 1540 (2004). It is an
important achievement that 172 States have submitted
their national reports to the Committee. We hope for a
universal reporting as soon as possible. Turkey would
also like to express its appreciation for the work of the
Panel of Experts.

Robust export controls are crucial to combat
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, their means of delivery and all related
technology. Needless to say, effective interagency
coordination and cooperation, as well as timely and
effective intelligence sharing, are very strong elements
in that equation. We also would like to hereby draw
attention to cooperation with industry for more effective
counter-proliferation efforts.

Regimes or systems are as strong as their weakest
links. Resolution 1540 (2004) is being implemented
on an uneven playing field, as States have differing
capacities. We therefore strongly support the full
utilization and strengthening of the assistance and
cooperation mechanisms regarding resolution 1540
(2004), in close coordination with the 1540 Committee,
and upon request. The resolution's regional and
subregional coordinators can play an important role
in facilitating regional approaches to assisting States.
Therefore options for funding such positions within
international and regional organizations should be
closely examined.

In every part of the world, transit and trans-shipments
are usually the most susceptible rings, in the chain of
export control, to exploitation. Devising realistic and
applicable methods to reinforce transit controls should
continue to remain among our priorities in order to
strengthen export controls. It would, however, be
unfair to levy the whole burden of controlling goods
to transit countries alone. More effective and equitable
burden sharing is needed. We should therefore strongly
highlight the importance of strengthening controls at
the origin.

Terrorism will remain a key challenge to peace
and stability, particularly through its ability to use
asymmetric methods to bypass traditional security
and defence systems. The essence of export control
measures is to prevent transfers of WMD-related
sensitive materials to undesired destinations and
individuals alike, including terrorists.

We welcomed resolution 2118 (2013) on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme
of Syria. We regret, however, the delays in the
implementation of the calendar determined by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
As the Secretary-General has reiterated in his various
reports, the situation in Syria only underscores the
importance of expediting the removal of all chemical
weapons from Syria. We are additionally concerned by
reports indicating non-declared WMD capabilities of
the Syrian regime and the use of non-listed chemical
agents for chemical attacks.

We are prepared to listen to all proposals on
enhanced coordination between national export control
and counter-terrorism bodies by creating a broadened
network of information and intelligence sharing
at global and regional levels. We would therefore
encourage cross-reporting on the progress of efforts
and sharing lessons learned at regular intervals in
relevant forums, such as the 1540 Committee and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as the
Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and
Material of Mass Destruction, the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and other international and
regional meetings and events.

Moving forward from a decade of awareness-
raising to a decade of full and sustained implementation
will indeed require long-term vision and strategy. We
therefore look forward to the comprehensive review to
be submitted to the Security Council in 2016, pursuant
to resolution 1977 (2011), and stand ready to contribute
in that regard.

I would like to add a few words in response to
one speaker's statement. Our track record in the fight
against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and our commitment to the international mechanisms
to which we have been party is clear. I reject the
baseless allegations arguing otherwise. Needless
to say, we will continue to contribute to the regimes
combatting proliferation in line with our international
commitments and we expect all respectable actors of
the international community to do so.

