I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this year's debate on the protection of civilians, as well as to extend our gratitude to the briefers for their presentations. Brazil associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366) once again reminds us of the heavy toll of armed conflicts on civilians. Each year, the number of civilians reported killed or injured in hostilities surpasses 20,000, which, as the report itself recognizes, is almost certainly an underestimation. Beyond casualty figures, the report is about families left in mourning, children losing hope and people living in fear. The concept note (S/2020/402, annex I) for today's debate stresses that the question is not one of a lack of legal norms but, rather, one of compliance. I would like to take one step back to highlight that perhaps the greatest problem lies somewhere else - in the need for lasting peace. We may continue to strengthen the protection-of-civilians normative framework and enhance compliance, but it will be only a palliative measure if we do not address the root causes of each armed conflict. When conflict erupts, compliance with international humanitarian law is key to protecting civilians. Unfortunately, indiscriminate attacks, the destruction of cultural heritage, the targeting of medical facilities and access restrictions for humanitarian workers have been the sad rule rather than the exception. Brazil strongly condemns any violation of international humanitarian law and calls on all parties to armed conflicts to respect their obligations under international law. Furthermore, when violations do occur, they must be investigated impartially, and perpetrators must be held accountable. In his report, the Secretary-General identifies the following risks and opportunities for the protection of civilians in the new decade: urban warfare, developments in weapons technology and malicious use of digital technologies, the impact of armed conflict on the environment and climate change, and peacekeeping operations. While Brazil shares many of those concerns, we must give a word of caution against the impulse to discuss all of them in the Security Council, unless they are related to a specific situation or country. The well-crafted division of labour among United Nations organs is not a suggestion in the Charter of the United Nations but, rather, the most legitimate and efficient way to achieve the main objectives of the Organization. More often than not, contemporary armed conflicts are carried out near or in urban areas, thus posing new challenges to the protection of civilians. International law already provides the normative framework to regulate military conduct in urban warfare, particularly through international humanitarian law. At the same time, the nature of the urban environment adds an extra layer of complexity in distinction and proportionality assessments. In those scenarios, the principles of humanity and precaution play an instrumental role. Brazil endorsed the Santiago Declaration, signed by Latin American and Caribbean States, in favour of a political declaration on the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. For Brazil, such a political declaration should establish common standards, promote policies to reduce the risk of civilian harm and facilitate the exchange of good practices. Some new technologies could be beneficial for protecting civilians, improving casualty monitoring and clarifying cases of missing persons. However, they might significantly change the nature of armed conflicts and the way they are fought. Therefore, while international humanitarian law is fairly well equipped to answer many questions associated with new technologies, there is an urgent need for additional regulation on the matter, especially regarding lethal autonomous weapon systems. The third issue raised in the Secretary-General's report is the impact of armed conflict on the environment and climate change. Armed conflicts have long-lasting impacts on all three pillars of sustainable development: they hinder socioeconomic development and affect the environment, generating considerable human suffering. Nevertheless, one should be cautious not to expand ad infinitum the already comprehensive protection-of-civilians agenda, particularly with issues that fall outside the mandate of the Security Council. While remaining sensitive to the impact of climate change on the most vulnerable countries, we must be wary of proposals to address non-military challenges through security lenses. Climate change and environment challenges are phenomena that lack military context and can have no possible military solution. They fall primarily under the development domain, and therefore require development-focused responses. Finally, the report touches upon one of the most visible faces of the United Nations in its efforts to protect civilians, namely, peacekeeping operations. When protection-of-civilians mandates are authorized, they should be clear enough so that peacekeepers on the ground, especially commanders, understand precisely what is expected of them, without hampering the autonomy that leaders in the field require. It is also important to provide realistic mandates, with feasible tasks from the military, political and legal perspectives. We must also ensure that peacekeeping missions have both the capabilities and the resources they need, including appropriate tailored training, to fulfil their protection responsibilities as effectively as possible. Brazil highlights the proven benefits that an increased presence of women in peacekeeping brings to areas including, but not limited to, the protection of civilians. We also underscore the essential role of gender advisers on the ground and the importance of promoting standards for their work within missions. Brazil is proud of the recognition achieved by our women peacekeepers for their work on the ground, especially in the fulfilment of protection-of-civilians mandates. Last year, Brazil was honoured when Frigate Captain Marcia Braga received the United Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award for her work in the Central African Republic. It is immensely gratifying to learn that Brazilian Commander Carla Castro de Araujo, the current gender and protection adviser of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, will be sharing this year's award with Indian Major Suman Gawani, a military observer to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. This year's debate takes place amid a pandemic that has brought about additional risks to the lives and security of civilians in situations of armed conflict. It exacerbates their vulnerability and creates additional hurdles to humanitarian assistance in conflict zones. Brazil supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire in the light of the coronavirus disease. Ceasing hostilities is a major step to effectively protect civilians and minimize their suffering in these trying times.
