President De la Rua (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to express the satisfaction of the Argentine
Republic at seeing you, Sir, presiding over our
deliberations. Argentina would like also to express its
satisfaction at having been able to contribute to peace
as part of the Security Council.

Preserving international peace and security is a
primary responsibility of the Security Council and it
must be strengthened. If this responsibility is not fully
exercised, none of the remaining activities of the
United Nations can be successfully implemented.

The end of the cold war has not changed the role
of the Council as established by the Charter, but it has
confronted the Council with a reality that entails new
challenges: international security now also includes
human security.

Since the beginning of the last decade, most
conflicts considered by the Security Council have been
essentially of an internal nature - even when they had
international repercussions. In these conflicts the target
has also been civilian populations, which have
repeatedly been victims of serious and systematic
violations of human rights and humanitarian
international law. One of the greatest contemporary
dilemmas is whether the United Nations can remain
indifferent to these violations, committed within the
borders of a State, when at the same time it advocates
the defence of those very rights and freedoms? There is
no simple answer to this question, because it is linked
to values such as the sovereignty of States and to the
principle of non-intervention.

We believe that the principle of non-intervention
must be respected, but at the same time we believe that
a complementary value should be added: the principle
of non-indifference. This non-indifference also means
that the perpetrators of crimes that offend the common
conscience of humankind cannot be left unpunished.
Thus the creation of the International Criminal Court
and the tribunals for Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia
and Sierra Leone are important deterrents and
indispensable components of stable, lasting and fair
peace.

Peacekeeping operations must also be adapted to
the new realities. Sometimes their mandates will go
beyond the observance of the ceasefire. As in the case
of East Timor, a mandate may even include
contributing to organizing the creation of a new State.
When necessary the mandate should include rules on
the protection of civilians. Srebrenica and Rwanda
taught us that a false notion of impartiality cannot
prevail in cases of genocide or crimes against
humanity. In all cases, the mandate must be clear,
realistic and adapted to the mission's goals.

These mandates will only be effectively
implemented if they are backed by political will
concretely expressed through the contribution of
adequate financial and human resources. The financing
of peacekeeping operations should be sufficient, and
the permanent Members of this Council have a special
responsibility in this regard. The need for a gradual
approach and the situation of developing countries
should also be taken into account when reviewing the
financing of these operations.

The most recent conflicts have shown us that
troops and civilian personnel should be efficiently
trained. The experience gained by Argentina through
42 years of participating in these operations was
reflected in the creation of the Argentine centre for
joint training for peacekeeping operations, which has
been operating since 1995 with the participation of
personnel from other Member States, and the training
centre for security forces on overseas missions.
Argentina, which is the major troop-contributing
country in the region and currently participates in nine
peacekeeping operations, will continue, in accordance
with international law, to provide armed troops and
security and civilian personnel to the operations
mandated by the Security Council.

We recognize the valuable contribution made by
the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, dated 21 August 2000, and we consider
that this report should be promptly considered.

The painful conflicts in Africa have diverse
causes that require integrated responses which combine
the essential elements of peace and security with
sustainable development, representative democracy and
the rule of law. These conflicts should be examined by
the Security Council with special sensitivity, which can
only be reached through direct knowledge of the reality
and greater coordination with regional organizations
and other United Nations organs.

Consistent with this perspective, Argentina has
been present in Africa. It has supported the
maintenance of peace by participating in operations in
Angola, Mozambique and Western Sahara. It has
provided humanitarian assistance either directly or
through the White Helmets. It has contributed electoral
observers to South Africa, Eritrea and Algeria, and has
promoted cooperation for development through the
cooperation funds.

In the multilateral area, together with our African
partners we have emphasized the importance of the
nuclear-weapon-free zones established by the
Tlatelolco and Pelindaba treaties.

Finally, I wish to underscore that in October 1998
Argentina hosted the last ministerial meeting of the
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic.
On that occasion, for the first time a plan of action was
adopted to enhance cooperation and ties between the
African and South American countries of the South
Atlantic.

I cannot conclude without expressing my
gratitude to Africa, without whose substantial
contribution and firm commitment to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter progress in
areas such as decolonization, disarmament, human
rights and development could not have been achieved.

I wish to reaffirm Argentina's ongoing
commitment to support the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and of associated and
humanitarian personnel. This is all the more relevant in
the light of the assassination yesterday of staff
members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in West Timor, which we
strongly condemn. We extend our condolences to the
family of those selfless servers of humanity and to the
entire United Nations family.

