Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation is
honoured to see you, the Foreign Minister of Tunisia,
presiding over today's meeting, and we wish to thank
you and your delegation for the tremendous interest
you have displayed in the issues before the Council this
month.

The Jamaican delegation is please to join you,
Mr. President, in welcoming President Paul Kagame of
Rwanda, with whom the Security Council met last
January. We appreciate his initiative to meet again with
the Council and thank him for his important statement
giving us his perspective on developments in the
region. We note his express commitment to moving the
peace process forward and the attention that he drew to
the three core issues: the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
need to address issues relating to the former Rwandan
Armed Forces (FAR) and Interahamwe and the
withdrawal of foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

Last week the Council was addressed by
President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and we were assured of his commitment to
relaunching the peace process. We View as a positive
step and as a confidence-building measure the meeting
held between President Kagame and President Kabila
in Washington last week.

My delegation's appeal is for the leaders in the
region to seek reconciliation and aim at bringing about
a peaceful solution to the crisis, which is affecting all
the countries in the Great Lakes region. For my
delegation, the Lusaka Agreement remains the most
viable option for peace and must be adhered to by all
parties, since in our view there can be no military
solution to the conflict.

We note President Kagame's appeal to the
international community to seize the moment. My
delegation hopes that all the signatories to the Lusaka
Agreement will reaffirm their commitment to the
process by abiding by the ceasefire and withdrawing
troops from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1304
(2000) and 1332 (2000), in conformity with the
stipulated time frame of the Ceasefire Agreement and
the Kampala disengagement plan of April 2000 and
with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
agree that all Congolese must be fully engaged in the
inter-Congolese dialogue, which is an important
component ofthe Lusaka Agreement.

This should also be an opportune time for the
parties to recommit to the subsidiary plan for
disengagement of the Harare agreement signed in
December last year. As the Secretary-General
indicated, the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has
already begun to take measures to support the
disengagement, and the Secretary-General has
informed us that he will be presenting to the Council
later this month a revised concept of operations for the
further deployment of MONUC as a basis for further
action.

Peace efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo cannot be allowed to fail, as the cost of such a
failure would be too high a price to pay for the region
as a whole. The conflict is exacting a terrible toll on
the civilian population not only of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but of the entire region. We
again emphasize the need for this issue to be addressed
within the framework of a comprehensive peace
involving the entire Great Lakes region. My delegation
therefore welcomes the regional initiatives taken so far,
and we look forward to the regional summit involving
all the parties to the Lusaka Agreement, to be held later
this month. We expect the meeting between the
Security Council and the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Agreement, also scheduled to take place this
month, to benefit from the outcome and
recommendations ofthe summit.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to emphasize
that sustainable peace can be achieved only when all
parties concerned rise above the differences which
separate them and focus instead on the issues which
unite them, and lay the groundwork for addressing the
economic and social challenges facing the countries
concerned.

