The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

At the outset, I would like to thank High
Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
have taken note of the report of the Organization on
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (S/2018/97l, annex), transmitted recently to the Security Council
by the Secretary-General. The OPCW has continued to
engage with Syria on unresolved issues concerning the
initial declaration of chemical weapons.

China supports enhanced coordination between
the two sides for a proper settlement of the issues at
hand. We have taken note that the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is investigating
five cases of alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria,
and hope to see conclusions from the investigation at an
early date. Meanwhile, all parties hope that the Mission
will produce the final investigation report on the use
of chemical weapons in the Douma area. We hope that
the mission Will carry out its work in strict compliance
with its mandate.

China's position on chemical weapons is consistent
and clear. We are firmly against the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstances and for any purpose. The use
of chemical weapons is not to be tolerated whenever
or wherever it occurs. All alleged chemical weapons
incidents must undergo comprehensive, objective and
impartial investigations so as to draw conclusions,
based on well-established evidence, that can withstand
the test of facts and history and to bring to justice the
perpetrators and parties responsible.

With regard to the adoption of the position on
accountability for the use of chemical weapons at the
fourth special session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention in June,
China's position remains unchanged. We hope that the
parties will work to bridge their differences through
dialogue and consultations, and together cope with the
threat posed by the use of chemical weapons.

Finally, I want to underscore that the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria is closely related to the
political settlement of the Syrian question. At present,
the parties to the Syrian question are engaged in
intensive diplomatic efforts to advance the Syrian
political process. We call on all parties concerned to
take a constructive approach, maintain unity on the
issue of chemical weapons in Syria, resolve problems
through dialogue and consultations and work together to
prevent the recurrence of the use of chemical weapons.
In that process, the parties should strictly abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and fully respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. We hope that the parties will work
together constructively for an early comprehensive, just
and proper settlement of the Syrian question.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

