Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Japanese presidency for convening this important
meeting and the Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her very
enlightening briefing.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
today poses a grave threat to international peace and
security. As has been noted, these weapons claim the
highest number of victims in the world by far, as the
headlines never fail to remind us. They are responsible
for almost 90 per cent of the victims of armed conflict
and for more than 500,000 deaths a year. The stakes and
challenges involved are enormous and lie at the heart of
all topics, as the Secretary-General emphasizes in his
report (S/20l7/1025).

The illicit trade in these weapons continues to fuel
conflict, exacerbate armed violence and incite organized
crime and terrorism. France, like many other countries,
has experienced this first hand during the terrorist
attacks that have struck its terroritory in recent years.
Beyond that, the stability and development of entire
regions -the Sahel and the Levant, for example - are
threatened. I recall that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development seeks a world free from corruption, illegal
trafficking and the illegal circulation of weapons, all of
which threaten the political stability and development
of humankind.

In the face of these extreme threats, we must
be able to mobilize in unison. Given that we can
respond effectively to these challenges only if we do
so together, in 2016 France took the initiative to issue
a political declaration on this subject, supported by
a cross-regional group of 63 countries. The effort
for the political mobilization of all countries of all
regions must continue. It is also important to turn this
commitment into reality by seeking to achieve the
robust implementation of existing instruments through
concrete measures. We can do so first through the
provisions of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects, which
remains the cornerstone of our work. France will have
the honour of chairing the third Review Conference,
to be held in New York in June 2018. France is also
mobilized in the context of the Arms Trade Treaty and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.

Various kinds of action - upstream of weapons
trafficking to prevent their spread, and downstream
to interrupt trafficking flows - must be pursued.
Among these, I would highlight the development
of adequate national legislation, the reduction of
illicit stocks in circulation thanks to collection and
destruction campaigns, improved security and physical
management of weapons and ammunition stocks, and
the strengthening of police and customs control, which
are all areas in which we could work. Significant
progress has already been achieved. Many States
have improved their legislation and the issue of small
arms is now better reflected in regional organizations.
However - and this is my third point - we cannot
stop there.

Increased international cooperation in the marking,
registering and tracing of small arms and light weapons
is also essential. The exchange of information remains
a key element if we wish to progress together. France
welcomes the introduction of various tracking systems
and databases such as iTrace and iArms. These
initiatives allow the registration of seized weapons
and, through access to the registers thereby created,
improve the sharing of information. Private actors,
especially industrial producers and civil society, also
play a central role and must therefore be involved.

France is also convinced of the central importance
of international assistance, which must be based on two
major principles. First, we must adopt a cooperative and
assistance-based approach that is tailored to the needs
of the beneficiaries. Along with capacity development,
that is one of the keys for the success of international
assistance. Secondly, it is important to seek coordination
among various assistance initiatives in order to avoid
duplication and guarantee the maximum efficiency of
all actions undertaken.

My country, for its part, resolutely contributes to
the fight against the supply of arms to armed terrorist
groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region, in particular with
Chad, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali and Mauritania,
which constitute the Group of Five for the Sahel. France
also conducts numerous training activities for the
benefit of States such as Benin, the Niger and Mali.

Despite our many accomplishments, many
challenges remain. We can and must do better and go
further in our efforts to strengthen the effectiveness
and coherence of our actions. At the international
level, adherence to and ratification of key international
instruments in this area is of crucial importance. That
is why France encourages all countries to accede to the
Arms Trade Treaty as soon as possible.

In conclusion, the third Review Conference of
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument, to be held in June 2018, will be a
unique occasion for us to move forward. It will be a key
opportunity for making concrete progress, including
by increasing mobilization of all actors in the security,
arms control and development sectors and by taking
advantage of all possible synergies among existing
instruments. I wish to assure members of the Council
of France's full commitment and mobilization in this
sense, at both the national level and as President, to
ensure the success of that important Conference, which
for France is a true priority.

