I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Lowcock, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, for their briefings. Tunisia welcomes the resumption of the work of the Constitutional Committee, which held its fourth session earlier this month in Geneva and agreed to hold a fifth round of talks on 25 January 2021 to address constitutional principles. We trust that the next round will spur the Committee and its small body to sustain the pace of their work and lay the foundations for constitutional reform. In that connection, we urge the Syrian parties to engage constructively in that process, be flexible and seek common ground in order to facilitate the creation of a solid and consensual basis for the constitution. We reiterate that the work of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva must be accompanied by confidence-building measures that are aimed at strengthening the expanded political process and ultimately lead to the organization of free and fair elections under the auspices of the United Nations, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and with a view to meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. The humanitarian situation in Syria remains a matter of concern, in particular now that winter has begun and given that the Organization is projecting that the number of Syrians who will need humanitarian aid will increase to 13 million next year. We are concerned about the continued deterioration of food and water security for Syrians, as that will exacerbate the threat posed by fragility, shortages and the resumption of conflict, as well as impede efforts to contain the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its effects. Continued instability, increased tension and violence in northern and southern Syria, along with the ongoing serious threat that terrorist organizations pose to security and stability, are hindering efforts to establish the conditions required to improve the humanitarian situation and create the secure and impartial environment needed to advance the political process. We reiterate the need to restore calm by establishing an enduring ceasefire throughout Syria, in accordance with the call made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and in implementation of resolution 2532 (2020). We also reiterate that it is vital for all parties to adhere to international law and international humanitarian law and that they must strive to ensure that civilians, civilian and medical facilities and medical and humanitarian workers be protected. Efforts to provide basic life-saving assistance throughout Syria must continue and be expanded using the various access routes available, in order to meet growing needs and address vulnerability and fragility, which have been exacerbated by the worsening economic situation and the COVID-19 pandemic. We reaffirm that all parties must ensure that assistance can be delivered safely, rapidly and without hinderance or discrimination to those in need, and that they must find a definitive solution to the protracted and worsening water shortages in north-east Syria. It would be helpful if the United Nations, its specialized agencies and its partners in Syria were to expand the scope of their operations to include the maintenance of damaged hospitals, schools and roads, the water and electricity supply and sanitation. Moreover, they should be involved in efforts to provide decent livelihoods for the most affected and vulnerable groups, with a view to enhancing the comprehensive humanitarian response to the crisis. In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only solution is a political settlement based on resolution 2254 (2015) that is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned and facilitated by the United Nations, as that will end the human suffering of Syrians, address the deep roots of the crisis, preserve the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and restore peace and stability to Syria and the region.
