The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Australia.

At the outset, I wish to thank Ambassador Oh
Joon for his report. Let me convey Australia's deep
appreciation for the Republic of Korea's energetic
leadership and his own of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) during its Council
term, and for the Republic of Korea's contribution to
global non-proliferation more broadly. Last month,
Australia attended the regional workshop in Seoul
to which Ambassador Oh referred. The workshop
was valuable for exchanging lessons learned in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and in identifying
what we need to do regionally and globally to keep up
with the evolving proliferation threat. We encourage
the Committee in the future to continue the active
advocacy and outreach that the Republic of Korea has
undertaken.

Sadly, as we mark the tenth anniversary year of
resolution 1540 (2004), the threat of non-State actors
acquiring weapons ofmass destruction is as real as ever.
Expanded international trade and financial linkages,
greater scope for intangible technology transfer and
technological advances themselves have increased
the challenge of proliferation to both non-State actors
and States. It is therefore all the more urgent that all
States fulfil their obligations to implement resolution
1540 (2004), seeking assistance when they need it and
strengthening regional and international cooperation to
starve proliferators of items, expertise and finance.

The comprehensive review of the forward strategy,
as requested by the Council in May, will be vital to
accelerating implementation, to ensuring that the
international community is meeting the evolving
threat, and to enhancing the role of the Committee.
The Committee must always strive to enhance its
accessibility, productivity and effectiveness. A living
points-of-contact network is a welcome initiative. I
should like to identify three areas where we can improve
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

First, it is vital that we continue to improve the
linkages between the 1540 Committee and other
relevant Security Council Committees, United Nations
instruments and multilateral non-proliferation and
export control regimes. The considerable expertise that
rests in those agencies and arrangements can help with
resolution 1540 (2004) implementation, for example by
providing control lists that can form the basis ofnational
export controls. Earlier this year, in our capacity as
Chair of the Australia Group, members wished us to
advise the Committee that the Australia Group is
ready to provide assistance upon request to support
the implementation of export controls for chemical and
biological transfers. As the representative of Jordan has
pointed out today, such assistance is needed.

Secondly, increasing outreach to industry and the
private sector is crucial to effective export controls.
Australia's experience in implementing an industry
code of practice for chemical precursors has reinforced
for us that when industry and the private sector
understand the threats surrounding proliferation, they
can be valuable partners rather than adversaries in
countering proliferation. The Wiesbaden process also
reinforces that fact.

Thirdly, we need to assist developing countries in
implementing their 1540 obligations and to ensure that
such assistance is practical and coordinated. Australia
has been working with countries in our own region, as
well as in the Caribbean and in Africa through Kenya,
to build capacity and to leverage the links between
security and development. Detecting and combatting
illicit trafficking in weapons of mass destruction can
also aid in the prevention of small arms, drugs and
wildlife trafficking. For that reason, the Council and its
Committees should look to provide more coordinated
outreach, advice and support across non-proliferation,
counter-terrorism and sanctions obligations. The
Caribbean Community's regional focal point has
demonstrated how this coordinated approach can be
effectively delivered in the field and how that can ease
the burden on smaller States.

In conclusion, Australia will continue to support
the work of the 1540 Committee. We must close the
gaps in implementation, and we must stay ahead
of technological advances and the techniques of
proliferators.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
