Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for having conducted this very important
and very interesting meeting. I shall try very briefly to
reply to some ofthe members ofthe Security Council.

I should like to thank Richard Holbrooke for his
very positive comments regarding the conduct of this
United Nations Mission and the elections. I want him
to know how much I appreciate his personal views, and
also the way in which he presented the Kosovars. So
much is said about them and they are never seen.

The Kosovars are not only political leaders, and I
am gratified that we have here in the Council Chamber
the co-head of the Democratization Department. I am
also pleased that the co-editor of the most important
and most widely disseminated publication in Kosovo is
here. I am glad that they are here because that nascent
democracy gains through their participation.

To the Ambassador of Bangladesh, I would like
to say that his assessment of what we called our
"outreach campaign" is extremely significant for me,
and I am also very pleased that the person who led that
campaign is here. That campaign allowed us to meet
not only with political leaders, but also with the men
and women of Kosovo who came to ask questions very
openly, very frankly and very bluntly in all ofthe cities
of Kosovo.

We have learned a great deal concerning the real
state of affairs, which is often far from our accepted
and ready-made ideas. The Kosovars are not in fact a
people of Mafiosi. There is plenty that could be said
about the Mafia in many countries, but I will not take
up that debate here, because it would take up a lot of
time and it would really make my intervention highly
undiplomatic, so I shall be very careful not to do so.
The Mafia is not always where we think it may be. It is
not always connected with matters that have economic
implications; it sometimes deals with violations of
human rights and violations of democratic rules. I
would like to thank Ambassador Holbrooke for having
recalled the zeal with which the Kosovar community,
as a whole, moved towards democracy, and I would
also like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury for having
said how deeply he believed in that society.

I would say to the representative of Russia, in
frankness and friendship, that we have never been in
agreement, except for the day here in the Security
Council and during a lunch that I recall well, when we
decided together on those municipal elections. We took
that decision together- all of us together; everybody
was in agreement. Therefore, we held them. I
understand your objections and I take careful note of
them. Sometimes I get the impression in listening to
you, Mr. Ambassador, that, as they say in my country
"you are more royalist than the king". But I take your
observations into account with a great deal of
interest and, in fact, I try to abide by them. But you
consider that the way in which we, the
international community - of which you are a major
part-have implemented resolution 1244 (1999), in
your words, is "incomplete and unsatisfactory".

(supra)

I do not have the time or the inclination to ask
you to consider all of the peacekeeping operations
throughout the world, Mr. Ambassador of the Russian
Federation. Behind the numbers of the resolutions,
there are men, human realities and things that are not
contained in that cold and indispensable paper that
makes up a resolution. Like you, I would have liked to
implement the entire resolution; it will be
implemented.

But look at what is happening in the Middle East,
Mr. Ambassador of Russia. Everything was done.
Negotiations were started and 25 years later we are
seeing the return of a terrible history. Everything is
difficult. Look at the resolutions that are 25 years old,
such as those regarding separation of Lebanon and the
State of Israel. It took 25 years to implement them.
Why ask that Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
be implemented in full immediately? I fully understand
your feelings, but I think that that is not possible or
reasonable. What is possible and reasonable has been
done, certainly with errors, which I recognize. When
you say that the representative of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia asks you with moderation - I am
grateful for that - for the return of armed forces to the
territory, how can you think that that would be possible
one and a half years after the war? I think we need to
allow time for success in this implementation of peace.
I understand your impatience.

I would also like to correct something that was
said several times. You speak, Mr. Ambassador, of non-
participation of the minorities, but aside from the
majority of Serbs, a matter which I deplore, again have
not been displaced for political reasons. I know the
people who went to Leposavic to register; I know
practically each and every one of them. Movement has
been stopped among the Serbs because otherwise they
were physically abused. People came to prevent them
from registering. Take that into account. But the other
minorities all participated. You speak of the Turks.
They did participate, with the exception of the
dominant party, which did not agree, although now it
has accepted, that Turkish should be the third official
language of Kosovo. Two is already a lot, but to
establish a third official language was not possible. We
negotiated. We went to Ankara, which accepted this,
but unfortunately the registration had been closed. We
did not reopen registration, despite our good will. Next
time, with their agreement - and this has been
accepted - we shall appoint representatives of the
party that did not participate in the vote to the
municipal councils. I did not see how we could have
done anything else. Otherwise, we would have been at
the mercy of those who did not wish to see the most
open and international type of democracy that had been
proposed, and we would have suspended the elections
because a minority of the minority did not want them. I
agree that the rights of the minority must be respected,
but let us also respect the rights of the majority. Those
elections will be rectified, I assure you, by further
votes and, no doubt, by the appointment of a number of
representatives of the minorities of which you have
spoken.

I would also like to make it clear to the
representative of the Russian Federation that the Joint
Military Commission that he spoke about is
functioning very well. We meet very regularly. Many
difficulties have been resolved, thanks to that
Commission.

As for substantive dialogue with the Serbs, it has
begun. We have met at least four times. UNMIK
representatives have gone to Belgrade and, as I said
yesterday, representatives very close to Mr. Kostunica,
including his head of Cabinet, have come to Kosovo.
We are starting. The dialogue undoubtedly will not be
easy with the Kosovar Albanians or the other
minorities of Kosovo, but with UNMIK things are
already under way. We are to meet soon in Zagreb at
the European Union summit to be held on 24
December. I agree, nothing is perfect, and certainly not
the return.

We have not - I say this on your behalf as well,
because, you too are involved, and not only me -
managed to change mindsets and wipe out the memory
of suffering in a year and a half. It will take time. We
have not changed the men and women of the Balkans,
who for centuries have faced isolation and in terms of
themselves and their environment have had very tense
and difficult relations. That will come. People familiar
with these countries know that we have to be patient,
because this will take time. I understand your
objections, Mr. Ambassador, and I think that we have
taken them into account.

I thank the representative ofthe United Kingdom.
I note his moderation concerning the Serb elections on
24 December, which should lead to a parliament of
Serbia whose importance for Mr. Kostunica and
democracy I understand. Do not believe that I am
indifferent to that. To the contrary, I shall provide all
the support I can. Arrangements must be made. I took
note of that word and I am satisfied with that very
moderate language. After the technical refusal that I
mentioned, we shall see to it that these arrangements
come about. Why not? Regarding the holding of
elections as soon as possible, I also noted the comment
of the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, for which I
thank him.

To the representative of Canada, who, like the
representative of the United Kingdom, is always
generous with his presence and his support in the field,
I say that I share his feelings. As the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom also said, the question of future
status will be negotiated later. Events cannot be rushed;
that would be a mistake. I am grateful for your
reference to the need to maintain the authority of the
International Criminal Tribunal. There can be no peace
without justice. It is very difficult to establish justice,
law and order in this region of the Balkans, for cultural
reasons and because of the recent suffering.

I wish to say to the representative of China that
the Turks and the other minority groups also
participated in the elections. Everything is not perfect,
but I would like to know when was the last election in
any of the countries represented here in which 80 per
cent ofthe population could vote. In my country, which
I love and salute, in the last election the turnout was 23
per cent. Mea culpa. The result was quite satisfactory;
nothing is perfect. But dialogue takes two. We are
working on that. But when only one side wants to
engage in dialogue, the conditions have not yet been
met.

I thank Argentina, and am aware of its role in the
region. I have met many of its representatives. I thank
its representative for his comments.

I also thank the representative of Malaysia for
referring to Ambassador Amneus, the Special Envoy
on persons deprived of liberty, who played a
remarkable role by going to Belgrade recently to visit
the prisons in which Albanian detainees were in
danger. They included Ms. Flora Brovina, whose
release all representatives welcomed also played a
considerable role. I thank them for that. I especially
thank Mr. Kostunica, which I have already done
officially, for having authorized it. As I have said,
Ambassador Amneus played an important role.

I would say to the representative of Tunisia that
we have begun reform of the judicial system, even if it
is still inadequate. It is very difficult to accomplish. I
was always militantly in favour of human rights, and I
still am. I have written a number of reports and made a
number of criticisms, but it is much easier to criticize
than to achieve anything. From time to time, when we
read reports that are critical of us, we are a bit
distressed that sometimes the critics are not there with
us to put their noses to the grindstone. I wish that they
were and would also make proposals.

We have appointed judges, but we made the
mistake - I agree with the representative of the
Russian Federation that we have made others - of not
calling from the start on international judges. We have
appointed Albanian judges. Tradition, threats, the
proximity of torture and death, the fact that the
common graves have not yet all been opened - all this
means that justice is flawed, it is true. What is the
Special Representative to do when he knows, for
example, that there are certain suspicions about a
person, so that his own conviction is to keep certain
people in detention, when the judges I appointed decide
to release them?

What does one do in a case like that? Follow the
example of those who do not believe in respect for
human rights and allow the security situation to
deteriorate? People who have had family members
killed then become incensed and seek revenge. It is
difficult to impose law and order very rapidly in a
country that has not known either for a very long time.

Together with my friend, Sergio Vieira de Mello,
at a meeting presided over by Mrs. Louise Frechette,
we drew some conclusions from the somewhat brutal
way in which we have to had to deal with this absence
oflaw and order. United Nations missions should come
with a kind of law and order "kit" - a kind of
authority, which is strengthened and backed, to
immediately impose law and order. These
peacekeeping missions need to be improved in that
respect.

In any case, I thank the representative of Tunisia
for having said that the moratorium was necessary in
order to prevent returns from Europe from taking place
in great numbers during the winter.

I was gratified to hear the representative of
Jamaica, who is very familiar with the situation, say
that things were moving ahead and that this Mission
was a model one for the United Nations. As I tend to be
rather pessimistic by nature, I did not assume this was
meant for me, but I would like to thank her on behalf
of the entire team. I thank her also for having recalled
that we had opened a centre in Pristina to host the
families of detainees and of missing persons.

The right to governance, as Namibia said, is a
lofty concept and a fine phrase. There has been a
rapprochement among groups and committees, and, as
the representative of Mali rightly said, a tremendous
number of people are at work in all of the committees,
and all groups are represented. The group that is
working on the return of the Serbs has noted that all
Serb organizations have come together to ensure that
this return takes place. Of course, this group is working
not only with the Serbs but also with UNMIK and other
representatives.

I agree with many of the comments made by the
representative of Ukraine. Let me simply say that the
word "boycott" seems to me inappropriate. There was a
real physical fear of registering. Of course, some of the
Serbs who did not want to participate were politically
motivated; they have that right. That is quite
understandable. But many of those Serbs, people with
whom we work every day and who wanted to vote,
could not because they were prevented, in a brutal
manner, from doing so. That, I think, is not really a
boycott.

As concerns a dialogue with Belgrade - and I
am gratified that its need was emphasized - it is well
under way. We will try to expand it to the extent
possible - that is, within the constraints of the
technical and practical possibilities for success and of
doing something visible. We do not want to go against
the majority of the Albanian population, which is
closely following our work and which for the moment,
regrettably, is not able to engage in a direct dialogue
with Belgrade. I am certain, however, that thanks to
elected representatives, a more direct dialogue will be
possible very soon.

I should like to thank the representative of the
European Union - and of all of the countries he
mentioned that are not yet members ofthe Union - for
his statement regarding the return of the Serbs, for the
considerable material assistance which Europe is
providing us, and for the moral support as well. Allow
me also to say to my friend Jean-David Levitte how
much I appreciated the personal comments he added at
the end of his formal statement.

Let me very quickly address the three subsequent
statements. To Austria, which holds the chairmanship-
in-office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), let me express our
deep appreciation, because without the OSCE there
would have been no elections. Indeed, the OSCE and
UNMIK worked together day and night in perfect
harmony despite the difficulties and conflicts - let me
reiterate, in harmony despite conflicts - and we owe
the success ofthe elections to them.

I would like to say a few words also to the
representative of the Yugoslav Federation. First of all, I
should like to thank him for having taken that moderate
tone. I thank him for his statement and for the way in
which he delivered it. I think that certain issues - and
here I speak not just for myself, of course, but for
Kosovars from all communities - we should be able to
settle among ourselves very quickly. Others will take
more time. But the important thing is that he said he
accepts resolution 1244 (1999). That is nothing new, of
course. President Kostunica has said so, and the
Albanian and Serb leaders of Kosovo together accepted
and signed that document. So now that resolution 1244
(1999) is accepted all around, I think that the way is
becoming clearer. I know it will be a long and hard
road, but I know also that we will able to reach an
understanding on what is most important.

Of course, I am in favour of the return. Everyone
is. All of the Kosovar Albanians, all the minorities in
Kosovo are backing the return of all groups. Yet here
once again - and I am saying this for the benefit not
only of the representative of Russia but of all - there
is many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip. Just because
we want to see a return does not mean that we can
ensure that it takes place in conditions of security. That
is why the murder of four members of the Ashkali
minority was a terrible blow for us. We absolutely must
ensure sufficient security to prevent this from turning
into a fiasco and endangering lives. We are working to
that end.

I do not want to burden the Council with
statistics, but security is vastly improved now over
what it was at the start. There was a week during the
electoral campaign when there was only one murder.
That had never happened in the past. Remember, there
used to be 50 a week at the outset. So the situation has
improved, but this is not enough. In any case, we need
to be able to work to ensure a safer environment for the
return.

I am not entirely clear as to what he means, but I
think it would be difficult to achieve the agreement that
the representative of the Yugoslav Federation wishes to
see between KFOR and UNMIK, in terms of
diplomatic mission status. As I said, I am not entirely
clear on what he means. As concerns detainees and
missing persons, since yesterday's visit everything is
possible, including - if the amnesty law is passed
quickly - the very significant release of a large
number of detainees. In any case, we remain in
continuous and close contact.

I have already expressed my opinion regarding
the return of the armed forces. I know that a limited
number are provided for in resolution 1244 (1999). I do
not think that this is possible right now. Nor it is
possible yet to determine final status. I share the
feelings of the representative of Yugoslavia, but this
issue needs to be addressed during negotiations. I like
very much the way in which he cited "substantial
autonomy" as the objective of resolution 1244 (1999),
and I think that we will be able to make progress in that
very sensitive area.

I should like to thank the representative of
Albania not only for his cooperation, which is so often
offered by Tirana, but also for having mentioned the
International Tribunal and the need to wait for a final
status to be proposed at the end, not at the beginning,
ofthe peace process.

I apologize for having spoken at some length. I
wished to try to respond to everyone, and I understand
very well that some differences of opinion remain
regarding an operation which, I think, is probably one
ofthe hardest in the world.

