Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2258 (2015) because we believe
that it is important to maintain the cross-border
provision of humanitarian assistance. It allows us to
access people in hard-to-reach areas who cannot be
reached by other means. However, we regret that in the
course of drafting the resolution, certain suggestions
that we considered timely have not been taken into
account.

The Russian delegation recommended the extension
of the United Nations mechanism for humanitarian
monitoring established under resolution 2165 (2014)
for all cargo entering Syria that is declared to be
humanitarian. We understand the burden that would be
borne by the United Nations in that respect, but we are
truly concerned that the supply of weapons to fighters
is not stopping and that foreign terrorist fighters from
across the world continue to join the ranks of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front and
other armed terrorist groups.

Unfortunately, that supply crosses Syria's borders,
quite often through the very crossing points where
the United Nations mechanism is at work. In spite of
the United Nations presence and the resolve of the
international community as a whole to end the Syrian
crisis and cut off terrorists, border crossings are used
for purposes wholly other than humanitarian and often
under humanitarian pretexts. This needs to stop.

We call special attention to the preambular part of
the resolution, in which the Security Council expresses
its interest in receiving more detailed information from
the Secretary-General on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance by the United Nations, in accordance with
resolution 2165 (2014). The Security Council, which
has established the mechanism and is responsible for
it, must be informed of the nature of the humanitarian
assistance entering the country, through which civilian
crossing points it is entering, and how much of it is
reaching the people. Generic information on the number
of convoys and approximate estimates of the number
of those in need are not enough. We hope that future
reports of the Secretary-General will provide more
comprehensive and detailed information in that regard.

