Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for organizing this debate,
which demonstrates once again the Council's interest
in Haiti. Allow me to also thank Mr. Mulet for his very
comprehensive briefing, which gave an overview of the
situation as seen from his privileged position in Haiti.

Mr. Mulet's briefing was so comprehensive that it
is difficult for me to add anything. Indeed, the
challenges facing the Government have been clearly
described by Mr. Mulet. I will mention two: the issue
of the legislative and presidential elections scheduled,
as noted, for 28 November this year, and the
reconstruction work in the country following the
earthquake of 12 January.

Regarding the first challenge, the elections, on
behalf of the Government I can assure the Council that
everything will be done to organize credible and
transparent elections whose results are accepted by the
population.

It is obvious that the second challenge - the
recovery work - will necessarily require the next
Government to enjoy the necessary legitimacy to lead
the reconstruction process to a successful conclusion.

Regarding the reconstruction work, as has also
been stressed, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
is now functional. At its most recent meeting, several
projects were approved, as Mr. Mulet noted, although
we lack the funds to launch them. It is therefore clear
once again that the international community's
contribution, in particular the fulfilment of the pledges
and the effective availability of the funds promised to
my Government at the 31 March conference, is
extremely urgent in order to ensure that the
population's expectations are not disappointed.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/446), as
noted by Mr. Mulet, highlights the fragility of the
5
security situation. As there are 1.3 million people
displaced or otherwise affected by the 12 January
earthquake, the reconstruction work has become
increasingly urgent and necessary, and its impact on
the security situation cannot be underestimated. That is
why it is so important for the Government and the
international community to ensure that the amounts
pledged are made available to the Commission in order
to avoid any delay in the reconstruction work and to
ensure that there is no outbreak of violence due to a
failure to meet the population's legitimate expectations
of better conditions.

As Mr. Mulet has said, much work remains to be
done. This will, of course, be a long-term effort. I
would like to assure you, Sir, and the members of the
Council that the Government is committed to ensuring
that this work takes place in good conditions. We know
that, there will be a new administration at the
beginning of next year, but the current administration
will nonetheless want to lay the foundations for the
new administration to be able to continue the work
already begun.

Regarding financing, as noted, only 18 per cent
of the pledges have been delivered thus far, and I know
that the co-chairs of the Interim Commission - former
President Bill Clinton and Prime Minister Bellerive -
have called on our international partners to increase
that percentage so that the projects that have been
approved can be implemented. In this regard, all I can
do is thank the countries that have already delivered
and, on behalf of my Government, call on those who
have not yet or have only partially done so to do so,
and assure them that the Government has done
everything possible to ensure a transparent and
peaceful management of these funds.

To conclude, please allow me once again, on
behalf of my Government, to express our appreciation
for the assistance we have received thus far for the
electoral process and for the reconstruction of the
country. I thank the international community as a
whole. I do not want to name names, but I cannot help
but mention the contributions provided by our
neighbouring regional and subregional communities.

That is what I have to add to the very
comprehensive briefing of Mr. Mulet, whom I would
again like to thank, along with the members of the
Council and you, Sir.
6
