Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Darfur
(S/2011/244) and the implementation of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in the framework of political
developments indicates that progress has been made in
the Doha negotiations, reflecting the onset of the
political process. That is a source of hope.

I should like here to stress the importance of
inter-Darfurian dialogue to give voice to the silent
majority of Darfur in all social categories and strata,
including tribal leaders, civil administrators and civil
society organizations with experience on the ground in
Darfur, on whom any agreement on Darfur will depend.

We have transmitted to the Security Council the
decree issued by the President of the Republic on
29 March calling for a referendum on the administrative
status of Darfur. As Council members are aware,
paragraph 55 of the Darfur Peace Agreement stipulates
that the "permanent status of Darfur shall be determined
through a referendum held simultaneously in the three
states of Darfur". Thus, the convening of the referendum
on the administrative status of Darfur is in
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement.

Furthermore, it is well known that my country is
drafting a new constitution to take effect following the
end of the transitional period for the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 9 July. The
preparation of the prospective permanent constitution
will require the administrative status of Darfur to be
settled first. We have informed the Security Council in
writing of the details of the referendum, which is
expected to be held under the supervision of the
National Electoral Commission and international,
regional and local observers.

We note that the Government of the Sudan is
making strenuous efforts to provide an appropriate
atmosphere for the conduct of the referendum and to
design a package of arrangements, including the lifting
of the state of emergency and guarantees of the
freedoms of assembly and expression. The Government
will pursue its consultations with political forces, the
signatories to the Darfur Peace Agreement and the

Declaration of Principles, UNAMID, the African Union
Panel of the Wise led by President Thabo Mbeki, and
other international actors with a View to conducting the
referendum in a manner that will achieve the desired
goal of enabling the people of Darfur to participate in
the voting process to determine in an impartial manner
the administrative of Darfur.

In outlining the security situation in Darfur, the
report before us indicates that tribal disputes, banditry
and plunder by armed groups are the principal sources
of insecurity in some parts of the region. As members of
the Council well know, certain leaders of armed
movements have pursued their consistent violations of
the ceasefire and attacks on police stations. Our
Government has therefore assumed its responsibility for
extending security and the rule of law and guaranteeing
the delivery of humanitarian assistance through regular
security operations. Some claim that our forces have
undertaken aerial bombardment, but such claims cannot
belie the truth that stability and security now prevail in
all provinces of Darfur, with the exception of a few
pockets where certain armed groups have taken refuge.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, a high-level committee is in place to follow up
the implementation of the humanitarian protocol. The
Government of the Sudan, UNAMID and
representatives of humanitarian organizations working
in Darfur all participate in that committee. The
committee continues to regularly oversee humanitarian
operations in the region. Paragraph 12 of the report of
the Secretary-General refers to the decrease in attacks on
humanitarian personnel, which was the result of police
security patrols carried out with the participation of
UNAMID.

Paragraph 51 of the Secretary-General's report sets
out the current situation in UNAMID, which is better as
compared to many other peace missions. Suffice it to
say, that 92 per cent of the Mission's military force is
now deployed on the ground. That is in addition to the
police and civilian elements already deployed. This
reflects my Government's seriousness and eagerness to
cooperate with the United Nations.

In that connection, I would like to say that, given
that this is such a major mission, the granting of entry
visas may be delayed because of routine procedures.
That should not distract attention from the actual
cooperation that exists, which led to the deployment of
the Mission's components. With regard to the draft

before the Council concerning visas, I would like to say
that the backlog of pending visas is due to duplications
in requests made through more than one channel, rather
than just through the UNAMID command. In that
regard, I wish to recall that, as soon as this issue was
raised under the tripartite meeting mechanism, my
Government agreed to grant the requested entry visas -
a total of 600 such visas. However, requests are being
submitted daily and there are now more than 1,000 such
requests. This is normal. I wish to reassure the Council
that we will grant visas for all requests.

I would also like to say that, while we recognize
the difficulties in outreach to police personnel in Darfur
who do not speak Arabic, we still request UNAMID and
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
officials to employ Arabic-speaking personnel, which
will facilitate their mission. We would like to express
our appreciation for the considerable efforts made by the
Mission and DPKO in that regard.

In conclusion, the Government of the Sudan is
moving ahead with its intensive efforts to achieve
sustainable and comprehensive peace in Darfur as soon
as possible. We are doing so by pressing ahead with the
political process internally through the Darfur dialogue.
That, in turn, complements efforts currently under way
by the joint mediation in Doha.

I appeal to the Council not to leave the peace
process in Darfur contingent upon the whims of the
rebel leadership, which continues to publicly reject
repeated calls from the Security Council and the
international community. We hope that the Council will
call on rebel leaders to join the negotiating process. The
Council is no doubt well aware of its responsibilities and
the role entrusted to it by the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
achievement of just and comprehensive peace is the only
option for the people of Darfur. How long will the
Council remain quiet in the face of the rigid and
controversial positions adopted by the leaders of
movements who in principle reject peace?

