Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Somalia once again. It is always a great honour to speak
before this organ.

In my address to the Council last September (see S/PV.8352), I spoke of signs of movement forward
in Somalia. Allow me today to highlight three areas
of action that, if properly supported and sustainably
implemented, can remain a source of great optimism
and a force for change in the direction of our concerted
effort to help deliver for the people of Somalia a
reconciled, peaceful and prosperous country.

It has been almost two years since Somalia
successfully effected its second peaceful transfer
of power at the highest echelons of Government in
a political process that saw the establishment of a
bicameral Parliament, relatively more participatory
national suffrage, the election of President Farmajo
and the appointment of Prime Minister Hassan Khayre.
This success was possible owing in part to the concerted
role of international partners, including the strong
partnership that exists between the African Union and
the United Nations.

Taking advantage of the winds of change blowing
in the region, Somalia was able to capitalize on the
positive aspects of these changes and accumulated
significant gains both regionally and beyond.
Regionally we are seeing Somalia increasingly seeking
to complement its internal mechanisms with regionally
centred security and economic cooperation and good-
neighbourliness projection and approaches, especially
with Ethiopia and Eritrea. The importance of the
regional tripartite meetings that have been taking place
at the different levels between these three countries
cannot be underestimated in terms of their potential to
foster and enhance mutual trust and bring about a more
cohesive, focused and people-centred regional harmony
and integration.

Beyond the region, the Gulf and the Horn of Africa
share together a long history of economic, religious
and political engagement. In recent years, the Gulf
States have increasingly become major economic and
political actors in the Horn region once again. Business
relations between the Gulf and the Horn of Africa are
substantial. Approximately $13-billion worth of Gulf
investment can be traced in the Horn from 2000 to
2017. Large-scale migration from the Horn to the Gulf
has a multifaceted mutual impact and influence on both
the Horn and the Gulf in terms of political, business
and religious dynamics, economic growth, peace
and stability.

Being part of these multifaceted dynamics and
seeking to influence them in a positive direction, rather
than shying away from them, is vital for the brighter
future of Somalia. It is therefore encouraging to see that,
in addition to positive diplomatic overtures from the
Gulf States, in October Prime Minister Hassan Khayre
paid a successful visit to Riyadh after approximately 18
months of reportedly challenging relations. The Gulf
crisis spillover effect that had threatened to destabilize
Somalia's cohesion is slowly registering improvements.
It is important that this trend continue and that the
strains in the relations that still exist between Somalia
and other Gulf States be diffused.

While 2018 has demonstrated that there is room for
optimism for Somalia in some key areas, more work
will be required by all Somalia's stakeholders. It is at
home, in Somalia, that inclusive politics must be seen
and perceived to be working in terms of power-sharing,
resource-sharing and land issues. It is important that
substantial efforts continue to be invested in ensuring
that the issues at the base of volatile relations between
the Federal Government of Somalia and the leaders
of some of the federal member states, as well as those
between the House of the People and the executive,
are addressed in a predictable, satisfactory and
sustainable manner.

The relationship between the Federal Government
and some of the federal member states remains a key
concern for the African Union. As part of the African
Union's own efforts, carried out side by side with those
of the United Nations to help in this regard, I agreed
to undertake a series of diplomatic engagements with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia, Mr. Nicholas Haysom. Our aim was to
explore avenues for supporting a consensual solution
to outstanding disputes between some federal member
states and the Federal Government. That was the same
message that the African Union Peace and Security
Council offered to the Federal Government and federal
member states during their successful field trip to
Somalia in November.

Both the Federal Government and the federal
member states deserve praise for the landmark
agreements reached at the National Security Council
meeting in Baidoa on the electoral model that will
determine how power can be accessed in a peaceful,
increasingly participatory and democratic manner and
how federalism will be deepened in terms of power-
sharing and resource-sharing between the Federal
Government and the Governments of the federal
member states. In reality, the issue is not about what
needs to be done in that regard. The Baidoa meeting has
already decided on that. The issue is about how it can
be done, in what time frame and with what resources.
The issue of resources to implement those agreements
is very important. Success in that process will be vital
to Somalia's cohesion and lasting reconciliation.
Throughout 2018, efforts were made to develop
legislative and institutional frameworks that will
be essential to the visibility, assurance and the
predictability of Government action in harnessing
people's legitimate expectations and to the holding
of landmark elections next year. The same should be
said with regard to the regional elections that will take
place next year. Proper legislation and predictions
will prevent any future squabbles and conflict. A
key milestone towards that effort was the successful
conclusion of the national constitutional convention in
2018. It is hoped that this will strengthen rule of law
and advance reconciliation across Somalia. Building on
that legislative and institutional framework, the end of
2018 saw the Federal Government announce progress
on the constitutional review process. To date, there has
been a review of five out of a total of fifteen chapters of
the Constitution. With that progress, the African Union
looks forwards to its early completion in 2019.

The urgent need to expedite the adoption of crucial
legislation and build duly agreed and Parliament-
sanctioned institutional frameworks to shape the new
State of Somalia cannot be overemphasized. If carried
out in a mutually agreed manner, it will go a long
way towards addressing the issues at the source of
recurrent political tensions and removing perceived or
real grey areas in the country. Although agreements so
far achieved in that context are in their early stages,
more discussions and negotiations between the Federal
Government and federal member states will be required
and, consequently, so will more and generous support
from Security Council members.

Throughout 2018, Somalia's economy continued to
move in the direction of recovery. Some of its notable
successes have been the completion of the second
12-month International Monetary Fund staff-monitored
programme - now on its third review, which is
expected to be completed this year - and Somalia's
eligibility to receive the urgently needed financial
support. In that regard, the African Union welcomes
the direct budgetary support of the European Union in
the form of €100 million and grants worth €80 million
from the World Bank.

The third area of great interest remains security.
The Federal Government is increasingly showing
readiness to confront risks and tackle issues that will
allow its security forces to take over the country's
security responsibility from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). The push for reform has
been at its core, particularly in the areas of biometric
registration, payroll reform and the ongoing operational
readiness assessment of Somalia's regional forces,
which is a requirement for force integration, as part of
the national security architecture.

Throughout 2018, a noticeable commitment was
the restructuring of the Somali National Army, with the
appointment of several senior military commanders.
Security reform efforts have taken place in Mogadishu
with the restructuring of the national intelligence
and security agency, the integration of its militarized
units into the Somali police, and the deployment of the
14 October brigade in areas such as Afgooye, Balad,
Busra and Merca. In an effort to offer a durable solution
to Somali security sector reform, the National Security
Council in Baidoa endorsed the transition plan. As part
of the plan, both the Federal Government and federal
member states agreed to focus on three pilot areas: the
hand-over of Mogadishu stadium, securing the main
supply route between Mogadishu and Baidoa and the
reoccupation of Lego.

The continued threat posed by Al-Shabaab, as
witnessed by the recent mortar attack against the
AMISOM. compound in Mogadishu two days ago, is a
reminder of the work still to be done. Both Al-Shabaab
and the Islamic State continue to maintain an active
presence across Somalia, with increased lethality
capacity. As I often observed during my briefings to the
Council in 2018, the threat ofAl-Shabaab will ultimately
require continued efforts to deny the group the capacity
to recruit from among the population, the completion of
the national security architecture, increased integration
of regional forces and further progress on the
comprehensive approach to security. The adoption by
the Government of Somalia of the national strategy for
preventing and countering violent extremism is a very
welcome development in that direction. For its part,
AMISOM. will continue to support those frameworks
and the important security reforms being implemented
by the Federal Government.

At the inception of AMISOM's current mandate,
the understanding was that the Mission's efforts would
focus on transiting from Somalia. In that regard, permit
me to reiterate that AMISOM. is actively working
towards its exit from Somalia. An essential part of
that has been the African Union's endorsement of the
transition plan, which is centred on the implementation
of AMISOM's exit strategy, particularly in helping to
empower the Somali security forces to take over security
responsibilities. Based on that reality and since my last
briefing to the Council, AMISOM. has undertaken a
series of activities as part of realizing its exit strategy.
Allow me to highlight some of those activities.

First, in accordance with resolution 2431 (2018),
AMISOM's military undertook a series of robust
operations across its areas of responsibility, aimed at
flushing out Al-Shabaab and recovering territory from
the terrorist group. Recently, these have included joint
AMISOM-Somali National Army operations to liberate
the Somali coastal areas that connect Mogadishu to
Merca. Similarly, AMISOM. forces have conducted
joint operations in Jubaland, Shabelle and HirShabelle,
specifically in El-Wak and Beledweyne up to Jalalaqsi.
Following the transfer of security responsibility for the
Mogadishu stadium, AMISOM's military continues to
work in support of the transition plan, with its immediate
focus on transferring the security of Somalia's military
academy by next month, February. As part of that
exercise, AMISOM's Burundi contingent has begun
relocating from the academy to its base in Jowhar.

With the operational planning for Mogadishu-
Lego-Baidoa completed, AMISOM's military stands
ready to jointly execute the operation in the coming
weeks with its Somali National Army counterparts. On
the other hand, AMISOM. police have also continued
to carry out a range of activities in furtherance of the
Mission's exit strategy - and, I would like to add,
with very limited personnel strength. Even with those
limitations, AMISOM's police continue to maintain
its presence across Somalia, notably in Mogadishu,
Baidoa, Beledweyne, Kismaayo and Jowhar, supporting
the empowerment of the Somali police force through
training and mentoring. Currently, and in support of
the transition plan, the AMISOM. police component
is continuing its support to the operational readiness
assessment of the regional forces, which has now
reached Puntland. This is a process that will eventually
support the integration of the regional forces, as
stipulated in the national security architecture.

Further, the AMISOM. civilian component
continues to play a vital role in supporting the Mission's
uniformed personnel across the AMISOM. area of
responsibility, as mandated by the Security Council. In
that context, I am happy to report that on 30 December,
AMISOM. deployed its first-ever civilian staff to
work alongside its uniformed personnel in Jowhar and
Kismaayo. Over the coming weeks and as AMISOM'S
civilian staff begins to deploy across other federal
member states, it will become important for the Council
to stand ready to consider strengthening the role of the
AMISOM. civilian component. In that connection, I
want to thank Mr. Haysom and Ms. Filipetto, Head of
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, for their
unreserved support in the deployment of AMISOM's
civilian component through the provision of living
space, office space and other logistical support.

Last November, in close collaboration with the
Federal Government and federal member states,
AMISOM. conducted an exercise to develop its revised
concept of operations. During the mandated exercise,
key issues were agreed on, including the reconfiguration
of the AMISOM. military, the resectorization of our
forces and the increased presence of the AMISOM
civilian component across its sectors, in support of its
armed forces.

The AMISOM. revised concept of operations for the
transition period is consistent with the transition plan
and with resolution 2431 (2018), and was approved in
November by the Chiefs of Defence Forces of AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries. As the African
Union looks forward to the Peace and Security Council
formally endorsing the concept of operations in the
coming weeks, AMISOM. and the Federal Government
will begin detailed operational planning this month.

Last December, under the framework of the
Somalia-African Union Task Force, the civilian,
military and police components of both AMISOM. and
the Federal Government of Somalia met as part of a
brainstorming exercise on the elaboration of the detailed
implementation plan for the concept of operations. The
African Union's expectation is that future meetings on
operationalizing the concept of operations will include
the participation of key international partners.

