Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank the delegation of France for its efforts
during a very complex month for the work of the
Council.

Mexico welcomes the first report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
(S/2009/59) and wishes Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg every success in his efforts as head of that
Office. We are also grateful for the participation of our
colleague Ambassador Majoor of the Netherlands,
Chairman of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ambassador Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone, who informed us about his
Government's ongoing efforts. We would like to
emphasize the positive situation in Sierra Leone after
years of conflict, which is reflected in the absence of
armed groups and the progress achieved in political
stabilization and peacebuilding.

In Sierra Leone, the United Nations has
encouraged efforts towards political, legal, economic
and administrative reform so as to further promote
development. Now, it is essential to start training local
human resources and avoid long-term dependence. To
that end, the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies must not try to work alone. On the contrary,
they must encourage and support the initiatives of
countries in the region that have a better understanding
of local realities and are in a better position to promote
cooperation and development. Sierra Leone is now in a
post-conflict reconstruction phase, which compels the
Organization to provide its support and planning
capacities.

We recognize the progress that the United
Nations presence has generated in fundamental areas,
including the promotion of dialogue among the primary
national actors to avoid new tribal conflicts; support
for the strengthening of the rule of law and the

consolidation of institutions; political support and
technical advice to strengthen the national Human
Rights Commission; and the training of security forces,
among others. Promoting the consolidation of those
efforts in the medium term is a priority task for
UNIPSIL.

In the area of human rights, we recognize as a
major step forward the enactment of the Child Rights
Act and the plan for a law on gender justice. We also
welcome the work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and support the efforts to achieve transitional
justice to promote the rule of law and strengthen peace
and national reconciliation.

Despite all this progress, Mexico is concerned by
the information contained in the report of the
Secretary-General, which points out that, in the context
of international organized crime, Sierra Leone is
increasingly being used as a route for the trafficking of
drugs and arms, acts of piracy have occurred along the
coastline of that country, potentially destabilizing tribal
disputes continue, and the economic situation is
deteriorating, with particular impact on the cost of
food.

Mexico therefore believes it critical for UNIPSIL
to assist the Government of Sierra Leone in promoting
dialogue and coordination in a context of shared
responsibility with countries in the region, in particular
Liberia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire, in
order to jointly combat the trafficking of drugs and
arms that are threatening the security and stability of
the country and the region and that cannot be
successfully tackled without the support of the
international community.

Mexico also recognizes the work undertaken by
the Peacebuilding Commission in Sierra Leone through
the country-specific meeting, to which a number of
representatives have referred. The mobilization of
resources facilitated by the Commission to support the
implementation of development projects in the country
has been essential to further consolidate the peace
process. Similarly, the Commission's work to promote
understanding and dialogue between the Government
and other actors involved in the political process is
encouraging.

We support the efforts of the Commission to
broaden the donor base, which will give the country
the necessary financial resources for the population to
benefit from the dividends of peace and reconciliation
as soon as possible. That is particularly relevant in the
current global financial climate, in which the flow of
international development assistance may be reduced.

It is essential to ensure a solid United Nations
presence in Sierra Leone with sufficient capacity to
continue supporting the work of the Government, the
Commission and all national, regional and international
partners through a joint vision that supports the socio-
economic development of the country. The Agenda for
Change, to which Sierra Leone's Ambassador to the
United Nations referred today, deserves our solid
support. We continue to support all UNIPSIL activities
to date that have allowed it to maximize its resources
and meet its objectives.

