Mr. Fares (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November. I am
also pleased to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, for her briefing.

We are here today to focus on a single objective,
which is combating impunity. The Rome Statute
established a regime between our national and
international legal systems designed to prosecute
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes - war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In that spirit, the
principle of complementarity was established between
the International Criminal Court and national legal
systems, meaning that at this stage, although Libya is
not party to the Rome Statute, the Court complements
our national criminal judiciary in order to ensure
justice. At the same time, we also underscore the
principle of Libya's State sovereignty with regard to
the application of its local laws for crimes committed
within its territory.

We are fully aware that there is some delay in the
pursuit and prosecution of suspects. However, we want
to emphasize that the delay is not the result of any
unwillingness on the part of the national judiciary to
prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the crimes in
question, but is rather due to the security conditions that
Libya is dealing with and that all countries that have
experienced conflict are familiar with. Our national
judiciary has actually prosecuted many of the accused,
and the various verdicts have led to the conviction and
punishment of some and the acquittal of others.

In that regard, we want to stress that in order for
our national judiciary to meet its obligations with
regard to achieving justice and promoting the rule of
law, we need the international community's serious
support in helping the Libyan authorities to end our
country's current security crisis, in conjunction with
the efforts being made to unify our institutions and
ultimately enable the political process to succeed. That
can be done, first, by providing the national institutions
responsible for applying the law with the support they
need so that they can play their full role in strengthening
security and stability; secondly, by eradicating the
various factors and conditions that result in crimes
and violations; thirdly, by confiscating the tools that
are used to commit those crimes, especially weapons;
and fourthly, by eliminating terrorist and all other
outlaw groups.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that the Libyan
authorities are committed and eager to punish the
perpetrators of crimes and combat impunity, while
applying legal rules that reflect the rule of law. The
Libyan judiciary is independent, impartial and capable
of carrying out criminal and social justice in order to
ensure the rights of victims and end impunity.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.
