Mr. Niamah (Medecins Sans Frontieres): I wish to
thank Ambassador Power for inviting my organization,
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), to address the nations
who can help my people, my country and my region.

I am honoured to represent MSF. We welcome
President Obama's Ebola response plan and hope for
its immediate implementation. We also call upon all
States Members of the United Nations to similarly
mobilize their capacities. With every day that passes,
the epidemic spreads and destroys more lives.

I first heard about cases of Ebola in March; soon
after, the disease came here to Monrovia. From then on,
people began dying. My niece, Francila Kollie, and my
cousin, Jounpu Lowea, both nurses, became infected at
work. While they were being treated, they died in late
July. So many of my friends, university classmates and
colleagues have died in recent months.

Since I have a medical background, I felt that
I had the responsibility to help my country. I am a
team leader in Medecins Sans Frontieres's Monrovia
treatment centre. I have worked in the triage section,
assessing patients prior to admission, in the suspected-
cases tent and with patients confirmed to be carrying
the Ebola virus. Because there is no cure, we can only
provide supportive care to our patients in the form of
food, hydration and the basic treatment of symptoms.
If treated early enough, chances of survival are much
better.

I cannot stand aside to watch my people die. But
I, along with my colleagues, cannot fight Ebola alone.
We need the international community; the international
community must help us. I wish to illustrate the battle
we face.

We have seen so many patients die. They die alone,
terrified and without their loved ones at their side. As
medics, we must have a different way of coping. When
I go inside the Ebola treatment centre, I keep my focus
on my patients' needs. We try to attend and help first
those who are much weaker, those who need the most
help - food and water - and those who want to talk
to our counsellors because they are so traumatized and
frightened.

We are trying to treat as many as we can, but there
are not nearly enough treatment centres and beds. We
have to turn people away, and many are dying at our front
gate. Right now, as I speak, there are patients sitting at
our front gates, literally begging for life. They rightly
feel isolated, neglected, alone and denied. They are left
alone; they die a horrible death, an undignified death.
We are failing the sick because there is not enough help
on the ground. We are failing those who will inevitably
become infected, because we cannot care properly for
the sick in a safe, protected environment to prevent the
spread of the virus.

One day this week, I sat outside the treatment
centre eating my lunch. I met a boy who approached the
gate. His father had died from Ebola a week ago. I saw
him with blood at his mouth. We had no space, so we
could not to take him in. We could see that his mouth
was bloody. When he turned away to walk into town, I
thought to myself that that boy is going to take a taxi,
and he is going to go home to see his family, be at home
and infect his family. He will also infect other people.
On my night shift, I saw a patient who was driven in an
ambulance about 12 hours because there was no other
treatment centre.

We urgently need to get the disease under control,
and we need the Council's help. We need what is
referred to as "contact tracing" in order to follow up
every person who has been in contact with someone
who is sick with Ebola or has died from Ebola. We need
to raise awareness about the disease, because there has
been so much denial even now and despite international
attention.

We need more care centres so that everyone can
find a bed and not have to stay at home and infect other
people. We need to get our medical staff trained in
proper procedures, so that they can keep the centres
running. We also need to get health services running
and to ensure that workers and ambulances are safe
for the health staff. We have seen too many health
workers and ambulance drivers come into our centres
as patients, facing the same fate. So we plead for
helicopters, centres, beds and expert personnel, but we
also need the basics. There are still homes in Monrovia
that do not have soap, water and buckets. Even those
simple things could help curb the spread of the virus.
Ebola has affected all aspects of our lives. Schools and
universities have shut down, along with public services.
I feel that the fate of my country, the future of my
country, is hanging in the balance.

My wife works at the John Fitzgerald Kennedy
Hospital in Monrovia. We are educating our children;
they serve as an example for their peers. We ask the
United Nations to be an example for peers, as nations
with the resources, assets and skills required to stop
this catastrophe. We do not have the capacity to respond
to the crisis on our own. If the international community
does not stand up, we will be wiped out. We need
Member States' help. We need it now.

