Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this important open debate on
peacekeeping. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his valuable contribution to our discussion
on the topic.

The dynamics of the political and security changes
in the world require a high degree of adaptability of
the United Nations timely and effective response
to the interconnected challenges brought about by
those changes. Originally conceived to perform the
traditional task of ceasefire monitoring, peacekeeping
has conceptually and operationally evolved into
a more complex and multidimensional institution
with a number of components. Notwithstanding that
transformation, peacekeeping operations remain an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to maintain
international peace and security.

Coherence among peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development is important. At present, a number
of United Nations peacekeeping operations have
mandates to implement a range of peacebuilding
activities. By preventing the recurrence of violence, by
supporting and enabling critical tasks in certain areas,
and by assisting host countries in developing their post-
conflict reconstruction strategies, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations establish the necessary
foundations for successive peacebuilding processes.

Azerbaijan believes that the ongoing deliberations
on ways and means of increasing the effectiveness of
peacekeeping should further reinforce the centrality
of the underlying elements that form the basis of
peacekeeping. I would like to focus on some of those.

First, the task of assigning peacekeeping and
peacebuilding functions rests with the Security Council,
which defines the nature of peacekeeping operations
and guides their activities. Therefore, the mandates
must be clear, realistic and achievable and must be
tailored and constantly adapted to the realities on the
ground. Also, operations must be fully equipped with
all operational and logistical capabilities necessary to
carry out their mandates.

Secondly, the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force, except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate, must be
observed at all times.

Thirdly, the Governments of countries emerging
from conflict bear primary responsibility for
identifying their needs and for developing post-conflict
development agendas. Therefore, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations should support the efforts
of host countries and coordinate their activities with
national authorities in all spheres.

Fourthly, strengthened cooperation and regular
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, including through interaction among them,
the Security Council and the Secretariat, should be
ensured.

Most important, the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation must explicitly uphold the principles of
political independence, sovereign equality, territorial
integrity and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State. Peacekeeping must not be used to sustain the
status quo created as a result of the violation of those
fundamental norms and principles of international
law, or to consolidate illegal situations existing at the
time that hostilities were suspended and to encourage
fait accompli-based solutions. The fact that illegal
situations continue because of political circumstances
does not mean that they are therefore rendered legal.
Law is more important than force. That understanding
and approach must be ensured throughout the whole
cycle of peacekeeping operation.

In some situations of armed conflict the restoration
of the demographic composition of the population,
affected as a result of large-scale ethnic expulsion
and the creation of ethnically cleansed areas, is a
prerequisite for the legitimacy and sustainability of
peace. It is therefore important that, in such situations,
peacekeepers create the necessary conditions for and
serve as the guarantors of the full, safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their places of origin.

After more than a decade, the Security Council
will adopt, as an outcome of today's debate, a landmark
resolution on peacekeeping, of which Azerbaijan is
one of the sponsors. I would like to thank Pakistan for
its timely initiative and able leadership in that regard
and to express our appreciation for its outstanding
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping.

