Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important event on
an important anniversary and for being with us today. I
also thank His Excellency the German Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs for being here. It was very good to
hear from our briefers the Under-Secretary-General,
Ms. Bellal and the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Mr. Mauer. The
ICRC is one of the oldest international organizations.
They gave us a very good context for why we are meeting
today and why international humanitarian law remains
so important. It provides a robust legal framework for
the protection of all civilians and combatants, and it is
a vital tool in ensuring that humanity remains, even in
the worst of conflict situations.

For the United Kingdom, support for international
criminal justice and international humanitarian law is
a fundamental element of our foreign policy. We hold
an annual meeting with the British Red Cross to review
compliance. The United Kingdom has a strong history
of upholding and promoting international humanitarian
law. We consistently call on State and non-State actors
engaged in armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and to act in accordance with their
obligations under it. The United Kingdom believes
that justice and accountability for the most serious
international crimes is not only right in itself, but it is
also crucial to building lasting peace and security.

In March, we published our first voluntary report
on the implementation of international humanitarian
law at the domestic level. We invite other States to join
us and publish the steps that they are taking to improve
compliance. My Government also believes that the
International Criminal Court has an important role
in pursuing accountability when national authorities
are either unable or unwilling to do so. We contribute
to the International Criminal Court and international
and hybrid tribunals, and we provide training and
other support to Member States that want to enhance
their own justice systems. We believe that our support
helps strengthen the rules-based international system,
and it helps tackle impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law.

The adoption this year of resolutions 2462
(2019) and 2474 (2019) and their increased focus on
the protection of impartial humanitarian activity in
the counter-terrorism context helps to address an
increasingly complex nexus around modern warfare.
The thirty-third quadrennial International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent on international
humanitarian law will take place in December. We look
forward to participating and will host a session as part
of the International Conference on the voluntary report
that I mentioned earlier to share our experience and
hopefully come up with a corpus of best practices.

We will also host an international conference in
November on preventing sexual violence in conflict
on the theme "Time for justice: putting survivors
first". The event will mark five years since the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. Our
Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Lord Ahmad, will lead the event, where
we hope to pursue deliverables against three key
objectives: securingjustice and accountability, tackling
stigma and preventing sexual violence in conflict.

As we all note, and as you enumerated, Mr. President,
there are ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law in multiple conflict zones. We need to
work together using all the tools available as members
of the Security Council to achieve that, as the Chinese
representative said a moment ago. Working with States
to implement training on international humanitarian
law, calling for greater accountability and information
when attacks happen and sharing expertise between
Governments are some of the things that we can do.
I would like to use this debate to shine a spotlight
on a few specific situations where the international
humanitarian law situation is dire.

In Ukraine, citizens in Crimea have been denied
access to basic services because they would not change
their citizenship, contrary to international humanitarian
law. In South Sudan, it is clear that justice, truth and
reconciliation are fundamental to rebuilding that
society, and all parties must ensure that transitional
justice, under chapter V of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, is implemented in full. In Mali and the
Sahel, the deteriorating security situation has brought
reports of violent international humanitarian law
violations and abuses by armed militias, armed terrorist
groups and regional security forces.

But it is in Syria that the adherence by the parties
to the conflict to international humanitarian law has
reached a nadir. The Syrian people have faced forced
starvation. They have been subjected to arbitrary
detention, with no access by the ICRC. They have been
driven from their homes in Aleppo and elsewhere.
They have had weapons of mass destruction used
against them in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta, as verified
by independent bodies. Now, as those displaced from
Aleppo join the terrified residents of Idlib, they find
their schools and hospitals being bombed. As we have
said in the Council several times, that is in defiance of
international humanitarian law and it defies humanity.
It undermines any claim by the Syrian authorities to
want to rebuild their country.

We still have not had answers as to how a return to

compliance with international humanitarian law will be
achieved. We have not had answers as to how Russian
and Syrian forces are implementing deconfliction and
protecting hospitals. We still have not had answers as
to why the Syrian authorities are bombing hospitals, as
admitted in their letter to the Security Council, without
following the Geneva Conventions and giving the due
warnings that the Conventions demand.

The Secretary-General has established a Board of
Inquiry to examine those questions, and that is welcome.
I take this opportunity to recall that commanders on
the ground have an individual personal responsibility
to uphold international humanitarian law. They will
be held individually and personally accountable for
violations that might amount to crimes against humanity
or war crimes. Justice might not come tomorrow, but it
will come.
With regard to the contribution of the United
Kingdom, it has given more than £28 billion, or more
than $3 billion, in response to the Syria crisis, which is
our largest-ever response to a single humanitarian crisis.
But with more than 400,000 people who have died,
more than half the population displaced, 6.2 million
people fleeing their homes, more than 5.6 million
people taking refuge in neighbouring countries and
11.7 million people in dire need of humanitarian
assistance, it is clear that the end to the conflict cannot
come too soon.

As President Maurer reminded us, there are
increasingly complex aspects to warfare at the moment,
especially concerning urban conflict. We have more
non-State actors involved in conflict than before,
conflicts are lasting longer and they lead to complex
and protracted crises. Ofthe 20 largest humanitarian aid
countries, 17 have been receiving international support
for eight consecutive years or more. The Council must
continue to draw attention to those points. In several,
non-international armed conflicts, State agencies are
involved overtly or covertly. Those are very complex
areas, and they require our further attention and study.
Only collectively can we address the increasingly
difficult and intertwined nature of modern conflict.

Finally, it is clear that we need more action. As
President Maurer said, the laws of conflict were
designed to be inherent and pragmatic. They were
designed not to be an aspiration difficult to attain, but
to be followed so that they could reduce suffering. We
need to continue to spotlight violations by any and
all actors. Only by doing so can we have a stake in
upholding and strengthening our common humanity.

