Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Zenenga, the Secretary-General of the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), the Permanent
Representative of the African Union and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for their briefings today.

The United States reiterates its support for the
Djibouti dialogue process under the leadership of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ould
Abdallah, and the process outlined by the Transitional

08-6107]
Federal Charter. We call on all Somali stakeholders,
including the leadership of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), to engage constructively in this
process in the interests of establishing lasting peace,
stability and effective governance in Somalia.

In paragraph 103 of the report of the Secretary-
General on Somalia (S/2008/709), dated 17 November
2008, the Secretary-General states that

"the international community's strategy for
addressing the multiple threats to regional
stability that emanate from Somalia [should]
be coherent".

We could not agree more. The Council cannot take a
piecemeal approach to dealing with these problems.

The problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia is
a key example. Although we may be tempted to address
piracy as a discrete issue, it is a direct result of the lack
of rule of law and desperate economic conditions on
the ground. Likewise, the political situation, security
situation and humanitarian situation are closely
interrelated.

We are encouraged by the signing on 26 October
of the cessation of armed confrontation agreement, as
well as an agreement to form a unity government
between the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia. However,
this political progress is being threatened by the
deteriorating security situation. The international
community must take immediate steps to stabilize the
situation so that the political process can continue.

The United States notes with appreciation the
Secretariat's concept brief for an international
stabilization force. We believe that the admirable
performance of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), including its key role in facilitating
continued humanitarian deliveries to Somalia, proves
that peacekeeping forces can play an invaluable role in
the country, even in the absence of a multinational
force. It is crucial that the international community be
prepared to support AMISOM. with all the tools at its
disposal so that Somalis will continue to receive food.

We have listened carefully to the representative
of the African Union and we believe that we must
consider all options at our disposal, including the
mechanism of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, if a multinational force cannot be generated.
With that in mind, we believe that it is prudent to have
contingency planning for every scenario.

The United States also condemns the acts of
piracy that we have seen in recent months. We also
strongly support renewing the authorities in resolution
1816 (2008) to combat piracy and will work with other
members of the Council to that end. It is obvious from
this week's news that piracy is a growing problem and
that the authorities under resolution 1816 (2008) must
not be allowed to lapse for even a day.

Finally, we would like to support the European
Union initiative to combat piracy and NATO's proposal
to assist with escorting world food shipments in the
interim.

