Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): This is the second time
during the current session of the General Assembly that the
Security Council is convening to consider the situation in
Africa. In our View, it is yet further evidence that the
United Nations continues to attach great importance to the
problems in this part of the world. We therefore believe
that this meeting of the Security Council is very timely.

Today, Africa has reached a very important turn in its
historic development. In a number of African countries the
economy has started to come out of the abyss, and the
people seem to have realized the importance of gaining
strength through unity. With the efforts of individual
countries, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
other regional organizations, some of the hot spots and
conflicts on the continent have been eliminated or eased.

At the same time, there are still persistent problems
which continue to impact negatively on the situation in
many African countries, especially those which appear on
the list of the world's poorest nations. As a whole, Africa
remains marginalized in the present system of international
economic relations. As a result, the situation in most of the
continent is still characterized by striking poverty and
underdevelopment. The United Nations, therefore, cannot
and should not take the position of observer and must act
adequately.

Years ago, the United Nations initiated the process of
the decolonization of Africa, and it succeeded in those
efforts. This Organization equally succeeded in eradicating
the vicious system of apartheid in South Africa. Ukraine
was proud to make its personal contribution to this noble
endeavour as a member and Vice-Chairman of the United
Nations Special Committee against Apartheid. As one of
those who were honoured to be among the United Nations
electoral observers in South Africa, I still remember those
exciting moments at the end of April 1994.

Ukraine was also actively involved in the ongoing
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Angola, as well
as in some humanitarian relief transportation missions to
other parts of Africa.

Today, the United Nations should help Africa in its
just striving for progress and sustainable development by
ensuring stability and peace on this continent.

In the area of socio-economic assistance to Africa,
the international community has already developed a
number of specific programmes, including the United
Nations System-wide Special Initiative for Africa, which
was launched by the Secretary-General. However, we
believe that external assistance should complement rather
than replace the steps to be taken by African States
themselves. In this respect, we welcome with hope and
optimism the decisions adopted at the Entebbe summit
during the recent visit of President Clinton to Africa. It is
very important that its participants and the United States
commit themselves to a series of measures aimed at
speeding up Africa's transformation and to facilitate its
full integration into the global economy.

Despite the positive developments I have just
referred to, political instability and serious retreats from
democracy are still preventing certain African countries
from moving forward. In some of them, vast movements
of refugees and displaced persons continue to be an
alarming factor which contributes to political instability.
In addition, internal conflicts are threatening the very
survival of those countries. Therefore, we strongly believe
that the issues of peace, security and stability and the
problems of economic development of Africa should be
addressed simultaneously, as they are closely interrelated.
The United Nations should be ready to meet those
challenges through its peacekeeping operations, good
offices missions and emergency relief programmes. At the
same time, broader international efforts, such as the
imposition of sanctions, if necessary, can succeed only if
they are complemented by genuine cooperation and
support on the part of the countries of the region.

In our View, the continuing leading role in ensuring
such cooperation should be played by the Organization of
African Unity. It is also imperative that the international
community enhance its political support for that
organization, as well as the material and technical support
required to improve its capabilities in resolving the
problems and conflict situations within the African
framework.

In past years we have witnessed positive examples
of preventive and peacekeeping efforts undertaken by
subregional organizations in southern Africa, West Africa
and the Horn of Africa. Therefore, we support the

 

implementation of the recommendation contained in the
Secretary-General's report to improve coordination and the
exchange of information between the United Nations and
these organizations.

Given the scope of a number of recommendations in
the Secretary-General' s report, our delegation fully supports
the idea of presenting it to the General Assembly and other
bodies of the United Nations system, as well as to
respective humanitarian organizations.

Finally, I would like to stress that Ukraine approaches
the issue of cooperation with Africa primarily from the
position of developing a mutually beneficial partnership.
From the very first days of its regained independence,
Ukraine, keeping in view the long-standing traditions and
history of its relations with many African countries,
proposed to develop such cooperation at a qualitatively new
level. We are only at the initial stage of this promising
cooperation, and I take this opportunity to encourage
interested African States to embark on this undertaking.

In conclusion, I wish to express our sincere hope that
the difficulties which Africa is facing today will eventually
be overcome and that this continent will turn into a region
of political stability and social and economic progress. It is
the obligation of all Member States of this world
Organization to help Africa to realize this goal.

