Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Let me thank
South Africa for bringing forward this important matter
under its presidency and for holding this debate open to
the participation of the wider membership. The focus
of this debate is on the rule of law in the context of
conflict and post-conflict situations, which is clearly a
crucial matter for the Council to consider and develop.

The rule of law is today an indispensable
component of any successful strategy on United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The Council
therefore has to deepen its reflection on the issue, in
particular when drafting mission mandates, so as to
respond more effectively to the needs on the ground.

Naturally, Portugal fully supports the statement
that later will be delivered by Ambassador Mayr-
Harting on behalf of the European Union.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation here today as well as for his
comprehensive report (S/2011/634*), which illustrates
many important aspects that will help guide the
Council's work on this topic in a more oriented way.
The report covers a lot of ground but, due to time
constraints, I will touch upon the following five issues
that we would like to highlight in that context.

My first point is on international tribunals. One
can never overemphasize the role that such tribunals
play in ensuring and promoting the rule of law. First
and foremost is the International Court of Justice,
whose role is undisputable, be it in conflict resolution
or prevention. That essential tool could be used more
often to the advantage of the international community.
It would therefore be important for more States to
accept its compulsory jurisdiction. We therefore
encourage States that have not yet done so to ponder
accepting it.

But in the recent history of the United Nations,
other international tribunals have come into existence.
Those have already established an impressive record in
the fight against impunity for the most serious crimes.
International tribunals, including ad hoc international
tribunals, mixed tribunals and specialized chambers in
national tribunals, have all played an important role in
administering international justice. They have
developed a set of international standards of justice
that have strengthened their authority and consolidated
an important area of international jurisprudence.

Likewise, their influence is felt also in domestic
jurisdictions. Indeed, the role of those tribunals in
building and promoting the rule of law at the national
level, including through the application of the
principles of complementarity with national
jurisdictions, merits being noted. Very soon, the
Residual Mechanism, established by the Council over
one year ago, will start its work absorbing an important
functional legacy of the International Criminal

12-2096]
Tribunal for Rwanda and International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, which represents an important part
of building international rule of law.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) builds on
those steps and now has a unique role to play, not only
on behalf of the 150 States that are parties to the Rome
Statute, but also of the international community as a
whole. The situations in Darfur and in Libya, which the
Council decided to refer to the ICC, are proof of that.
Cooperation with the Court is therefore crucial to
achieving the goals of justice and fighting impunity,
which are part and parcel of sustainable peace.

My second point relates to the rule of law as a
crucial component in the mandates established by the
Council. The rule of law is fundamental to sustainable
peace and development. The Council should address
those needs when drafting mandates and planning
missions, as well as at an early stage of the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. We should also
make sure that the necessary means are made available
in due time, which requires careful United Nations
planning.

Furthermore, there should be an evaluation of the
results of the work undertaken by the United Nations
on the rule of law in the field. Bearing in mind the
importance of the rule of law in the prevention of
conflicts and in ensuring sustainable peace and
development, the Council should follow that work
closely and support initiatives to further strengthen and
coordinate relevant United Nations activities, such as
the development of indicators.

My third point relates to transnational organized
crime. This is a matter with undeniable relevance to the
topic we are addressing today. Conflict and post-
conflict situations provide fertile ground for organized
crime, which today, with international networks and
the interlinkage of different criminal activities,
represents a real threat to peace and security. Piracy off
the coast of Somalia, with its impact, not only
domestically on Somali society but also at the
international level, provides some hard evidence of that
link.

Only through strong legal systems, appropriate
legislation, effective judicial machinery and
international cooperation can those threats be fought.
For countries debilitated by conflict, easily permeated
by such criminal activities, the only viable option is the
assistance of the international community. We welcome

12-2096]

the Council's awareness of that by calling for long-
term capacity-building efforts by the United Nations in
affected countries, including through regional
initiatives, and for a strengthened United Nations
coordination.

My fourth point concerns the situation of those
most vulnerable to the impact of conflict and post-
conflict situations. An effective response has to address
the particular needs of those people, such as women
and children, who are not only more vulnerable, but
also so often targeted and used as soldiers or as
instruments of war, as is the case with sexual and
gender-based violence. Rule-of-law tools are also
fundamental in that regard. The means to fight
impunity for those crimes have to be strengthened,
including in United Nations mandates through their
components on protection of civilians. Moreover, legal
systems have to be capable of addressing the special
situation and needs of women and children,
particularly in societies traumatized by conflict,
including through special legislation and appropriate
programmes of assistance and by abolishing laws and
practices that discriminate against women and pose
obstacles to their full and equal participation.

My fifth point concerns a final word on
amnesties. Our steadfast support to the ICC is firmly
anchored in the belief that there can be no impunity for
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes that concern
us all. We therefore fully support the United Nations
policy, reiterated in the Secretary-General's report, of
rejecting any endorsement of amnesty for genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity or gross
violations of human rights.

