The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Cuba,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Greece, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Malawi, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Peru,
South Africa, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and
Uruguay, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take seats at the table.
When a speaker is taking the floor, the Conference
Officer will seat the next speaker on the list at the
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Mrs. Viotti (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mrs. Booto (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Zarif
(Islamic Republic of Iran), HRH Prince Zeid
Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Wenaweser
(Liechtenstein), Mr. Lamba (Malawi), Mr. van den
Berg (Netherlands), Mr. McIvor (New Zealand),
Mrs. Yahaya (Nigeria), Mr. de Rivero (Peru),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland), Mr. Edghill (Trinidad and Tobago)
and Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 6 June 2003 from the Permanent Representatives
of Canada, Jordan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand and
Switzerland addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/2003/620. Members of the
Council also have before them a letter dated 10 June
2003 from the Permanent Representative of Greece to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/2003/639.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
at this meeting, and I give him the floor.


