Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful
for the informative briefing delivered by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, on her twenty-eighth report pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). We also pay tribute to the
hard work carried out by her Office on this case. We
have taken stock of the progress made by the Darfur
investigation team during the reporting period, as well
as the difficulties that the Prosecutor's Office faces
both in the course of its investigations and in its judicial
activities, hindering the fulfilment of the task entrusted
to it by the Security Council.

The situation in Darfur triggered the first referral
of a case by the Security Council to the International
Criminal Court more than 13 years ago. Since then,
some 28 reports have been submitted and yet the case
continues to languish in the investigation phase, with
serious obstacles to making progress. We reiterate that
the Council cannot remain indifferent to the fact that the
investigation has been prolonged for more than a decade.
It is clear that the time elapsed has not contributed to
shedding light on the crimes committed and has made
it more difficult to attribute accountability, not to
mention the high economic cost, as highlighted by the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute with
regard to the cases that the Council has referred to the
Court. Fortunately, the Assembly of States Parties has
also provided very concrete indicators regarding the
budget in order to ensure the most efficient, effective
and transparent use of the funds. The Office of the
Prosecutor, which utilizes the largest percentage of
those resources, now faces the challenge of prioritizing
their optimal use.

Bolivia believes that those who have committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity or genocide
must be held accountable before the Court. We cannot
deny that that is an important and fundamental element
to consolidating peace in Darfur. However, over the
past few years we have witnessed signs of positive
progress in the Sudan. As indicated in the latest reports
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the recent presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/20l8/l9)
and even in the most recent report of the Prosecutor,
the general improvement of the situation in Darfur and
the progress achieved in terms of cooperation between
the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations
have facilitated the work of UNAMID on the ground.
We believe that that achievement is principally the
result of the joint work carried out among the African
Union, the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan. All of those efforts must remain focused on the
consolidation of peace in Darfur.

We are also encouraged to note that the ICC and
the African Union are improving cooperation between
their two institutions. The Court should contribute to
the efforts of the international community, in particular
those of regional organizations, to strengthen the
political processes in the Sudan, especially those
related to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We
reiterate that cooperation and coordination between the
ICC and the African Union are critical, as highlighted
in resolution 1593 (2005).

We emphasize that the development and future of
international criminal justice are closely tied to the
concepts of cooperation and complementarity among
States. The International Criminal Court is intended
to complement the primary sovereign capacities of
each State to administer justice within its territory.
Therefore, in addition to ensuring effective and timely
trials, we must also restore local capacities. That
highlights the fact that it is now necessary to grant
special attention to reviewing the case of Darfur, which
the Prosecutor mentions in her report, introduced today.
It also calls on the Office of the Prosecutor to assess the
array of cultural, social and political scenarios in which
it intervenes, the evaluation of which is unavoidable if
progress is to be made in terms of effective cooperation
in the investigation and prosecution of suspects. Bolivia
insists on the importance of an understanding that
transcends traditional approaches that are ineffective,
onerous and obstructive. A restorative justice that
promotes peace and reconciliation among peoples
remains possible.

In that regard, in celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute this year, we should
take the opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness
of the Court and on whether the model as originally
conceived still meets the expectations of cooperation
and universality. The Security Council and the
membership of the United Nations in general should
value the work that the Court undertakes in order
to pursue the investigations and cases referred to
it - even more so when we consider that several States,
including members of the Council, are not yet parties to
the Rome Statute.

For the same reason, the debate on the impunity
of many of those responsible for the commission of
crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide
has been weakened relative to the capacities of the
Court, serving only to diminish its effectiveness in
fulfilling its duties. We insist on the fact that we cannot
maintain sincere dialogue while there are still countries
demanding the full rigour ofjustice without complying
with their own international obligations, including by
openly denouncing the Court.

Finally, in respecting its own obligations as a State
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, Bolivia supports efforts to seek justice and fight
impunity. We therefore urge all States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to guarantee
its universal jurisdiction. We believe that the value of
the principle of universality of international criminal
justice is critical in that regard.

