Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Venezuelan presidency
of the Security Council for the current month for
having proposed this issue as the subject of a meeting
of the Security Council. We would also like to thank
the representatives of Sweden and Chile for having
contributed to our debate today.

The sanctions regime provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations is one of the most important
tools at the disposal of the Organization, and in
particular of the Security Council, in order to achieve
the clearly established purposes and principles, which
often concern the maintenance of international peace
and security. Given the fact that imposing sanctions
on States or regimes is not an end in and of itself,
we reiterate our rejection of open-ended sanctions.
Sanctions should be lifted as soon as the causes that
led to their imposition no longer exist. The role of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council and that of
the sanctions committees in particular, is extremely
sensitive and important. Those bodies provide follow-
up for the implementation of the sanctions regimes,
ensure the oversight for their implementation, provide
recommendations and make the appropriate decisions
that should lead to measures and practical action on the
ground. Each one, according to its area of expertise, is
in constant contact with the Security Council and the
Statesm Members of the United Nations. It is therefore
important that we ensure that the working methods of
subsidiary bodies and committees are appropriate and
expedient in ensuring the desired effectiveness of those
same bodies and committees and in strengthening their
credibility, which in turn strengthens the credibility of
the Security Council in the eyes of Member States.

Given that circumstances sometimes change, it
is important that the working methods be subject to
periodic review and updating to ensure that subsidiary
bodies and the relevant committees are able to
successfully carry out their functions with effectiveness
and transparency. The bulk of the Security Council's
work is at the level of subsidiary bodies. We agree that
there should be increased transparency in the working
methods of subsidiary bodies, including the sanctions
committees, by, inter alia, increasing the number of
public briefings presented by the Chairs. There is a need
to increase consultations with the States concerned.
Non-Council members must receive periodic
summaries about the meetings held by the subsidiary
bodies and committees. There is therefore a need to
continue to translate sanctions lists into all official
United Nations languages and to update the information
published on those bodies' and committees' websites.
Egypt is in agreement with respect to the content of
the draft presidential concept note (S/2016/ 102, annex)
distributed by the Venezuelan delegation on the items
relating to the selection and training of new members of
the Security Council that are called upon to chair one of
the sanctions bodies or committees, particularly given
that there exist divergences and differences in methods
of work from one committee to another, sometimes
even an absence of clarity.

Regarding improving communication and
cooperation among the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council, including communication between
those bodies and the Security Council, my delegation
supports the content of the draft presidential note
encouraging the Chairs of subsidiary bodies on similar
issues to hold periodic meetings to discuss issues of
common interest as well as good practices, so as to make
headway in common cooperation. An example of this is
the joint meeting held recently between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the sanctions committee on
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida,
on the financing of terrorism.

There is a need to forge a common vision for
coordination among the Chairs of the sanctions
committees and penholder delegations. A study should
be conducted so as to draw a distinction between the task
of elaborating draft resolutions and that of managing
unofficial consultations on resolutions seeking to
extend sanctions. The President of the Security Council
should convene those types of consultations and
manage related discussions. That is why the success of
sanctions committees depends largely on constructive
cooperation between national authorities of the States
concerned, regional parties and neighbouring countries.

That is why Egypt reiterates the importance of
ongoing dialogue and constructive cooperation with
such parties, in particular during periodicjoint meetings
and visits on the ground, given that sanctions are not
coercive measures but rather ones seeking to support
stability and combat spoilers. Sanctions committees
would benefit from hearing from a broad spectrum of
players, be it at the United Nations, in peacekeeping
operations or from the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as advisory
working groups such as the Working Group on Children
in Armed Conflict.

We might also add that sanctions committees would
benefit from hearing from parties external to the United
Nations, such as national experts from civil society,
in line with the appropriate mechanisms agreed upon
with the Chairs of sanctions committees. Proposals
to modernize the working methods of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council are the subject ofa great
deal of research and high-quality studies, but what is
most important is the political will to take them into
consideration and the belief that updating their working
methods would give them added value. We hope that
the presidential note will be taken into account, as it
includes recommendations that are very important to
Egypt.

