Mr. Djedje (cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): We
thank the Russian presidency for convening today's
important meeting, which gives the Security Council
the opportunity to assess, one year after its adoption,
the level of implementation of resolution 2365 (2017) on
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices. We also thank Mr. Alexander Zouev
for his excellent briefing on the implementation of
the resolution.

The remarkable progress made in recent years
in mine action is to be welcomed and encouraged, as
is the growing commitment of States to complying
with mine-action standards. Indeed, 164 States are
now parties to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. My
country notes with satisfaction that some States have
destroyed the remaining anti-personnel mines on their
territories, thereby fulfilling their obligations under the
Convention. My delegation also welcomes the inclusion
of mine action at the heart of humanitarian action,
peacebuilding and the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.

It must be recognized that, despite the significant
progress that has been made in this area, the common
goal of achieving a mine-free world is far from
being achieved and remains a major challenge for
the international community. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/623), the
phenomenon remains a persistent threat to international
peace and security, particularly for civilian populations
and humanitarian workers, but also for peacekeeping
forces deployed in conflict zones. Long after the end
of hostilities, these explosive devices continue to kill
and maim, making it impossible for refugees and
internally displaced persons to return to their homes
or to give them any hope of a return to normal life or
post-conflict reconstruction. Furthermore, despite the
decrease in threats caused by mines and explosive
remnants of war, new threats have emerged, such as
improvised explosive devices, obsolete and poorly
managed stockpiles of ammunition, and the circulation
of small arms and light weapons.

In the wake of the crisis in my country, Cote
d'Ivoire, despite not having experienced the use of
anti-personnel mines, decided to destroy its stockpile
of anti-personnel mines - a total of 1,803 mines - in
accordance with its commitments under the Ottawa
Convention on anti-personnel mines. The Ivorian
Government has also decided to make the management
and security of arms and ammunition stocks one of
its priorities.

With the support of the United Nations Operation
in cote d'Ivoire and its Mine Action Service, cote
d'lvoire has established weapons and ammunition
storage sites that meet international standards, through
the development of standards for the construction
of weapons depots, the renovation of armouries and
the construction of secure bunkers, in accordance
with international standards. Similarly, a weapons-
stockpile-management procedure manual and an
ammunition-management guide have been developed
to improve existing tools and systems. The authorities
have also worked, in terms of capacity-building, on
the technical training of persons in charge of depot
management, and have set up a computerized database
of weapons and ammunition. To date, C6te d'Ivoire
can boast a marked and registered weapons rate of
95 per cent.

In the face of the worrying issue of mines and
explosive remnants of war, C6te d'Ivoire calls for
strengthened international cooperation among States
with a view to eliminating the danger they pose to
international peace and security. It encourages the
implementation of international legal instruments
related to mine action and urges ongoing collective
efforts towards the universalization of such instruments.
My delegation also believes that the elimination of the
risks inherent in anti-personnel mines requires a holistic
approach that involves both raising public awareness
of the dangers posed by those devices and conducting
the operations necessary to identify and remove them.
That approach must also include victim assistance,
weapons management, the destruction of arsenals,
national capacity-building and the full implementation
of Conventions prohibiting and regulating the use of
anti-personnel mines.

My country also encourages States to implement
programmes and policies on mine awareness, mine
clearance, mine risk education and victim assistance,
based on the Strategy of the United Nations on Mine
Action 2013-2018. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the inclusion
of the issue of mine action when developing mandates
for peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and humanitarian and development programmes. In
that context, we appreciate the key role played by the
United Nations, including its Mine Action Service,
and reaffirm the need for partnerships and cooperation
among regional organizations, such as the African
Union and the United Nations.

Lastly, C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the completion
of the United Nations explosive ordnance disposal
standards as an important step in adapting the response
of the United Nations to the evolving mine threat.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
struggle to eliminate the danger posed by mines
and explosive remnants of war remains relevant
to our shared efforts to promote peace and ensure
development in the world. It is therefore important that
the Security Council remain seized of the issue because
of its implications for international peace and security
and that the Secretary-General ensure that Council
members are regularly informed of its progress.

