Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing. We
agree with her that the victims in Darfur need justice.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Darfur more than
300,000 people have been killed and 4.7 million others
affected, including more than 2 million who have
been and remain internally displaced. In the past, both
Sudanese Government forces and their allied militias
have engaged in the widespread and systematic killing,
raping and torturing of civilians. Perpetrators have
burned villages and blocked humanitarian aid from
reaching populations in desperate need. Some rebel
groups have conducted similar brutal attacks. More
than 12 years ago, alarmed by the atrocities taking
place in Darfur, the Council referred the situation to
the International Criminal Court in order to bring to
justice those responsible for such atrocities and to end
the climate of impunity in the Sudan.

The United States has continued its efforts to help to
end the conflict and improve conditions for the people
of Darfur. That focus on the safety and the security of
Darfuri citizens was a key component of the five-track
engagement plan, the framework launched in June
2016 whereby the United Stated Government offered
to revoke certain economic sanctions on the Sudan
if the Sudan made progress in a number of areas. We
asked the Sudan to maintain a cessation of hostilities
in areas of internal conflict such as Darfur, and to
improve humanitarian access. We note that in 2017 the
Government of the Sudan has refrained from military
offensives, halted aerial bombardments in Darfur and
taken meaningful steps to expand humanitarian access.
With the exception of one party, the armed
opposition in Darfur also reciprocated by announcing
its own unilateral cessation of hostilities. However,
much more progress is needed. While Darfur has not
experienced the same levels of violence in 2017 as in
years past, lasting peace remains elusive. The human
rights situation continues to be volatile. Humanitarian
needs remain high and accountability non-existent.
Those responsible for human rights violations and abuses
and attacks on civilians should be held accountable,
including security forces using excessive force against
civilians, such as in Kalma camp in September, and the
members of armed militias who perpetrate atrocities
against civilians in Darfur. In November, we noted the
Sudanese Government's arrest of the former Janjaweed
commander Musa Hilal, who is subject to United
Nations sanctions for his commission of atrocities in
Darfur following clashes between Sudanese security
forces and armed militias loyal to Hilal.

We are concerned about the reports of civilian
fatalities, including the killing of women and children,
occurring during those clashes. We call on the Sudanese
Government to allow the United Nations, humanitarian
organizations and the media to access the area where
the clashes took place so that they can investigate the
reports and assist those in need. We also call on the
Government to investigate promptly and credibly any
allegations against Hilal, in accordance with the Sudan's
human rights commitments and obligations, and to
hold Hilal to account if he is found to have committed
atrocities. We note that the International Criminal Court
has investigated allegations of atrocities committed
by all sides, and has charged Sudanese Government
officials, militia leaders and certain armed-opposition
members with crimes, including genocide; crimes
against humanity, including torture, murder and rape;
and war crimes, including pillaging and deliberate
attacks on peacekeepers.

We have pointed out for many years that it is
unacceptable that the suspects in the Darfur situation
remain at large and have not been brought to justice.
In particular, we have expressed disappointment that
Sudanese President Omar Al-Bashir continues to travel
to countries around the world. Receiving President
Al-Bashir on those visits has served only to burnish
his image, diminish the seriousness of the charges
against him and dismiss the tremendous suffering of
the victims. We must stand with the victims, no matter
how powerful those who inflict abuses on them may
be. Other leaders who have targeted their own citizens,
including the former President of Cote d'Ivoire Laurent
Gbagbo, the former Liberian President Charles Taylor
and the former Khmer Rouge leaders Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan, have been called to answer for their
alleged crimes.

We will continue to use the tools at our disposal to
press the Sudan to improve its human rights practices
and to promote justice for the people of Darfur. A Sudan
that adheres to the rule of law, respects human rights
and breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will enjoy
sustainable peace and prosperity. We look forward to
the day when the Sudan is a valuable contributor to
regional security and stability.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not reiterate
the United States position with respect to recent
developments related to the situation in Afghanistan,
which is different from this situation in a number of
respects. As we said in the Council in November and as
we reiterated at the Assembly of States Parties meeting
last week, we continue to have serious concerns
about and a long-standing principled objection to any
International Criminal Court investigation or other
activity concerning United States personnel.

