The President: I should first of all like to
welcome the presence at this meeting of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Greece,
Norway and Serbia and Montenegro in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovie
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Vassilakis (Greece) and
Mr. Strammen (Norway) took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Michael Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

I see no objection. It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Steiner to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members have before them document
8/2003/113, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Michael Steiner, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

I now give the floor to Mr. Steiner.


