The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I would like to start by thanking all the sponsors for
their efforts, as well as the delegations that worked so
intensely to achieve such a historic result. Spain voted
in favour of resolution 2334 (2016) because we are
convinced that it will contribute to preserving the two-
State solution, which we believe is the only solution
that can lead to ajust, comprehensive and lasting peace
for Palestinians and Israelis.

That peace could never be determined externally,
but will need to be negotiated between the two parties.
However, the international community does have
an obligation to do everything it can to promote an
agreement. With today's vote, the Security Council
did what it had to do. Over the past two years, as a
non-Permanent Member of the Security Council, Spain
has repeated on numerous occasions that we were in
favour of the Council expressing its position on the
Palestinian question when the time was right and, if
possible, to adopt a text on which there was consensus
that could truly advance the peace process. That day has
come today. The text of the resolution that we adopted
today fulfils, as we see it, the necessary requirements.
It is a balanced text that strives for nothing more than
to act in favour ofpeace.

Over these two years, we have also repeated many
times in this same Chamber the position of Spain on
the Palestinian question. We have always stated that
the settlements are counter to international law and one
of the main obstacles to make the two-State solution
a reality so that Israel and Palestine can live in peace
and security within mutually recognized borders.
Furthermore, we have also stated that the incitement to
hatred and acts of terrorism are not only morally and
legally reprehensible, but they also undermine efforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, and they should be strongly condemned.
The resolution that we have just adopted is fully
compatible with that position.

As the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon recalled
last week here in the Chamber (ses S/PV.7839), over
the past 10 years the Security Council has pronounced
itself only twice on the Palestinian question - the
last time being eight years ago. We welcome the fact
that such silence has been broken and we see this
as the result of the work carried out by the Security
Council, month after month, throughout these years.
Spain has contributed to that work, motivated only by
its sincere wish to help the cause of peace. Spain will
continue working as long as it is necessary, based on
that same motivation, to contribute to a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, which would be
the outcome of a negotiated agreement between the
two parties.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Israel.

