Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Madam President, at the
outset, I would like to thank you for convening this
open debate and for your concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also thank the Secretary-General, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the President of the Cote d'Ivoire chapter of the
West Africa Action Network on Small Arms for their
respective contributions. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report on small arms and light weapons
(S/2015/289). The report contains many useful
recommendations.

Illegal small arms and light weapons continue to
be the weapons of choice in stocking and sustaining
conflicts with a devastating impact in far too many
regions. The lack of a strong regulatory framework
on the arms trade, related weak border controls,
corruption, stock management tracing training and
the illegal diversion and use of small arms and light
weapons are vital challenges. As a strong supporter
of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect,
Indonesia remains deeply committed to continuing to
uphold this noble imperative in consonance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.

We also fully recognize that illegal small arms and
light weapons have disturbed the peace and well-being
of many societies and the proliferation ofthose weapons
exacerbates the challenges to the responsibility to
protect. More often than not, these weapons, coupled
with unresolved grievances, poverty, wide income
disparity, misgovernance, injustice and human rights
abuses by State and non-State actors result in a toxic
mix.

Terrorism, organized crime, drugs and human
trafficking, among other ills, flourish in such conditions.
Indonesia therefore stresses a comprehensive and well-
supported approach to tackling the menace of illicit
small arms and light weapons, in which States remain
responsible for regulating their legitimate arms trade, as
well as curbing and eliminating the possession and use
of illicit weapons. When they require assistance with
their capabilities related to the control of small arms
and light weapons, the United Nations and international
partners give them the help they need.

It is worrying that despite the fact that it is well
over a decade since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, the illicit trade in and the use of small
arms and light weapons continue to imperil many
societies. Indonesia urges the relevant national actors to
do what is necessary, and calls for robust international
cooperation and assistance in implementing the
Programme of Action.

We note that the Arms Trade Treaty has entered
into force. Its merits notwithstanding, it is essential that
the legitimate interests of States that import and export
arms be considered equitably, and that the Treaty be
exploited in a transparent, non-discriminatory and
balanced way, and not so that some exporting States
can pursue particular political agendas.

The importance of nationally identified, nationally
prioritized and nationally owned disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security
sector reform in conflict-affected countries within
a framework of peacebuilding, peacemaking and
development cannot be emphasized enough. At the
same time, Governments, the United Nations and the
international community must also have zero tolerance
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws. We must work together to build a better
global culture that inculcates rights and responsibilities
and upholds the rule of law for everyone.

The proliferation of illegal weapons is both a driver
and a symptom of insecurity and instability. Effective
national efforts, with greater international support, will
help to produce good governance and justice and ensure
rights and benefits for citizens, raising the stakes for
everyone to strengthen peace. Such an environment,
with a greater emphasis on the peaceful and equitable
resolution of conflicts by the United Nations and States,
will help efforts to defeat illegal small arms and light
weapons and reduce the space in which such weapons
proliferate. Let us work together to help the affected
countries raise their capacities and resources, and
strengthen a global edifice based on rights and law that
can eliminate the diversion and use of these weapons.
For its part, Indonesia will continue to play its role in
that fight with full resolve.

