Sir Alan Duncan (United Kingdom): It gives me
enormous pleasure to be able to sit here on behalf of
the United Kingdom and extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Antonio Guterres as the new Secretary-General.
On a very personal level, I recall the work that he
and I did together when he was the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and I was the
United Kingdom's Minister of State for International
Development. I am glad that such cooperation can
continue in both of our new roles. I hope that the
United Kingdom's generous aid budget, much of which
used to go in the direction of the Office of the High
Commissioner, will not be forgotten.

Mr. Guterres assumes his role at a time of
widespread instability and the existence of far too many
long-running conflicts across the world. The United
Kingdom firmly believes in the role of the United
Nations in upholding the fundamental principles of a
rules-based international order, which must underpin
our understanding of what is right and what is wrong
in the world.

I would also like to thank the Swedish presidency
for convening today's open debate. You and I, Madam
President, have also worked together in the past, when
you were Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Sexual Violence in Conflict. I salute your
continuing efforts to place conflict prevention and
gender at the centre of your foreign policy.

Ever since the inception of the United Nations, the
United Kingdom has been at the forefront of decisive
action by the United Nations to prevent conflict. On this
very day, 71 years ago, London hosted the first meeting
of the General Assembly. On the agenda in 1946 were
two issues that we still face today: sustaining peace,
and supporting refugees driven from their homes by
the scourge of war. Both seven decades ago and today,
the work of the United Nations on those issues - and,
of course, many more - remains fundamentally about
addressing conflict.

However, we should recognize that while the issues
may seem the same seven decades on, the response of
the United Nations certainly is not. We have tools at
our disposal that our predecessors never had. We have
tools for conflict prevention, mitigation, mediation,
stabilization and recovery. Thus, the challenge is
how to use such tools effectively and, often, many of
them at the same time. We therefore fully endorse the
Secretary-General's vision for an inclusive approach
to conflict prevention, peace and development - the
peace continuum - and his commitment to achieving
the reforms needed to deliver it. The United Kingdom
sees five key building blocks in the realization of
that vision.

First, there is development. We share the Secretary-
General's View that development is fundamental to
addressing the drivers of conflict. That is why our own

aid budget is increasingly focused on the world's most
fragile places. The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States laid the foundations for achieving the global
goals of the United Nations. Together, we now must
build on those foundations and harness the political and
security tools of the United Nations.

Secondly, we need to equip ourselves with the
expertise needed to take action sooner. Two obvious
steps are improving situational awareness, which
builds on New Zealand's recent work, and supporting
senior United Nations officials when they flag risks and
challenge the Council to respond. The recent briefing
on South Sudan by Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, is an excellent example.

Thirdly, we need to recommit to making greater
use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
including enabling the Secretary-General to make full
use of the tools at his disposal, such as his own good
offices and expert mediation by his envoys and others.

Fourthly, we need to encourage regional
responsibility, because, try as we might to seek
solutions from New York, the best solutions are
often found at the local level. We should continue to
support regional organizations that show leadership in
preventing conflict. That includes organizations that
span multiple regions. For example, the Commonwealth
has dedicated Commonwealth Day and the ensuing
year to peace-building, with a focus on practical action
among its 52 member States.

Finally, we must ensure that United Nations
deployments are fit for purpose. That means that they
must be properly prepared and equipped, with each
mission tailored to the task at hand. It means that the
Council must be prepared to focus its resources in
order to deliver those effective missions. It means that
we must deliver what we are calling "the three P's", as
agreed upon at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
in London in September 2016: better mission planning,
more pledges of personnel and equipment, and
improved performance.

The tools of the United Nations provide the best
means to prevent conflict and lay the foundations for
sustained peace. However, we must deploy the right
tools at the right time. In many cases, that means that
we should deploy them sooner - warning rather than
reacting, and mediating rather than peacekeeping. That
is why the peace continuum is so important. It requires
us to develop greater awareness of possible flashpoints
so that we can chart a more peaceful course.

We agree with the Secretary-General that if
this great Organization is to continue to achieve its
objectives, it must be simpler, more decentralized
and more flexible. I am confident that between the
Secretariat and Member States, we have the knowledge,
skills and will to make that happen. Today, I reiterate
the pledge of the United Kingdom that we will fully
support that effort, just as did 71 years ago.
