Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, but let me make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.

First, I wish to express my appreciation to the
Jordanian presidency for convening this open debate on
an issue of great importance to the United Nations and
the Member States. The number of speakers today is a
clear reflection of the interest in this issue. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-GeneralFeltman for his
briefing. Indeed, avoiding war and historical tensions,
maintaining peace and achieving reconciliation are
fundamental objectives of the work of the United
Nations, so we welcome this opportunity to engage in a
debate on this issue.

Peacebuilding efforts today pertain mostly to the
development of a political, economic, security and
institutional environment conducive to the establishment
of lasting peace. But ensuring a favourable social
environment is also key, as psychological and social
factors will often directly affect efforts in other areas,
from politics to security. Parties to a conflict may
have divergent historical narratives and even selective
memories that pollute the social, political and security
environment, become an obstacle to reconciliation and
contribute to relapse into conflict. In this context, along
with developments in other areas, we must strive to
reach a common historical narrative in order to provide
local populations with a brighter, conflict- and war-free
future.

The international community, the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations have a
role to play in helping to forge conditions that enable
reconciliation through the various instruments at their
disposal, including mechanisms such as history, truth,
inquiry commissions, panels and tribunals. But in this
process, the following factors must always be borne in
mind.

First, no two conflicts are alike. The requirements
for reconciliation efforts will differ according to the
conflict, as well as to political, social, economic,
cultural and historical factors. While in some cases
truth commissions may facilitate reconciliation, in
others tribunals could be successful.

Secondly, ownership of the reconciliation process
by the parties is a determining factor. Reconciliation
cannot be forced and can be sustainable only with the
consent of the parties. Reconciliation is a process for
which local populations bear the primary responsibility.
The international community and the United Nations
must support local reconciliation efforts, but they
should not attempt to act as a substitute. In this
context, the United Nations is an important actor,
possessing the legitimacy, capability and experience
to assist by providing technical support mechanisms
and agreements that are required as the bases of
reconciliation processes. The United Nations and the
international community should provide the necessary
political, financial and logistical support for such
mechanisms that can help achieve reconciliation in the
pursuit of lasting peace.

Thirdly, parties should be enabled to meet on a
common objective historical ground. The establishment
of historical facts through scientific means, such as
impartial and objective historical commissions that may
be formed by the parties, or even with the participation
ofthird parties, can be very useful to laying the common
ground on which reconciliation can be built.

In this context, the proposals in the concept note
of the Jordanian presidency (S/2014/30, annex) are
noteworthy. The establishment of United Nations
historical advisory teams to assist local authorities
in securing documents and archives could be useful.
Additionally, United Nations assistance in building
local capacities for national archives or national
historical commissions, where necessary, could also
be beneficial. They would help to secure the necessary
scientific data that could be critical in later stages on
the way to establishing common, objective historical
ground. Also, third parties often play an important
role. They may hold key data in their archives. The
United Nations could assist reconciliation processes
by urging third parties to unconditionally provide the
relevant mechanisms with the necessary information
for an unbiased, objective and scientific account of the
historical narrative.

Fourthly, although establishing historical facts may
be important, reconciliation should focus on the future.
It is essential to create an atmosphere that promotes
understanding, tolerance and cooperation in order to
achieve true reconciliation. Reconciliation must not
be narrowed down to revisiting the past or used to
revive old animosities. The establishment ofa positive,
forward-looking agenda will be more beneficial to
creating a peaceful future in which communities can
make a fresh start.

Fifthly, reconciliation does not mean impunity. In
order to achieve true reconciliation, those responsible
for the most serious crimes, crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes must be held accountable.

Sixthly, it must always be remembered that
reconciliation is mostly a long-term and complex
process. We must not give up efforts at the first sight
of obstacles. On this note, let me pay tribute once again
to the memory of the late President Nelson Mandela
for his unrelenting efforts in pursuit of and success in
achieving national reconciliation.

As we discuss and attempt to strengthen our
capacities to better deal with post-conflict factors,
we should not stop intensifying our efforts to prevent
conflicts. We should also strengthen all instruments
at our disposal for preventing and resolving conflicts,
including mediation.

I should like to respond to the remarks made by the
Ambassador of Armenia concerning the events of 1915.

As is well known, genocide is a precisely defined
concept in international law, and its proof requires
high standards of evidence. That is why this concept
must not be used lightly to promote spurious historical
narratives. Moreover, the allegations of genocide
regarding the events of 1915 have never been legally
or historically substantiated. In the same vein, there is
neither political nor legal consensus as to the nature of
those events.

In that context, it is important to recognize that
memory does not, on its own, constitute reality. Often,
as in the case of the controversy between Turks and
Armenians regarding that painful episode of their
common past, national memories can clash. We believe
that deriving animosity from history by trying to
imprint on others an incriminating and one-sided view
of the past and calling for selective compassion is not
the proper way to respect the memory of many Turks,
Armenians and others who lost their lives during the
First World War.

It is therefore important to face history in its entirety
and through the impartial scientific examination of
the historical records and archives so that the right
lessons can be drawn from history and a common, fair
memory can be reached. I believe that today's open
debate is focused on the achievement of meaningful
reconciliation based on shared historical understanding
that helps to cement lasting peace. That is why we
need to help forge an agreed and shared narrative and
memory of a troubled past, rather than honing one-side
narratives.

We continue to seek an open and honest dialogue
with Armenia. We hope that Armenia will seize
this historic opportunity to replace the language of
subjective conviction with the language of objective
knowledge.

