Mr. Landerretche (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my delegation would like to express its
thanks for the statements made by States members of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), by the representative of the African Union
and by the IGAD facilitator.

For my country, the establishment of a
Transitional Government and Parliament in Somalia is
without question a very important step towards
restoring peace and security there, after more than 14
years without a central government. It is our hope that
the new transitional institutions will relocate to
Somalia as soon as security conditions permit. In that
regard, we regret that political progress has not been
accompanied by significant improvement in the
security situation prevailing in the country.

Moreover, the Somali reconciliation process still
has a long way to go; genuine reconciliation among the
parties still has yet to be achieved, and the original
causes for the civil war still need to be adequately
addressed.

We would like to take this opportunity to support
and to express our appreciation for the efforts made by
the IGAD members of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, in particular the steps taken by the
Government of Kenya with a view to resolving the
complex differences among the various Somali groups
thus facilitating the reconciliation process. In
particular, we would like to express our thanks for the
interesting and complete statement made by the
President of the Transitional Government,
Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed. My delegation notes his
statement and thanks him for it.

Lastly, we would like to pay special tribute to the
work done for peace and reconciliation in Somalia by
the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Winston Tubman, and his team. We also
acknowledge the humanitarian and development
activities undertaken by the United Nations in Somalia.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the
delegation of China for introducing and carrying out
negotiations on the text of the draft presidential
statement, which my delegation fully endorses.

