Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Ethiopia is closely following the situation and is
very concerned about the recent incidents that have
taken place following the renewed escalation of violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory since last month,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. We expressed the same
concern at both emergency consultations that were
convened under the agenda item "Any other business" on
the escalation of violence in Gaza and Southern Israel,
when the Council was briefed by Under-Secretary-
General Miroslav Jenca, and at the monthly briefing
(see S/PV.8405) and consultations, when Special
Coordinator Mladenov briefed the Council, stressing
the situation's fragility and underscoring the urgent
need to change the dynamics on the ground and address
underlying political issues. We continue to appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations, in close consultations
with countries such Egypt and other relevant parties, to
help restore calm and on the need to promote political
dialogue between the parties based on a two-State
solution, to which Ethiopia fully subscribes.

Today's briefing and recent discussion further
show how the latest developments are bound to cause
damage and undermine the long-sought hope for peace
between the Israelis and Palestinians. The deteriorating
political, humanitarian and security situation in Gaza
remains extremely worrisome. Although Special
Coordinator Mladenov pointed to progress in terms
of reconstruction efforts and the provision of water
services, among other things, we believe that the
humanitarian situation cannot be alleviated without
fixing all essential services, as well as easing the
movement of people, goods and services.

We would also like to note the importance of
promoting intra-Palestinian reconciliation, supporting
the efforts of Egypt and bringing the Gaza Strip under
the control of the Palestinian Authority, as per the
Cairo agreement, which have not yet fully materialized.
Therefore, it is vitally urgent that all sides exercise
maximum restraint and that every effort be made to
de-escalate tensions, in order to avoid endangering
the lives of innocent civilians and exacerbating the
humanitarian situation.

All of that makes it self-evident that, unless the
peace process is advanced and the underlying problems
are peacefully solved, the tragedy at hand will only
happen again and again, eventually getting to the point
of no return. That is why it is so critical that ways and
means be found to continue the peace process and save
the two-State formula, which is the long-held position
of the United Nations and the international community.

We all know that those same underlying problems
and known obstacles to peace persist, with no
movement forward to speak of - a situation that is
hardly conducive to sustainable peace and security for
either party. Without genuine efforts to remove those
obstacles, there cannot be any meaningful progress
towards realizing the two-State solution. That is why
direct negotiations between the parties should resume
without any preconditions and without any delay. As
we leave the Council next month, we can only hope
that the international community, and particularly
the Council, will be able to take steps in support of
realizing that objective.

