Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by aligning myself with the statement to be made
later by the Permanent Representative of Germany on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to join
others in thanking the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.

The United Kingdom continues to be fully
committed to advancing the Middle East peace process.
My Foreign Secretary had the opportunity to discuss
the way forward with Prime Minister Olmert, President
Abbas and Foreign Minister Livni, during her visit to
Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories last
week. We welcome the ongoing efforts to end the
violence and to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, and we would like to join others in
particularly welcoming the recent efforts by Saudi
Arabia and by King Abdullah in person to help achieve
this end.

The fact that an agreement was reached in Mecca
to form a Palestinian government of national unity is
clearly an important development. We await with
interest the details of that agreement. The United
Kingdom looks forward to engaging with a new
Government based on the Quartet principles. We hope
that the formation of a national unity government will
mark the end of intra-Palestinian violence and allow us
all to move forward.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Quartet's
statements of 2 and 9 February and the commitment
from both parties to advance the peace process. Like
other Member States, we look forward to the
forthcoming trilateral meeting between Prime Minister
Olmert, President Abbas and United States Secretary of
State Rice.

However, and as a number of speakers have noted
this morning, significant challenges remain. We
condemn without reservation the suicide attack in Eilat
on 29 January. There is no justification for attacks such
as these, which only serve to escalate further an
already tense situation in the region. Qassam rocket
attacks continue to be launched into Israel, and the
situation remains fragile at the Al-Aqsa mosque. The
United Kingdom urges that any action in that holy site
be taken with the agreement of all parties concerned
and in a way that respects the status quo.

The United Kingdom will continue to work
closely with our international partners. We must
continue to provide international assistance to build
capacity in Palestine and to help the Palestinian
economy develop. Governance and economic reform
go hand in hand with political progress. We remain
committed to finding a solution that will result in a
comprehensive and lasting peace with two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security.

I should also like to address Lebanon. The United
Kingdom continues to be concerned by ongoing
political instability in Lebanon. Today's bombing of
two buses near Beirut is another deplorable act, and we
condemn it, too, without reservation. I would like to
stress again that there is no justification for such
attacks.

The United Kingdom continues to support the
democratically elected Government of Lebanon in its
efforts to resolve the current political impasse, and we
urge all parties to participate in those efforts through
peaceful dialogue.

I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate France on the successful Paris III
conference, which will significantly boost the
Lebanese economy.

The United Nations has a central role to play in
helping Lebanon achieve durable peace and stability.
The United Kingdom continues to believe that Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) provides the best
framework for solving Lebanon's problems. We
welcome all constructive international mediation
efforts to help resolve the crisis and we urge regional
States to avoid destabilizing the situation in Lebanon.

As many speakers have noted this morning, the
key now is for all Member States to assist the
Government of Lebanon with the full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006). We therefore welcome the
progress made so far, especially in helping the
Lebanese authorities extend their control over the
whole of their territory. But here, too, there is more to
be done. Making progress on the disputed Sheba'a
farms and securing the release of the captured Israeli
prisoners, as well as ensuring the implementation of
the arms embargo under resolution 1701 (2006), are all
critical.

I should like at this point to say that, like others,
we were concerned by the serious incident that
occurred on 7 February along the Blue Line. It is
important that both sides act with caution and restraint.
We welcome the tripartite meeting that took place on
12 February.

The role of the United Nations in seeking justice
for the murder of Rafik Hariri is crucial. The United
Kingdom fully supports the work of the Organization's
International Independent Investigation Commission.
We stand ready to assist the Commission in its work in
any way we can. It was important that the Security
Council achieved agreement on a tribunal to follow
that investigation. We hope that Lebanese politicians
will find an agreed way forward and that the tribunal
can proceed.

