Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (S/2013/377). I will begin
by announcing that Ms. Ai'chatou Mindaoudou took up
her responsibilities as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire and Head of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
last week, on 8 July. She has already been able to meet
with President Ouattara, members of his Government
and other key stakeholders.

As is highlighted in the report before the Council,
Cote d'Ivoire has continued to make progress on the
path to recovery since the end of the violent post-
election crisis in April 2011. President Ouattara and his
Government have taken significant steps to stabilize the
security situation, accelerate economic recovery and
initiate key reforms. An elected National Assembly is
in place and working well. The success of the regional
and municipal elections held in April demonstrated
the ability of the national authorities, including the
security forces, to assume responsibility for organizing
and safeguarding the election process.

We can say that Cote d'Ivoire is on the right track.
Its leadership has shown remarkable resolve in tackling
the country's many challenges. The establishment of
the National Security Council and the adoption and
endorsement of a national security strategy are important
steps on the road to security sector reform, while the
start, in 2012, of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the 65,000 or so former combatants
was another important milestone. Indeed, that process
remains a key priority for President Ouattara, who has
asked his Government to expedite the disarmament and
demobilization of 30,000 combatants by the end of this
year and to complete the process by the end of 2014.

We cannot pretend that this is not an ambitious
goal, and UNOCI will continue to assist the national
authorities in implementing that national programme.
However, Cote d'Ivoire will need the support of the
international community as a whole to ensure that
lasting solutions are found for every former combatant.
There is a real risk, going on lessons learned from the
crisis, that if solutions are not found for them, they may
once again become a threat to human rights and stability
in Cote d'Ivoire and the subregion, since they may
potentially take up arms again if the opportunity arises.
It is therefore very important that the Government
continue to work closely with its international and
regional partners to ensure that such reintegration is
sustainable, and that it is supported by job creation and
a return to normality.

The Government has made genuine efforts to
engage with the political opposition parties, in spite
of the decision those parties made to boycott the local
elections. While discussions with several of them have
been resumed, dialogue with the former ruling party
has been stalled since February. It is vital that it be
resumed without further delay in order to pave the
way for political reconciliation, which will be essential
as we move towards a new electoral cycle in 2015.
At the same time, conflict prevention and resolution
at the local level should be promoted. Considering
that the current mandate of the Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission ends in September, it is
important for the Government to ensure that efforts to
promote reconciliation and healing continue across the
country.

Reconciliation must go hand in hand with equitable
justice. Ensuring the accountability of those who have
committed violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law is essential. The human rights
situation, in which I include incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence, remains worrying. Efforts to
combat impunity must be expedited by ensuring that
those responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law are brought to justice
whatever their political affiliation, while, obviously,
respecting the rights of those in detention. Impartial
justice is essential to achieve reconciliation and end
decades of impunity for human rights violations.

As the report indicates, the Governments of Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia have continued their efforts at
every level to address common border challenges, with
the support of UNOCI and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. At the second quadripartite meeting in
April, both Governments committed to beginning to
institutionalize their cross-border cooperation and to
enhancing their security forces' presence on both sides
of the border. They also agreedto increase their exchange
of intelligence, to undertake joint actions - including
intensified and coordinated land and river patrols - to
take steps to strengthen the relationship between their
security forces and their populations and to reinforce
their coordination of humanitarian efforts.

Despite such significant progress, threats to Cote
d'Ivoire's peace and security persist and should not be
underestimated. The political divisions go deep and
networks connected to the former regime, whose aim is
to destabilize the Government, are still there. Further
continuing concerns are the presence of mercenaries,
former combatants and other armed elements, the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons, criminal activity
and violence between communities. Nor should we
forget other threats to stability, which include piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, drug trafficking and organized
crime; and we cannot rule out the possibility of terrorist
threats.

All of that goes to show that UNOCI's ongoing
presence in cote d'Ivoire remains essential, particularly
regarding its core priorities - the protection ofcivilians,
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants, and security sector reform.
UNOCI has continued working to strengthen its efforts
to protect civilians, with particular emphasis on the
western part of the country, involving strengthening
its civilian presence on the ground and its contacts
with local authorities. That has, in point of fact, helped
to improve the mission's capacity to collect relevant
information, identify key protection concerns and take
necessary action, in close coordination with the United
Nations country team.

Further to the decision of the Security Council, 850
troops were repatriated in May following the conclusion
of the local elections, and preparations are under way to
transfer the military hospital in Abidjan to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. UNOCI is continuing to refine plans
for a further reduction of its military strength by 2015,
while exploring with the Government the possibility
of reducing, for example, the protection arrangements
enjoyed by some members of the Government and key
strategic installations. In that regard, UNOCI is keeping
a close watch on developments on the ground to inform
the planning process.

In the report before the Council, the Secretary-
General has proposed broad benchmarks to measure
Cote d'Ivoire's progress towards long-term stability and
to undertake transition planning. However, it is clearly
still too early to predict when UNOCI will start its
transition. We need to take into account, in particular,
the 2015 presidential and legislative elections, after
which the situation can be fully reassessed.

By way of conclusion, let me say that the Council's
ongoing support continues to be critical to improving
the ability of the United Nations to make a positive
difference in Cote d'Ivoire.

