Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully aligns itself with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Spain on behalf of the European Union.

Since the adoption of resolution 1402 (2002),
violence has escalated even further in the Middle East.
The military operations undertaken by the Israeli army
in Ramallah, and later in other Palestinian towns, are
leading to a political impasse and a humanitarian
tragedy. This situation in unacceptable.

France strongly urges that both parties fully
implement resolution 1402 (2002) without delay. The
Israeli army must withdraw from all Palestinian towns,
and military operations under way must cease. Equally,
all forms of violence and terror must cease. A real
ceasefire between Palestinians and Israelis should be
concluded without delay. France reaffirms what was
stated by the President of the Security Council on
behalf of the 15 members: the demands contained in
resolution 1402 (2002) are not in a sequence and
should all be fully implemented.

In order to emerge from this vicious cycle of
violence and hatred it is necessary to have a political
perspective. The situation can improve only when the
Israeli Government agrees to undertake, in parallel to
discussions on security, political negotiations leading
to the creation of an independent, Viable and
democratic Palestinian State. Security issues and
political issues must be addressed; they cannot be
separated.

France states once again, and forcefully, that
nothing can justify the murder of innocent civilians.
The suicide bombings that have taken place over the
past few days lead to a feeling of disgust. France
condemns them with horror. Once again, we express
our compassion and our deep sympathy to all the
victims and their families.

The Palestinian Authority, which has the
responsibility to combat terrorism, can act only if its
capacities are preserved and if it is not weakened. This
implies, notably for the Israeli Government, the lifting
of the siege of Ramallah and the re-establishment of
President Arafat's abilities to take action, travel and
negotiate. The physical integrity and personal safety of
the President of the Palestinian Authority must be
assured. To exile him would be a mistake, with
incalculable consequences.

The neutralizing of President Arafat and, to a
larger extent, the dismantling of the Palestinian
Authority and its security infrastructures run counter to
Israel's sought-after objective. The long-term security
of the Israeli people does not come through the
destruction of the Palestinian Authority but, on the
contrary, through negotiation with the elected and
legitimate representatives of the Palestinian people.

Our Council should be fully aware of the very
serious humanitarian consequences of the Israeli
military operations. They inflict new trials on the
Palestinian people, who are victim to a blockade and
are being gradually deprived of the most elementary
means of subsistence. The restrictions imposed on the
activities of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and other medical and humanitarian
institutions are unacceptable. Equally unacceptable are
the repeated violations of the right to consular access
for nationals of third States in danger.

For a long time France has been in favour of
deploying international observers. It proposed this idea
in this Chamber 18 months ago. The present
circumstances, tragically, lend increased relevance to
this proposal. The presence of these monitors would
serve the interests of the Israeli population as well as of
the Palestinian population. This proposal, which is
increasingly supported, could complement the
proposals of General Zinni and assist in the
implementation of the Tenet and Mitchell plans. It
would facilitate the resumption of political negotiations
by contributing to a return to calm. The Secretary-
General rightly emphasized that this idea should be
placed at the forefront of the work of the Security
Council. Perhaps we should go even beyond that and
give serious consideration to deploying an interposition
force to accompany the implementation of the Security
Council resolutions. The question deserves to be posed
from now on.

The situation poses a considerable risk to the
entire region. France is extremely concerned by the
renewal of tensions observed on the border between
Lebanon and Israel. In a presidential statement of 18
June 2000, the Security Council confirmed that Israel
had withdrawn from Lebanon. Recent attacks
originating from Lebanese territory are unacceptable.
Any violation of the blue line, in either direction,
should cease. France calls on all parties involved to
demonstrate the greatest possible restraint.

France encourages the diplomatic efforts being
made by all, and particularly those of the "quartet".
The "quartet" must have access to President Arafat. It
should be able to play its full role, in unity and in the
service of peace. We hope that the United States will
once again become involved further in the search for a
solution to the conflict. The Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the European Union met in Luxembourg to
examine the means that would make it possible to
escape the spiral of violence and restore the conditions
for a resumption of dialogue. As my European
colleagues have indicated, our Ministers have decided
to immediately dispatch to the region Mr. Pique,
Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs, on behalf of the
European Union, and Mr. Solana, the High
Representative, to meet with President Arafat and
Prime Minister Sharon and to demand the immediate
implementation of resolution 1402 (2002). The efforts
of all must converge towards our common objective: a
halt to the confrontations and the resumption of
negotiations.

In two weeks the Security Council has adopted
two important texts, resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002). These two resolutions show the way towards a
de-escalation, ceasefire and resumption of political
talks. There are no other paths towards peace.

