Mr. Radebe (South Africa): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, at this
historic meeting, and we thank him for his statement.
We also thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing.
We welcome the statements by His Excellency
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the
Republic of South Sudan, and His Excellency
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of the Sudan.

On behalf of the Government and people of South
Africa, we congratulate the Government and people of
South-Sudan on the independence they achieved on
9 July 2011. That was indeed a historic moment for the
African continent and the people of South Sudan in
their struggle for self-determination. For years, the
people of South Africa, on the basis of our own history,
have identified with the aspirations and desire of the
people of South Sudan for independence, freedom,
justice and self-determination.

On 9 July, the Government of South Africa
officially recognized the Republic of South Sudan as a
sovereign and independent State. We hope that the
independence of South Sudan will serve as an
inspiration to the millions of oppressed peoples across
the globe who continue to suffer under occupation and
colonialism.

The signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), in 2005, was a major achievement
for the people of South Sudan in their struggle for
freedom, as well as in the international community's
efforts to bring about a peaceful end to the conflict in
the Sudan. The holding of elections in April 2010 and
the referendum in January 2011 were significant
milestones in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We commend the
leadership of both the Sudan and South Sudan for their
commitment and partnership in the successful
implementation of these key pillars of the CPA.

The date of 9 July will go down in history as a
significant day when the world witnessed the closure
of one of the most painful chapters in the lives of the
Sudanese. The day equally marked a new beginning
filled with hope and expectations, as South Sudan
became a new independent and sovereign State. This
achievement is a tribute to the late Mr. John Garang,
who once stated,

"I and those who joined me in the bush and
fought for more than 20 years have brought to
you the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on a
golden plate. Our mission is accomplished. It is
now your turn, especially those who did not have
a chance to experience bush life".

We pay special tribute to this great African
revolutionary, who unfortunately did not live to join
his fellow compatriots in celebrating this milestone in
the implementation of the CPA.

We congratulate both President Al-Bashir and
President Salva Kiir Mayardit for the exceptional
leadership they have demonstrated in the six years
since the signing of the CPA. We welcome the
statements delivered by both Presidents in Juba on the
day of independence. Those positive statements inspire
hope and bode well for reconciliation and the
strengthening of bilateral relations between the two
sovereign and independent States, which are bound by
a common history and share a common destiny as
neighbours.

South Africa is cognizant of the multiplicity of
challenges that the new State faces immediately after
its birth. South Sudan is one of the most
underdeveloped and poverty-stricken nations in the
world. We are certain, however, that the same amount
of bravery and courage displayed by the people of
South Sudan in their struggle for independence will
stand them in good stead as they seek to address all the
socio-economic challenges that still lie ahead.

On the political front, there are still key
outstanding CPA issues that need to be addressed. They
include the final status of Abyei and the continuing
tensions in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
We should not allow these outstanding issues to reverse
the gains registered thus far.

South Africa welcomes the Agreement signed
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area, which paved the way for the Security
Council to deploy the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei. We would like to underscore,
however, that the resolution of the Abyei question will
go a long way towards consolidating peace and
stability in the two Sudanese States. In this regard, we
encourage both parties to reach a lasting agreement on
Abyei and to resolve the situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

We are encouraged by the firm commitment and
desire of both parties to reach an agreement on all
these pertinent outstanding issues. We are cognizant of
the positive impact which the successful resolution of
these issues will have in laying the foundations for
peaceful coexistence and good-neighbourliness. We
will continue to support the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
leadership of President Mbeki, to assist the two States
in resolving all outstanding issues without delay.

The fact that the Republic of the Sudan was the
first State to recognize the independence of the
Republic of South Sudan was not only a symbolic but
also a further goodwill gesture of brotherhood and
friendship. In January this year, the African Union
Heads of States and Governments adopted a solemn
declaration extending their solidarity and that of the
entire continent to the people of the Sudan, who have
taken the unprecedented and generous step of
accepting self-determination for their brethren. The
declaration further stated that Africa legitimately looks
forward to the complete normalization of relations
between the international community and the Republic
of the Sudan to ensure that all the peoples of the Sudan
can enjoy peace, dignity, democracy and development.

We cannot overstate the role played by the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council, the African
Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the entire international community in
general towards lasting peace and stability in the
Sudan. South Africa would like to make a clarion call
on all those who have been involved in these efforts to
continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people
of South Sudan as they embark on a journey of State-
building, as well as for their solidarity with the
Republic of the Sudan as they deal with the new reality
created by the emergence of a new neighbour.

In this regard, South Africa welcomes resolution
1996 (2011), adopted last week by the Council,
establishing the new United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. We are particularly pleased
with the integrated nature of the new Mission, with a
focus on peacebuilding and support for development
based on the principle of ownership. The Mission will
play a significant role in supporting the new State in
laying a foundation for sustainable development.

For our part, South Africa will continue to assist
with the means at our disposal in building on the
technical capacity-building programmes of the past
five years. The sister peoples of both South Sudan and
the Republic of the Sudan can continue to count on our
support to help build and consolidate lasting peace and
stability in that part of our continent. Together with our
IBSA partners, India and Brazil, we have committed to
mobilizing our own resources to support development
projects both in the Sudan and in South Sudan through
the IBSA Poverty Alleviation Fund.

In conclusion, we are of the firm View that the
resolution of the conflict in the Sudan will contribute a
great deal to the comprehensive resolution of all the
conflicts on the African continent. In this regard, we
salute the outstanding work of the African Union High-
Level Implementation Panel led by our former
President Thabo Mbeki. We also pay tribute to one of
our own compatriots, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios, for the exceptional
manner in which he discharged his duties. We are
grateful to the women and men who have served in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan since its first
deployment. In spite of the harsh and challenging
conditions under which they served, they dedicated
themselves to the noble cause of peace and stability, at
times making the ultimate sacrifice.

To the people of South Sudan, I say: "Your time
has indeed come. It is now your turn".

