Mr. Tekaya (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Let me
at the outset express my delegation's deep appreciation
to the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the considerable
work it has done under the mandate given it by the
Security Council.

The Panel has just presented to us an important
addendum to the report that was submitted in April
2001. The two documents, taken together, represent a
very useful reference tool.

I should like also to welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and the United Republic of Tanzania. Their
participation attests to the importance they attach to the
matters we are considering. We listened very
attentively to the explanations they have given us,
which the Council will duly take into account in its
deliberations on this matter.

We welcome the initiative of engaging in a frank
and constructive dialogue with the countries of the
region about the prospects of moving ahead with the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the

S/l'V.4437

 

Congo, in particular given the fact that our meeting is
being held at a time when the momentum of the peace
process - which is holding steady - needs to be
strengthened further, so that it can reach the point of no
return.

Last month the Council held a meeting with the
Political Committee that led to important decisions on
the deployment of phase III of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo - whom my
delegation would like to thank warmly for the kind
words he addressed to Tunisia, an outgoing member of
the Security Council - has just provided us with
important information about the Abuja meeting on the
inter-Congolese dialogue. In this context, we
encourage the Congolese parties to continue their
efforts in order to ensure a successful outcome to the
dialogue.

We welcome also the contacts undertaken
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi with a View to normalizing their relations.
This could certainly help in restoring peace to the
region.

We encourage also all bilateral and multilateral
initiatives for dialogue among the States of the region,
because this would speed up implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and lay the foundation for
peace, security and stability in the Great Lakes region.

The addendum submitted to us by the Panel of
Experts confirms that the systematic exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues, and it confirms a very clear link between the
continuation of the conflict and the illegal exploitation
of the resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The Panel believes, however, that it would be
unrealistic to hope that this exploitation could end
before the conflict is settled. We agree with that View,
and we believe that the Council has a very basic
responsibility in that connection.

The Panel of Experts offered conclusions and
recommendations that are very important for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for the region.
We must carefully study those recommendations and
conclusions, as should the parties involved.

We believe that the Council should take a dual
approach. It should consider the recommendations of
the Panel of Experts with a view to taking the right
decisions thereon, so as to have the desired impact on
bringing to an end the plundering of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and also
bringing about an end to the conflict. Such measures
should be well thought out. We believe that this should
be done in parallel with ongoing efforts to help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo re-establish full
sovereignty throughout its territory and over its
resources and to help it in its efforts towards
reconstruction and economic recovery.

It bears repeating that the main aim of the
Council is to put an end to the war and to promote
peace and security throughout the region. Indeed, we
believe that any action taken by the Security Council
must encourage the parties to effectively implement
Council resolutions and to take concrete steps to move
the peace process forward.

We believe that it would be useful to extend the
mandate of the Panel of Experts; that would enable us
to continue to follow the situation on the ground,
thereby enabling the Council to fully assess the
situation.

We attach the greatest importance to ending the
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; ending the war once and for
all; and ensuring that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
restored. We also want to see the final, speedy and
complete withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Likewise, we
attach great importance to respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States in the region.

