Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
briefing. For all the excitement there was last week
around the hearings of the candidates for the position of
the next Secretary-General, we are pleased to have the
current Secretary-General still working very closely
with us for many months to come.

Looking back on last week's hearings, it was
heartening to hear all nine of the declared candidates
committing to achieving a two-State solution,
underscoring just how united opinion is on the issue.
And yet the violence in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories continues. The risk of a sudden
deterioration is all too possible. The fundamental
causes of the violence - incitement and the effects of
the occupation - remain. The United Kingdom will
continue to strongly condemn all acts of violence and
terrorism. Both sides must do all they can to calm
the situation. That is particularly important during
Passover, since the recent past has shown how quickly
clashes at Jerusalem's holy sites can escalate and spread.

There is a way out. We all have to work to advance
improvements on the ground and re-establish hope that
a two-State solution is still achievable. Without that,
continued conflict and suffering are inevitable. First
and foremost, progress has to come from the parties
themselves. We have heard on many occasions that they
remain committed to a two-State solution, but too often
that commitment has not been matched by action. Israel
must reverse its damaging settlement policy and cease
demolitions of Palestinian property. The sharp increase
in demolitions this year continues to cause terrible
suffering. Together with the ongoing expansion of
illegal settlements and annexations of land, the physical
viability of a two-State solution is being undermined,
as the Secretary-General reminded us today. If the
Israeli Government really is committed to a two-State
solution, it must reverse its policy.

The Palestinians must also take the necessary steps
to reunite the West Bank and Gaza. The continued
split between the two territories seriously damages the
chances of peace. Reports of large-scale diversions of
reconstruction materials to Hamas are worrying, and
today's report of a tunnel dug from Gaza into Israel
is extremely concerning. We hope that the suspension
of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism will soon
be resolved so as to enable the safe entry of much-
needed construction material. Both parties must work
to improve conditions on the ground and take steps in
line with past agreements to bring a two-State solution
closer. We will continue to support that process and
look forward to contributing to further progress at the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in Brussels.
The continued development of the Palestinian economy
and institutions is vital.

While a return to meaningful negotiations appears
difficult at present, the international community,
including the Security Council, must do what it can to
preserve the viability of a two-State solution and get
the parties back to a position where political progress
is possible. The United Kingdom, as ever, stands ready
to support that effort. To that end, we look forward to
the Quartet's report and welcome further details of the
French initiative. Carefully coordinated international
efforts over the coming months could help to build
consensus on the key threats to a two-State solution
and encourage action to address them and re-establish
a genuine political horizon.

I would now like to turn briefly to Syria. We
welcomed the briefing last week by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, as well as his resumption of
proximity negotiations with the Syrian Government
and the opposition's high negotiations committee in
Geneva. We hope they can build a basis for face-to-face
negotiations following the framework of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015). However, we remain concerned about reports of
ongoing violations ofthe cessation ofhostilities. Regime
offensives seem intent on encircling Aleppo. Their
obstruction of humanitarian aid, especially to Darayya
and other areas of rural Damascus, is worsening the
suffering, and the failure to agree on mechanisms
for the release of arbitrarily detained people is only
prolonging horror for a great many individuals, as
some of us heard at a powerful event last Thursday.
When the Council adopted resolution 2268 (2016), we
demanded that the parties fulfil their commitment to
the cessation of hostilities, including by accelerating
humanitarian delivery and taking confidence-building
measures. Such steps were meant to advance a political
process. The failure to deliver on those points only
undermines that process and erodes the confidence of
the Syrian people.

I would like to conclude by calling on those with
influence on the parties, and especially on the Syrian
Government. We have to leave the regime in no doubt
that it must live up to its commitments, show restraint
and engage honestly with the political process. Until we
see progress on those points, it is right that the Council
should receive regular updates from the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy in a public forum. Those
who challenge or obstruct peace must be heard by all.
There should be no place for them to hide.

