Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): For many months now, the situation in Syria
12-29516
has, understandably, been the subject of the constant
attention and alarm of the international community.
There have been to many casualties and too much
suffering for the Syrian people, with too many
destructive consequences if the crisis continues to
ratchet up - not only for Syria itself but for regional
peace and stability.

From the very beginning, Russia has firmly and
consistently called for the non-use of force by all
parties and has emphasized the need for a political
solution to the problems confronting the country
through an inclusive political dialogue conducted by
the Syrians themselves. Based on respect for Syria's
sovereignty, we have cautioned against destructive
attempts at external interference and against imposing
any kind of illusory fixes.

We supported today's Security Council resolution
owing to the need for a rapid deployment to Syria of
the United Nations advance observer mission. The
resolution addresses requirements both for the
Government of Syria and for opposition groups to fully
cooperate with monitors and fulfil the Annan six-point
proposals. On the initiative of Russia and a number of
other members of the Council, the initial draft
resolution underwent substantive changes to make it
more balanced, appropriately reflect realities and take
into account the prerogatives of the Syrian Government
in receiving the observer mission on its territory.

The observers, which will include a Russian
officer, will face a difficult challenge. They will need a
high degree of professionalism, courage and
objectivity. It is necessary to establish favourable
conditions for the work of the observers, including
from the perspective of ensuring security. We now
await the Secretary-General's early submission to the
Council of specific proposals for launching a broad-
scale United Nations observer presence following
consultations with the Government of Syria.

We also agreed to the resolution based on the
need to support the Annan mission. Russia not only
welcomed the decision of the Secretary-General to
appoint Mr. Annan but, countering those who predicted
the allegedly inevitable failure of the Envoy's mission,
we also provided vigorous and effective support. We
are now at an extremely critical juncture. It is essential
that all Syrian parties, including the armed opposition,
quickly refrain from violence, strictly abide by the
Annan plan and begin to organize a broad-based
12-29516

negotiating process. Russian will continue to be
prepared to make its active contribution to meeting this
challenge.

