Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
Mr. Geir Pedersen and thank him for his first briefing
to the Council.

I sympathize with Geir Pedersen today and express
my solidarity with him in the light of the worrisome
number of preconditions and refusals expressed by
some colleagues - I repeat, by some and not all of
our colleagues - while others have encouraged him
to move forward in implementing his mandate and
carrying out his noble task, which has our approval.

Today, we have heard a staggering series of moody
and selective opinions concerning the mandate of
the so-called Special Enjoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, nearly six years after the beginning of the
Envoy's mission. Six years, and we are still hearing
strange, moody and selective opinions concerning the
mandate of the Special Envoy. Of course, the objective
of those opinions is to stick a spoke in the wheels and
hamper him in his efforts and mandate, while putting
political pressure on him and distorting his objective
reading of the situation in my country. That is why my
advice for my dear colleague Geir Pedersen would be
to reduce the number of briefings that he delivers to
the Council so that he can carry out his noble mission
in accordance with his mandate, which he knows and
understands very well and which we support.

During the Special Envoy's visit last month, he
held useful discussions in Damascus. We affirmed
Syria's readiness to cooperate with him in order to
guarantee the success of his mission and facilitate a
Syrian-led and owned inter-Syrian dialogue for moving
forward with the political process. That is, first and
foremost, a Syrian interest, more so than that of any
other country. In conjunction with that, we affirmed to
him our pursuit of efforts to eliminate terrorism, put an
end to the illegitimate foreign presence across Syrian
territories and preserve the effective maintenance
of Syria's unity, sovereignty and independence. Any
political process that does not take those elements into
account will remain an unrealistic solution without
political prospects.

That said, I would like to recall what the statement
our American colleague has just made, which was
commended by my British and French colleagues,
about the decision of the United States Administration
to maintain an occupying force in part of the Syrian
territory. That was said in the presence of members
of the Security Council, who are responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
mandated to implement scores of resolutions adopted
by the Council, which stipulate that the Council is
unanimous in favour of preserving the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
Syria. The Council's members have affirmed that in
more than 20 resolutions. Nevertheless, today we have
heard our American colleague, commended with pride
by my British and French colleagues, talking about the
decision ofthe United States Administration to maintain
the presence of 200 or 400 intelligence elements and
marine troops on a dear part of our territory.

In that context, I note that we stand ready to directly
consider, with Mr. Pedersen during his next visit to
Damascus, issues relating to cooperation between the
United Nations and Syria, including the formation of
a constitutional committee and the various elements
relating to that. However, it is now clear that those who
are delaying the launch of the work of that committee
are the same parties that are interfering in the internal
affairs of Syria and seeking to impose their agenda
and preconditions on the actions of the committee. In
that respect, we stress that any action pertaining to the
constitution must be founded on the principle that the
Syrian people alone have the right to decide the future
of their country, without foreign interference, given
that the Constitution and all related issues are a purely
sovereign matter, solely decided upon by Syrians.

The first paragraph of every resolution adopted by
the Council on what has been called the Syrian crisis
states that the Security Council reaffirms

u"

1ts strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria and to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations".

Those are the words of the Security Council. That
commitment, which goes hand in hand with the
common denominator that is supposed to bring
us together - namely, respect for the provisions
of the Charter and the principles of international
law, - immediately requires the following.

First, the illegitimate presence of foreign
forces, including American, French, British and
Turkish forces, in all territories of the Syrian Arab
Republic must be brought to an end and the so-called
international coalition must be dissolved so as to end
the war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
by that coalition, including the total destruction
of the city of Raqqa, which was undertaken on the
pretext of eliminating Da'esh there. In addition, much
infrastructure was destroyed that was symbolic of the
development of the Syrian people and took many years
to build.

Any foreign military presence in Syria, without the
approval of the Syrian Government, is a full-fledged
aggression that needs to be ended immediately. That is
how we, as a State, would deal with this issue. In that
context, my country categorically rejects the hostile
and changing statements made by the United States
Administration with respect to keeping a reduced force
in my country, regardless ofthe pretexts given to justify
such presence.

Secondly, the efforts of the Syrian State, its
allies and friends to combat the remnants of terrorist
groups such as Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front, as
well as entities and individuals related to them, must
be supported. Any support for those terrorist groups
must cease. Moreover, work to return foreign terrorist
fighters, including Europeans and others, to their
countries of origin and to hold them accountable for
the crimes that they committed against the Syrian and
Iraqi peoples must be given support. The fundamental
pillar of the terrorist war to which my country has been
subject has always been the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, who were brought to Syria from the
four corners of the globe. Indeed, more than 100,000
terrorists were sent to Syria from more than 100
Member States of this international Organization.

Around five years after the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014), which called for the
immediate withdrawal of all foreign terrorist fighters
from Syria, a European official just told us that "the
return of our terrorist fellow citizens from Syria
represents a danger for my country". That official
has thereby deviated from the propaganda that has
been broadcast by his country for years about those
terrorists being birds of peace and members of the
Syrian moderate opposition. Another European official
just told us that those terrorists are "the enemies of
European nations". That official has also deviated
from his country's years-long propaganda campaign,
which holds that "those are jihadists and friends of the
Syrian people".

Members of the Council recall what Laurent Fabius,
former French Foreign Minister, said in Marrakech on
12 December 2012, to the effect that French jihadists
are doing a good job in Syria, and I now repeat his
words in French in order to help my French colleague
to recall them. Worse still, a third European official
considers that the return of those terrorists to Europe
is an "extremely difficult matter". I would like to
ask this European official why it was easy for some
Governments to recruit, finance, train and send those
European terrorists to Syria.

The irresponsible position regarding the return of
foreign terrorist fighters to their home countries and
their prosecution for what they have done in Syria and
Iraq clearly proves that some countries are afraid of the
information that the terrorists would reveal about the
role of the States that sponsored them. It also shows
that those countries would like their terrorists to
remain a factor of destabilization in my country and
in the Middle East as a whole. They would also like to
continue to invest in those terrorists and recycle them
so that they can be sent to other parts of the world in
the future.

We are not making this up. Some time ago,
the Algerian authorities announced that they had
detained hundreds of terrorists from Da'esh and other
organizations on the Algeria-Niger border, who turned
out upon investigation to have come from Aleppo in
Syria. Who sent hundreds of terrorists from Aleppo
to the Algeria-Niger border? Who provided them with
transportation and logistical support?

Thirdly, in order to bring an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people and give them the opportunity to
return to their normal lives and meet their daily needs,
the coercive economic sanctions, which have had a
devastating effect on all Syrians, must be immediately
and unconditionally lifted. The sanctions have caused
immense losses to our national economy that go far
beyond the value of the humanitarian assistance that
has been offered to Syrians.

Fourthly, the Syrian State must be supported in its
efforts to create an environment conducive to the return
of displaced persons and refugees to their homes,
towns and cities with safety and dignity. I reiterate the
appeal to all those who have left the country because
of terrorism to return and shoulder their national
responsibility to rebuild their country, which belongs
to its entire people.

Our national anthem begins with the words
"Defenders of the homeland, may peace be upon you,
refuse to be humiliated". Those words demonstrate
the commitment of the Syrian people to their political
independence territorial integrity and high appreciation
to the defenders of the country who are its strong
shield, namely, the Syrian Arab Army and the armed
forces that have made enormous sacrifices to preserve
the sovereignty of Syria and the independence of its
national decision-making to oppose foreign interference
and any attempt to undermine the integrity of its land
and people, not only for the last eight years but for
decades before that.

That is why the Syrian Government, which has held
firm over eight years in the face ofterrorism and foreign
interference, is now determined to reject the agendas of
hostile countries. We are determined, now more than
ever, to recover all our territory and liberate it from
terrorism and the illegitimate foreign presence there.

In parallel, we are committed to working towards
a political solution in which Syrians - and Syrians
alone - decide on their future and make their choices
through an inter-Syrian dialogue that is Syrian-led,
without any external interference, in order to guarantee
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.
