The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

We are deeply concerned over the stalemate in
the Middle East peace process and the bleak prospects
for resumption of the peace talks. We hope the parties

concerned will strengthen their belief in the peace
talks, overcome the difficulties and interruptions,
create favourable conditions for an early resumption of
the peace talks. Israel should freeze all settlement
activity and cease the building of the separation wall.
Israel should also refrain from moves that do not
contribute to resumption of the peace talks on the issue
of East Jerusalem.

The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory remains a serious challenge. The
parties concerned should earnestly implement Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) and renounce violence
against civilians. We urge Israel to open all the border
crossings to Gaza and ensure that the region achieves
reconstruction as soon as possible and that its people
can return to normal life.

Internal reconciliation in Palestine is of critical
importance. We hope all factions in Palestine will bear
in mind the long-term interests of the nation and will
work together to strive for the success of the Middle
East peace process. We support the efforts made by
Egypt in this regard.

The international community should redouble its
efforts to push for all parties to build the momentum
for negotiations. We hope the Quartet will play a
bigger role in facilitating the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations. We also hope the Security Council will
contribute more significantly to the Middle East peace
process.

China supports the achievement of the goal of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of
land for peace and the Road Map. China will continue
to make constructive contributions, along with the rest
of the international community, to the achievement of
the two-State solution and comprehensive, just and
lasting peace and development in the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.

