Mr. Inzko: I thank the Council for giving me the
opportunity today to present my fourth report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
thirty-eighth report altogether. I hope that my
presentation will provide a better understanding of the
overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where we
stand now and what challenges we will face in the
period ahead.

It is now exactly 15 years since the Peace
Agreement ending the hostilities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was concluded in Dayton. Since that day,
there has been significant progress in the country and
Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership of and
successful work in the Security Council is just one
example of the many improvements that we have seen
in the past 15 years.

In that respect, it is a great pleasure to have
President Radmanovic' here, representing Bosnia and
Herzegovina in this forum. Let me also take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Radmanovie on his
re-election to the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on assuming the Chairmanship of the
Presidency yesterday.

Let me also congratulate every citizen in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the European Union (EU) decision
earlier this week to allow visa-free travel for all
Bosnians to all the Schengen countries of the European
Union. That is a very significant decision, which shows
the EU's commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European future. But it also demonstrates that Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political leaders can address
difficult reform if they muster the necessary political
will.

Moreover, the regional situation in the Western
Balkans has continued to develop positively. In the
summer, the Croatian and Serbian Presidents made
ground-breaking visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina that
underlined the need for reconciliation and regional
cooperation. As recently as last week, Serbian
10-63264
President Tadie apologized for Serbia's role in the 1991
Vukovar massacre. In a similar fashion, the new
Bosniak member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, Bakir Izetbegovic', offered his own apology
to Serbia for the crimes committed against innocent
civilians by the Bosnian army during the war. Those
are positive acts and gestures of reconciliation, which
have had a positive impact in the region and in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

However, despite the improved atmosphere in the
region, the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains complex. Today, 15 years after
the signing of the Dayton Agreement, there is still
insufficient dialogue and compromise. Sadly,
nationalist agendas inside the country have continued
to prevail over cooperation and compromise. The
European Commission's progress report published just
two days ago accordingly confirmed that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not living up to its potential and that in
the past year the country has only made limited
progress in addressing the conditions for European
integration. Basically, there has been no progress on
key reforms required for Euro-Atlantic integration in
the past year.

Unfortunately, the developments of the past year
are symptomatic of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the past four years. Whereas there
was substantial progress in the first 11 years after the
war, in the past four years there has been stagnation
and time has been largely wasted. The fundamentals of
the country and its institutions, including their
constitutional framework, have been challenged on a
regular basis. Let me give the Council some concrete
examples.

First, there has been a fundamental change in the
rhetoric and verbal attacks against the State. Leading
politicians from Republika Srpska have frequently
referred to the future independence of their entity while
claiming that Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
"impossible country", and therefore not sustainable.
The same leaders have also repeatedly denied rulings
by two international United Nations courts, the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, that
genocide took place in Srebrenica, thus further
increasing tensions. I want to underline that, despite
that rhetoric, the Federation-based parties have stopped
challenging the existence of Republika Srpska almost
entirely. However, the leading Bosnian Croat party, the
Croatian Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
has called for a separate Croat entity. That may not be
realistic, but it is nevertheless unnecessarily increasing
the tensions in the country.

Secondly, the State-level institutions have not
worked to their full potential during the past four years,
due mainly to political obstruction. In comparison with
the previous State-level Parliament, in the period 2002
to 2006, the outgoing Parliament has adopted one third
less legislation.

Thirdly, there has also been a marked increase in
unilateral actions, with the entities adopting and
implementing legislation with little regard for the State
and/or the other entity. Republika Srpska in particular
has adopted a number of laws that challenge European
partnership priorities or that aim to dismantle State-
level reforms. There have also been similar, but less
frequent, developments in the Federation.

The problems to which I have referred have lead
to a political stalemate and clear stagnation during the
past four years. As a result, as confirmed by the
European Commission's progress report, there has been
only limited progress in addressing EU-related reforms.
To name just two, in the past year State-level
authorities have failed to address the December 2009
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights with
regard to discrimination against some citizens in
Bosnia and Herzegovina who are prevented from fully
participating in public affairs and receiving
appointments to certain State-level institutions.

Similarly, a State-level census law has not been
adopted, as the political parties could not agree on the
future implementation of the census results. It will now
be up to the new legislature to deal with this issue. But
it is unlikely that Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able
to hold a State-level census in 2011 together with the
other countries in the region and in the world.

Equally, there has been very little progress in
implementing the objectives and conditions for the
transition or the closure of the Office of the High
Representative that have been determined by the Peace
Implementation Council.

On the State property objective, there has actually
been regression, as the Republika Srpska National
Assembly adopted its own law on State property,
which- if it enters into force - would register all
State property in that entity to Republika Srpska. If the
law is formally enacted, it will make a comprehensive
negotiated solution on State property impossible.
Consequently, that would make the closure of the
Office of the High Representative substantially more
difficult.

Furthermore, similar to the situation with State
property, there has been no progress in addressing the
defence property objective since my last report. As a
result, Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards
NATO has stalled, as it has not been able to meet the
conditions for implementing NATO's membership
action plan. Equally, Republika Srpska authorities
continue to fail to meet the outstanding requirement for
the termination of the supervision of Brcko.

Due to the lack of progress, the Peace
Implementation Council has not been able to decide
about the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, as already foreseen in 2006. The Peace
Implementation Council will meet again later this
month to consider the situation. In essence, however,
the decision about the closure or transition of my
Office depends on the readiness of Bosnian political
leaders to meet the objectives and conditions that have
been set.

Despite the increasingly difficult situation on the
ground and despite the lack of progress in addressing
the conditions for the closure of my Office, in July
2010 I unilaterally reduced my staff by over 20 per
cent. When I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina last
year, my Office still had 220 employees; now it has
160. Of course, many years ago, my Office had 800
employees. I also handed over the responsibility to vet
certain appointed entity and cantonal officials to the
respective local authorities, in a spirit of transition and
more local ownership.

It was in that overall atmosphere that I have
described that general elections were held last month.
The international media portrayed those elections as a
watershed event in the future of the country that will
determine whether it will move forward towards Euro-
Atlantic integration or backwards towards
disintegration owing to increasing calls for secession
coming from the smaller entity.

The Bosnian election authorities conducted those
elections efficiently. International election-observation
missions concluded that the elections were generally
held in accordance with international standards. The
turnout for the general elections was around 57 per
cent, which is the highest turnout in any election since
2002. At the same time, if we compare this election
with the elections in 2006, there was an 18 per cent
increase in the number of voters. This is good news
that shows citizens increasingly care about the future
of their country.

At the same time, the elections were held on the
basis of the current election law, which is not in line
with the European Convention for Human Rights. This
does not affect the legitimacy of the elections, but this
problem must be addressed urgently after the formation
of the new Government.

Let me underline that Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
order to become fully sustainable and to move forward
towards Euro-Atlantic integration, will need political
leaders that are ready to change the way they conduct
politics. Zero-sum politics will need to be replaced by
politics based on compromise and a readiness to meet
each other half way. I cannot overemphasize this point.
This is fundamental for a stable and forward-looking
country. In this regard, the responsibility for what
happens in the next four years is firmly in the hands of
the incoming authorities. They have a choice to make
and, when they make it, they must take responsibility
for what follows.

The choice facing Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
whether it survives as a State or whether it is divided.
It will definitively continue to exist. The partition of
the country or secession are not solutions. If it were
possible to partition Bosnia and Herzegovina
peacefully, it would have happened in 1992. It was,
however, not possible then and it is not possible today.
The partition of the country would also be a triumph
for the Milosevic-led policy of the past. Instead, the
choice facing Bosnia and Herzegovina is whether it
chooses to reintegrate and reform, and in so doing join
the EU and NATO, or whether it chooses stagnation
and isolation.

In light of the situation I have described, there is
still a need for the international community to remain
fully focused on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must
continue to accompany the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the Euro-Atlantic path, and the
international community must make it clear to the
incoming Governments what we expect from them in
the period ahead. As a first step to recreating the
momentum, we must urge politicians to form
Governments at all levels that are focused on the
10-63264
Euro-Atlantic agenda. However, Government
formation - especially at the State-level - may take a
long time, especially since some politicians have made
clear their desire to roll back previously agreed reforms
and to devolve a number of competencies from the
State to the entities.

Furthermore, we must insist very vocally that
Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial integrity and
constitutional framework be preserved. Unfortunately,
this emphasis is still necessary. We must make clear
that only Bosnia and Herzegovina as one country has a
future in the EU and NATO and that rhetoric about
Bosnia and Herzegovina being an impossible State
must stop.

Beyond those basic issues, we need Bosnia and
Herzegovina to progress with urgency towards both the
European Union and NATO. This is in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's interest as well as in the international
community's interest. In this regard, we should
strongly encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to address
the main problems identified in the European
Commission's progress report, such as the European
Court of Human Rights ruling, the census law and
other key European partnership priorities. We should
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to address the five
objectives and two conditions that have been set for the
transition and closure of the Office of the High
Representative. Finally, we should encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina to start a step-by-step process of
constitutional changes in order to make a country that
is self-sustainable and efficient in dealing with the
challenges of Euro-Atlantic integration. We are
speaking here not of the centralization of a State or the
strengthening of centralized institutions; we are
speaking here of strengthening the efficiency of State
institutions.

In 10 days, we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. In this context, we
need to ensure that we do not leave the job in Bosnia
and Herzegovina unfinished. As I have argued before,
the presence of the European Union Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR) with an executive mandate
is still important. I must underline that it is important
that sufficient troops be left on the ground to provide
adequate levels of reassurance to the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In this respect, I strongly recommend
the renewal of the Security Council resolution on
EUFOR next week.
10-63264

Our continued attention on Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach, where Bosnia and Herzegovina can
move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration under its
own steam - and that means with full ownership and
the full responsibilities that go along with it. I am truly
convinced that this possibility can become a reality,
and I will, as High Representative and also as the
Special Representative of the EU, continue to dedicate
all my efforts to assisting and supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts in this direction. I also count on
the continued support of the Council in this regard.

