Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom very much appreciates your presence
in the Chair, Sir, and the contributions already made in
this debate.

I should like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

We all owe a debt to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for the work that has
been done under difficult conditions, including limited
personnel and the devastation caused by tropical storm
Jeanne. I would like to express our particular thanks to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Juan
Gabriel Valdes for his contribution, to the Brazilian
force commander, to the Canadian police commissioner
and to all troop-contributing countries.

The debate has focused on three priority issues,
and they are the obvious ones for a post-conflict State.
First is the need for a political evolution towards a
democratic end State and for elections, which Minister
Miller described as a critical way station on the path to
democracy. Secondly, there is the need to create a
secure State in which, eventually, the responsibility for
law and order will rest with the Haitians. Thirdly, there
is the need for economic development, which must go
hand in hand with the others in order to improve the
living conditions of the people of Haiti. Those three
objectives require a coordinated delivery of services by
the United Nations and its agencies on the ground in
the country, reinforced by the neighbours, the regional
organizations and bilateral donors.

The United Kingdom fully supports the Transitional
Government. It is important that all necessary effort be
made to move towards a lasting, secure and stable
environment in Haiti. In order to achieve that, it is
essential that all democratic elements in the country
have the opportunity to participate in the transitional
process and the elections, including those members of
the Lavalas party who have renounced violence.

The United Kingdom Government remains
concerned by the human rights situation in Haiti. It is
essential that those individuals who are and have been
involved in human rights violations not have any place
within the Government or associated bodies.
Establishing an effective and respected Haitian
National Police force, the officers of which are subject
to thorough vetting, will be an important step towards
improving that human rights record.

On security, as others have said, further steps are
needed, especially on disarmament, demobilization
and - the key element - the reintegration process.
Disarming the gangs that operate throughout much of
Haiti is crucial for the creation of a stable future.

Through the United Kingdom Department for
International Development, we are financing
development activities in Haiti and, of course, we
support Haiti through the European Union and World
Bank programmes. The long-term commitment of us
all to Haiti is essential for a successful future, and in
that regard we particularly welcome the assistance of
the regional organizations and the cooperation of
neighbouring countries, as we have heard today.

If I may, however, I should like to end by saying
that Haiti should serve as a potent and salutary
example to us. Its problems in the 19905 necessitated a
major United Nations operation, but we did not stay
long enough to achieve durable success. This time, the
United Nations and the international community need to
stay the course. But more generally, the United Nations
and the Security Council need better to address
impending threats before they become a reality in
individual countries. We need to give a higher profile
to the work on conflict prevention and to support those
countries at real risk of instability. Hence, the
importance for all of us of the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, with its
proposal for a more a coherent approach by the entire
United Nations family to the range of issues which
actually comprise the conflict spectrum. I very much
hope that that work, too - like progress on Haiti -
can develop in 2005.

