Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to welcome and thank
you, Sir, for presiding over a meeting of the Security
Council once again. I would like to welcome the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
Mr. Maas, and thank him for attending this meeting. I
thank Mr. Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, and
Mr. Maurer, President of the International Committee
ofthe Red Cross (ICRC), for their briefings. We listened
attentively to Ms. Bellal's briefing.

Seventy years ago, in the aftermath of two world
wars and after painful reflection, the international
community came together, revised and made
improvements to the Geneva Conventions and further
developed and supplemented them by adopting the
Protocols Additional. The principles of humanity,
differentiation, military necessity, proportionality
and prohibition of reprisals were established, with
protection at the centre. These shining principles of
humanity received universal support from all countries
in the world in a strong and important manifestation
of multilateralism. Two decades ago, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict was added to the agenda of
the Security Council, paving the way for the further
development and consolidation of the principles of
international humanitarian law.

At present, the international security situation
remains grave and fraught with new dynamics.
Traditional and non-traditional security threats are
intertwined. Armed conflicts in some regions have
become protracted or have even escalated, causing
serious concern to the international community.
Promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes through
dialogue, upholding international humanitarian law
and carrying forward the international humanitarian
spirit are of great significance. China would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, the Governments concerned and the parties
to a conflict must earnestly fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Governments in
all circumstances bear the primary responsibility for
complying with international humanitarian law, and
this role is irreplaceable. The conduct of the parties
to a conflict in disputed areas should be governed
by international humanitarian law. In situations
where conflicts are inevitable, the principles of
international humanitarian law should be upheld to
prevent the indiscriminate use of force or acts that
disregard humanitarian consequences. Any violation of
international humanitarian law should be investigated
and punished according to the law.

Secondly, the international community should
play a constructive role in helping the relevant parties
to strengthen capacity-building in implementing
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. China appreciates the efforts of the ICRC in
adhering to the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and independence and its long-standing contribution to
the wide dissemination and effective implementation
of the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols
Additional. Humanitarian agencies, on the basis of full
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned,
should promote humanity, compassion and dedication
and engage in training, legal consultancy, technical
support and experience-sharing to ensure the effective
implementation of the principles of international
humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the implementation of international
humanitarian law should be strengthened with a focus on
enhancing the effectiveness ofthe existing mechanisms
of international humanitarian law. At present, the
continuous development of cybertechnologies,
artificial intelligence and high-tech weapons and
the frequent occurrence of non-international armed
conflicts and terrorist attacks pose challenges to
the implementation of international humanitarian
law. The international community should proceed
from the practical needs of applying and complying
with international humanitarian law and build on the
consensus among countries to reach a broad agreement
on addressing current challenges and strengthening the
implementation of international humanitarian law.

Fourthly, the Security Council should attach
great importance to tackling the underlying causes
of conflicts by addressing both the symptoms and
root causes. Conflict prevention, reduction and
resolution and the peaceful settlement of disputes are
the fundamental approaches to upholding the spirit of
international humanitarian law, focusing on protection.
At the heart of the collective security mechanism, the
Security Council should earnestly fulfil its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security and encourage parties to a dispute to fulfil
their obligations to implement Council resolutions and
resolve conflicts through dialogue, consultation and
political negotiations.
The international community should establish a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security concept, build partnerships by way of
choosing dialogue over confrontation and partnerships
over alliances and create a world of lasting peace and
universal security. We should build a community of
a shared future for humankind, advocate for a global
governance concept of extensive consultations, joint
contributions and shared benefits and strive to create a
peaceful and stable international environment.

China was among the first countries to accede to
the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional.
Over the years, the Chinese Government has been
taking proactive and useful measures to implement,
study and disseminate international humanitarian law,
including strengthening relevant domestic legislation,
conducting training and advising in the army and
carrying out international humanitarian law education
and awareness-raising activities throughout society.
The National Committee on International Humanitarian
Law ofthe People's Republic ofChina was established in
2007 to promote the dissemination and implementation
of international humanitarian law in China. China
stands ready to continue to work with all parties to
make greater contributions to the development and
implementation of international humanitarian law.

