Mr. Mansour: On behalf of the State of Palestine,
I congratulate Kazakhstan on assuming the Security
Council presidency and express appreciation to
you, Sir, for your able leadership of the Council's
important agenda. We also thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and

Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing.

I also extend our warmest congratulations to the
new elected members of the Security Council - Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, the Netherlands,
Peru and Poland - and wish them every success in
upholding their responsibilities in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the Council's
resolutions as they collectively seek to fulfil the duty to
maintain international peace and security.

We also renew sincere appreciation to the countries
and delegations of Egypt, Italy, Japan, Senegal, Ukraine
and Uruguay upon completing their terms, during which
they served with exemplary commitment, competence
and wisdom. We recognize their countries' contributions
to the Council's efforts to address the many critical
issues on its agenda, including the question of Palestine,
throughout their tenure and in the face of many crises.
Those contributions were most recently reflected in the
vote taken by the Council on 18 December 2017 on the
draft resolution (S/2017/1060) submitted by Egypt, as
the Arab representative on the Council, on the status of
Jerusalem. While the draft resolution was, regrettably,
vetoed (see S/PV.8139), we remain grateful for the
honourable stance taken by the overwhelming majority
of countries in reaffirming the relevant resolutions and
the key principles to Palestinian-Israeli peace that are a
matter of international consensus.

Looking back, the year 2017 ended on a
disheartening note, as we bore witness to decisions
denigrating the rights and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people and dismissing the global consensus
that has prevailed for decades based on the Security
Council's resolutions on Jerusalem and the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict in its entirety. At the same time,
however, we found solace and hope in the resounding
rejection of such decisions and in the unequivocal
reaffirmations - here in the Chamber, in the General
Assembly and in capitals around the world - of the
relevant resolutions, including, inter alia, resolutions
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016); of respect for
the legal, political and historical status of the city of
Jerusalem; of East Jerusalem's status as occupied and
as an integral part ofthe rest of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967; of respect for the historical
status quo at Al-Haram Al-Sharif and of Jordan's
custodianship of the Muslim and Christian holy sites
in the city; and of fundamental positions and principles
recognizing Jerusalem's special status, sensitivity and
centrality to peacemaking, and hence its designation
among the final-status issues to be resolved for the
achievement of ajust and lasting peace.

Assumptions that all of that could somehow
be skirted, or that peace could be achieved
otherwise-whetherunilaterally orbyillegalimposition
of facts on the ground - are faulty assumptions at best,
and dangerous and reprehensible at worst.

Our position rejecting the 6 December 2017 decision
on Jerusalem by the United States Administration
has been fully conveyed to the Council and remains
unwavering. We remain insistent with regard to respect
for the law and our rights, and we reject that unilateral,
provocative decision, which directly contravenes the
Charter and United Nations resolutions on the matter.
That decision is null and void and has no legal effect
on the status of Jerusalem. We welcome the General
Assembly's decisive affirmation in that regard on
21 December 2017 (see A/ES-lO/PV.37) and reiterate
our deep appreciation as well for the actions undertaken
by the Arab Ministerial Council, the Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries in response to that crisis.

In response to repeated distortions of our position,
I am compelled to clarify further. Our position is not
intended as disrespect and should not be interpreted
as such by anyone. On the contrary, it is a position
rooted in full respect for the law, for the principles of
justice and equity, for the Charter, for the Council, for
the Assembly and for the decades-long international
consensus on the parameters of a peaceful solution.
It is a position of respect for the legitimate national
aspirations of our people, who have been so patient and
steadfast in spite of the grave injustice they continue to
endure. It is a position of respect for the human rights
and dignity of our people, which we cannot allow to
be denied. No price tag can be put on the rights and
dignity of any people. They cannot be quashed by
threats, intimidation or punitive action. Such attempts
must be rejected by all who seek peace and justice and
who truly believe in international law as the path for
their realization.

We will therefore remain resolute on three counts:
in calling for the application of international law to the
question ofPalestine in all ofits dimensions and without
exception, in our historic pursuit of the inalienable
rights of our people and in our commitment to peace
and coexistence.

Nothing that we have done in the recent period or
at any other point in the long years of the Middle East
peace process should be misconstrued or cynically
portrayed as a rejection of peace. On the contrary,
although it is unacceptable that we - the aggrieved
party, the occupied people, dispossessed, colonized
and brutalized - face demands to repeatedly prove
our worthiness to be granted inalienable human rights,
including to be a free people in our own land, we have
consistently demonstrated our good faith and our
commitment to peace.

We have done that despite the enormous sacrifice
we have been asked to make in the context of the historic
compromise devised by the international community
in the form of the two-State solution along the 1967
lines. We accepted that compromise 30 years ago, in
1988, and have adhered to it ever since throughout
every phase of the peace process, from Oslo forward.
We have emained committed even in the face of the
duplicity, bad faith and illegal policies and practices
by Israel, the occupying Power, destroying not only the
two-State solution, inch by inch and day by day, but
also destroying the very belief that peace is possible.
That cannot be reasonably denied by anyone.

It is therefore appalling to witness the resurgence
of claims by the Israeli Prime Minister and other
Government officials that the President of the State of
Palestine, President Mahmoud Abbas, is not a man of
peace. Exploiting the current circumstances and the
anger and resentment they have caused, they are again
attempting to distract the international community
and evade responsibility for the political deadlock and
deplorable situation on the ground by making such
false, shameful claims about the Palestinian side. We
have seen such demonization before; it is repugnant and
we firmly reject it.

History and facts speak for themselves, and
such claims could not be farther from the truth.
The commitment of President Abbas to diplomacy,
international law, negotiations and non-violence as the
means for achieving a peaceful and just solution that
would realize the rights of the Palestinian people and
their legitimate aspirations to live in freedom, dignity
and security in their homeland, while coexisting side by
side with Israel in the context of a two-State solution,
has been demonstrated time and time again.

President Abbas continues to actively consult with
capitals across the globe, having just visited Brussels
several days ago and Amman, Ankara, Addis Ababa,
Cairo, Beijing, Berlin, Madrid, Moscow, New Delhi,
Paris, Washington, DC, and elsewhere over the past
year. He has also received delegations nonstop in our
continuing search for peace. That has been his life's
work, and the Palestinian leadership has conformed
to it, in word and deed, for decades. Doubting that, in
the storm of provocations and schemes to which we are
currently being subjected in response to our firm stance
on principle, reveals utter ill intent and is unethical
and offensive.

Against the backdrop of those developments and the
ever-worsening situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and in
our refugee camps throughout the region, it would be
an understatement to say that the Palestinian people
are facing an existential crisis. We have rung the alarm
bells before, to no avail. Yet we are compelled by the
gravity of the situation to do so again today. We do that
with the deep conviction in the justice of our cause and
concern for the plight of our people, but also with the
abiding conviction in the power of international law
and the role of this Organization to deliver us to justice
and a peaceful end to the conflict, which has inflicted
such suffering and tragedy.

Right now, the world is witnessing in shocking detail
the dehumanization of the Palestinian people - their
subjugation and deprivation, attempts to erase their
history, heritage and identity, and the systematic
destruction of their generations-old communities,
their will and their hope, with no end to that travesty
on the horizon. Our stand is therefore neither a case
of brinkmanship or posturing. This is about people's
lives - in this case, about an entire nation.

It is a crisis that unquestionably concerns our
very existence in our national homeland, our rights,
including to self-determination and return, and our
survival as a people. And, as in similar crises in history,
it is entirely man-made and is made worse every day
by man's decisions, by greed, cruelty and might over
right, while tormenting innocent children, women and
men and determining their fate. Their crime? It is their
ethnicity as Palestinians, and their religion as Muslims
or Christians, as non-Jews, and their insistence on
living in freedom and dignity in their homeland.

For that, they are openly degraded and demonized
by the occupying Power and its people, who are incited
against them to the point of outright extremism and
terror. They are forcibly driven from their homes
and land by a violent, oppressive occupation that is
unrelenting in its colonization, fragmentation and
annexation of their territory, with settlements and
the feverish pace of the wall's construction. Their
human rights are trampled, and they are besieged and
blockaded in a massive form of collective punishment.
They are arrested, detained and imprisoned. Even
children are not spared, as we heard from Mr. Mladenov
this morning, We witnessed such horror in the plights
of a 16-year-old girl, Ahed Tamimi, and a 16-year-old-
boy, Malik Al-Jawabra, who, along with the hundreds
of other children, were abducted from their homes, held
captive by the occupation and tried by the only juvenile
military court in the world.

All of that is being done under the pretext of
security and religious edicts, whereby any means, no
matter how brutal, immoral or illegal, are justified in
the ongoing pillage, displacement, humiliation and
torture of the other. Even in this Chamber, the highest
multilateral and political security body, and in a secular
Organization established on the base of international
law - our one common language - we are subjected
to biblical preaching and the denigration of the rights
of an entire people on the basis of religious ideology
and the premises of supremacy and exclusivity. That
not only contradicts international law and human
rights, but sets a dangerous precedent in this Council
extending far beyond the question of Palestine.

The purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the very reason for the United
Nations existence are being trampled before our eyes
and without consequence. Once again, the message is
that the law does not matter and that those who follow
the rules will lose, while those who break and mock
them will win. What impact will such a message have
on our youth at this critical moment in the history of
our region and the world? In the same vein, we must
ask: What message is being sent by the reduction of
humanitarian support at this time of need? What is to be
gained from depriving innocent, vulnerable refugees of
subsistence and driving them to desperation? How does
that serve the cause ofpeace and stability? How can the
politicization of humanitarian assistance be accepted?
It cannot in any way.

We appeal for compassion and the upholding
of humanitarian law, principles and collective
responsibilities. We urge donors to enhance support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
and to ensure the continuity of its internationally
recognized, vital humanitarian and development
assistance to more than 5.5 million Palestine refugees
and of its contribution to regional stability in this most
volatile period. We welcome the recent statement by
Commissioner-General Pierre Kr'ahenbiihl and his
call on the international community to stand with the
Agency and respect its long-standing commitments and
shared principles. We also welcome Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres' efforts to mobilize support.

We also recognize the important role of the host
countries and the generous response of some States
to accelerate their support at this time in order to
help the Agency, which was mandated by the General
Assembly, in line with obligations, commitments and
the relevant resolutions, pending ajust solution. We call
on all States to increase their support to the Agency
if possible, highlighting the Commissioner-General's
message that beyond humanitarian aid, UNRWA stands
for hope and respect for rights and dignity, which are
so crucial in the absence of a solution and the growing
despair and uncertainty about the future.

In the span of one year, we have seen hopes for
peace rise and suddenly be dashed. Since the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) one year ago in this Chamber,
the dramatic deterioration of the situation, the escalation
of tensions and the deepening political deadlock have
been cause for grave concern. We continue to believe
that resolution 2334 (2016) represents the best chance
for rectifying the course and salvaging the two-State
solution based on the 1967 lines with the aim of ending
the Israeli occupation that began in 1967, thereby justly
resolving the question of Palestine in all its aspects and
making Palestinian-Israeli peace a reality. That was at
the heart of the urgency of the resolution's adoption and
its unanimous global welcome at the time - with the
exception of Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and his
Government, who stand in obstruction of the two-State
solution and all peace efforts.

The failure to implement the relevant resolutions
and to hold Israel accountable in the face of its flagrant
non-compliance and violations only further foster such
impunity, diminishing peace prospects day by day, hour
by hour. Complacency and defeatism in the face of such
crimes and, worse yet, any manner of complicity are
totally unacceptable. In that context, actions violating
relevant resolutions and granting recognition to Israel's
illegal measures in occupied Palestine, including East
Jerusalem, are inexcusable, unlawful and must be
rejected by all.

Now is the time for collective action in response
to the explicit calls made in resolution 2334 (2016),
including for intensification of international and
regional diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace on the basis of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet road map and an end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967.

Now is the time for the international community
to mobilize the political will to implement the relevant
resolutions and to revive the peace option, averting
the grave impact that the continued unravelling of the
situation will have regionally and globally. Recent
developments to the contrary must not dissuade us
from moving forward on that basis, but rather must
strengthen our resolve.

We reiterate the Palestinian leadership's call, as
made at the highest levels at the Palestine Liberation
Organization Central Council last week, for a collective
peace process under international auspices aimed
at achieving a just solution and fulfilling the long-
denied rights of the Palestinian people. It is a fair
request for, despite all our best efforts, it is clear that
unilateral initiatives have failed. The mechanisms for
such a collective process already exist and should be
immediately activated.

We call on the Quartet, bearing in mind its
responsibilities; the Security Council, bearing in
mind its Charter duties and relevant resolutions; and
the United Nations, bearing in mind its permanent
responsibility towards the question of Palestine
until it is justly resolved, to act now, on the basis of
international law and with the tools available to them,
to stem this dangerous downward spiral and salvage the
prospects for peace.

We underscore the stated readiness and capacities of
the European Union and the Russian Federation to fulfil
their respective roles in the Quartet, in accordance with
its Security Council-mandated responsibilities, and
believe that its expansion to include other relevant and
willing international and regional partners would serve
the cause of peace. We urge all peace-loving countries,
large and small, to support our call for collective action
without delay in the interest of peace and justice.

We reiterate our appeal to those countries that have
not yet done so to recognize the State of Palestine on
the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in line with the relevant resolutions, in
respect of the erga omnes right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, and as a significant contribution
to a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
based on the vision of two States living side by side in
peace and security. All States must step up their efforts
to uphold their commitments and obligations to bring an
end to the unlawful and unjust situation that prevails.
No peace initiative will ever succeed otherwise.

On our part, in spite of immense challenges and
growing hopelessness, we shall continue to adhere to
international law and to engage responsibly with the
international community, using all political, diplomatic,
legal and popular means possible to realize the freedom
and independence of our people, restore their rights,
and establish a just and lasting peace. We respectfully
ask that that good faith be reciprocated and that the
Council not let the Palestinian people down at this most
critical existential moment.

