Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting on the status
of the crisis situation in West Africa resulting from
Ebola. My thanks go, too, to Mr. Anthony Banbury,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission on Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER), Mr. David Nabarro
and Mr. Thomas Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross
in Guinea. I thank them for their briefings and above
all for their dedication, and express our admiration for
the work they are carrying out to tackle this serious
epidemic.

Like other speakers, we convey our condolences
to and express our solidarity with the families and
countries of the thousands of victims.

Without a doubt, since our very first meeting with the
Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Ms. Susana
Malcorra, and Mr. Banbury, it was clear that we were
facing a situation demanding an urgent response, given
the many thousands of lives at risk in the countries of
West Africa. Since that very first meeting, the Council
has been keenly aware that cooperation tailored to each
country would be crucial in treating those affected
and preventing the transmission of the contagion to
the region and the world, and that we had to avoid the
mistake of being selfish, stigmatizing, discriminating
or isolating, inter alia, by halting trade, closing borders,
suspending transportation or refusing entry to our
countries to persons coming from the region.

I believe that not only did the Council truly listen
to and act on that message, but that the whole world
paid due heed to these urgent needs, despite some
remaining gaps. Even though there appear at times to
be signs of self-interest or insufficient cooperation,
this is not the prevalent climate - not in reality, not
on social networks and not in the hearts and minds of
our globalized world, which views the Ebola epidemic
not only as a health problem but, as has been said and
as we have heard, as a multidimensional crisis with
horrific humanitarian, economic, cultural and social
consequences in countries that had been devoting all of
their abilities, intelligence, courage and hope in recent
years to the process of human, social and economic
development.

It is surely crystal clear to the Security Council,
having heard these briefings, how urgent the situation
remains. Cooperation is clear - there is no alternative.
We must all do that we can and must. However, many
possible scenarios arising from this extremely complex
crisis remain uncertain; macroeconomic projections
are uncertain, as are the financial impact and how great
the need will be. This is because we cannot extrapolate
projections to conclude how many millions of dollars
will be needed by the end of 2015, and when we do not
know how this tragic situation will evolve or indeed
deteriorate. Nor do we know the consequences and
knock-on effects, beyond the health impacts, of Ebola.
The World Bank, for instance, has estimated that the
impact of the crisis could reach $4 billion by the end
of 2015, while the Ambassador of Jordan noted that it
could reach $36 billion through 2016 and 2017. The only
certain and clear thing is that there are victims, that
we must transform fear into solidarity and that, as we
understood from the very first day that an emergency
meeting was held on this subject (see S/PV.7268),
the need to respond in a coordinated and cooperative
manner is urgent, necessary and indispensable.

We also recently heard from the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the right to food, who said that
the Ebola outbreak ha had severe consequences for
agricultural production, on which two thirds of the
population of West Africa depends. Accordingly, we
should incorporate in our future planning efforts to
ensure cooperation and urgent action to confront the
uncertainty of hunger.

I would like to express our respect for the societies
of the countries of West Africa and their Governments.
It is not just a question of a series of statistics or an
intellectual exercise to say that our solidarity must be
understood as cooperation and as a necessary response
to an emergency. We truly understand the efforts
that all of those countries have made to emerge from
poverty and exclusion. In that vein, I also want to
express our deepest respect for those who are working
at the very heart of the epidemic to put a stop to the
scourge. I also highlight the contribution being made
by many countries and many regional and international
organizations. And I stress the commitment of the
various agencies of the United Nations, the leadership
shown by the Secretary-General and organizations like
Medecins Sans Frontieres, the Red Cross and many
more.

An Argentine doctor who works as a volunteer
with Medecins Sans Frontieres, Carolina Lanclares,
who is out there in the field, spoke clearly about
the logistical challenges. Sometimes when we say
logistical challenges, we picture major investments or
sophisticated equipment. In a recent interview, young
Dr. Lanclares mentioned discovering that were people
infected with the virus in an area that could only be
reached by crossing a river from the closest town, and
that it had been 25 years since a vehicle had crossed
that river. When we talk about complex systems for the
treatment of people infected with the virus, therefore,
we also should bear in mind the day-to-day life of these
people and the possibility more people may fall victim
to technocracies than to the Ebola virus.

Finally, I wish to acknowledge the cooperation
pointed out by the Permanent Representative of China
and that of all countries as well. Why am I mentioning
what the representative of China in particular said? He
mentioned that different countries and organizations
were investing over the middle and long term in the
course of the emergency. I also wish to acknowledge the
United States decision to provide a maximum capacity
treatment centre to assist troop- and police-contributing
countries.

I say this because it has helped us in Argentina to
fight the prejudice, the fear and discrimination that we
very often have to ask the mass media to manage by
exercising the ethics of responsibility. When we can say,
for example, that there is going to be a treatment centre
for those troops and police who are in the field - in the
case ofArgentina, we have troops in the United Nations
Mission in Liberia - that there is also a space to give
them medical care, we can thereby overcome fear - by
cooperating. That is how we overcome prejudice - by
demonstrating that we are not indifferent to people who
are out in the field in United Nations missions.

I know that the Group of 20 (G-20) and Argentina
and your country, Mr. President, a member of the G-20,
have without any doubt participated in the decisions
of heads of State to cooperate, but what I should say
is that Argentina was able to cooperate - I am not
going to say how much in terms of figures - but we
are cooperating by sharing knowledge that arose in a
State-run viral diseases institute, where a technique
for treating the hemorrhagic fever known in Argentina
as mal de rastrojos was developed. The researchers in
that public institute saw that their knowledge could be
transferred and used in the Ebola response, specifically
by treating the sick with a concentrate of antibodies
retrieved from recovered patients.

This transfer of knowledge and the protocols were
taken up by the World Health Organization. I do not
know if that is very much, but I do believe it is useful
because this area of knowledge is what was used to
treat the Spanish nurse, Teresa Romero who was cured
from Ebola thanks to the serum from a nun who had
previously contracted the virus.

It is essential that we continue following this topic
closely. The Security Council must support UNMEER
in the area of our jurisdiction - the missions in the
field - so that they have all the capacity they need in
order to respond to this unprecedented and very serious
situation and to the challenges that all of humankind is
facing.

I wish to conclude by stating that I listened
carefully to all the speakers, as I always do, but the
Permanent Representative of the United States brought
up an intangible dimension - the cultural dimension,
or subjectivity. Mr. Ladsous mentioned it the very first
day. It is not a question of donning a surgical mask for
people to be safe from contagion. It goes much deeper
than that because touching, hugging, kissing and close
physical caring for the sick are prohibited. Therefore, I
offer my great respect to Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Australia, who said that more women
were providing care than men. Indeed, traditionally,
throughout the world, women are those responsible for
the task of providing care. In truth, I want to express
my solidarity with those caring women. When I look at
the Permanent Representative of Liberia, I think of the
enormous challenge that this epidemic presents for all
of humankind and for women who must refrain from
touching, kissing or hugging. That is why cooperation
is not an alternative, it is an imperative, and that is why
responding to this emergency is not an option; it is a
pressing need for all humankind.

