Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you personally, Mr. President, along with
your country, for presiding over the Security Council
this month. I also thank Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for her
briefing to the Council.

At the outset, I wish to affirm the commitment of
the Government of the Sudan to cooperating with the
United Nations organs and institutions that are active in
the Sudan. That cooperation with the Panel of Experts
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan - whose report for
the previous quarter was just presented - continued
throughout the reporting period.

My Government welcomes the fact that the Chair
of the 1591 Committee wishes to visit the Sudan in the
near future. We must come to an agreement on the terms
of reference of her visit. That is the main reason why we
have not yet set the dates for the visit. It is our hope that
the Visit will be an opportunity for the Chair to assess
the situation on the ground and to gather information
first hand so as to enable her and the Committee to
reach sound decisions and positions that are founded
on documented facts rather than non-credible, second-
hand information.

In all of our statements and meetings with the
members of the Council, we have always maintained
that in 2005, when the sanctions resolution on Darfur
was adopted - over 13 years ago - the situation at
that time was completely different from the current
situation. All United Nations reports published by the
Secretary-General or the Panel of Experts over the past
two years have borne witness to the improvement of
the situation in Darfur. That significant improvement
led the Council to adopt resolutions 2363 (2017) and
2429 (2018), stipulating the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) until its mandate comes to an end in
June 2020. That is why we are required to seriously
consider without further delay reviewing the provisions
of resolution 2429 (2018) so that it can be consistent
with the nature of the challenges on the ground.

Restoring the control of the State and its institutions
over all regions of Darfur is at the forefront of these
challenges. That will not take place without a prompt
lifting of the arms embargo imposed on Darfur and a
review of the sanctions resolution. We expect that to
happen very soon.

We stress the readiness of the Government of the
Sudan to maintain its coordination and cooperation
with all regional and international partners in order
to address the security challenges, in particular the
fight against terrorism, illegal migration, illicit human
trafficking and cross-border organized crime, as well as
to strengthen regional security and stability. This will
help the Sudan continue its contribution to peace and
international security while addressing international
problems. I recall what Ambassador Volodymyr
Yelchenko, Permanent Representative of Ukraine, in
his capacity as former Chair of the Committee, said in
his 7 December 2017 briefing to the Security Council,
following a field visit to the Sudan:

(Spoke in English)

"Several Committee members underlined that
the overall situation in Darfur had improved in a
significant way." (S/PV8123, p. 2)

(spoke in Arabic)

In the quarterly report he submitted to the Council
on 27 July 2017, he also said:

(spoke in English)

"As I mentioned in my visit report, I believe
that all United Nations efforts in Darfur, be they
peacekeeping or sanctions, should ideally be
reviewed in parallel in a complementary manner to
reflect the current situation on the ground."

(Spoke in Arabic)

I would also like to mention that the opinion
of the Panel of Experts is consistent with that of the
former Chair of the 1591 Committee, and we believe
that the current Chair agrees with that opinion. The
question is therefore why no practical and tangible
measures have yet to be taken to put an end to this
factual contradiction, which also goes against regular
procedures and established law, since the Security
Council's measures are binding under international
law. We would ask the Council to take specific
measures to eliminate these contradictions between
its own resolutions, stating that the situation in Darfur
has indeed been normalized, followed by a reduction in
UNAMID troops of approximately 75 per cent, and the
fact that the sanctions imposed on Darfur that have not
yet been lifted. This is a strange situation and should
be rectified.

In conclusion, we reaffirm, as usual, the commitment
of the Government of the Sudan to cooperating with
the Panel of Experts, the 1591 Committee and various
United Nations agencies and organs in order to address
the situation in Darfur. Furthermore, we affirm * and
perhaps Council members will agree with us - that we
reject attempts by the Panel of Experts, the Committee
or UNAMID to exceed their mandate under the
resolutions of the Security Council.

When it comes to the Committee, its mandate is
limited, clear and unambiguous. In this regard, I note
the reference in the report before the Council to the
demonstrations that took place in Khartoum. The 1591
Committee has nothing to do with these demonstrations,
since its mandate is to watch over the embargo imposed
by the Security Council in a well-defined geographical
area and in accordance with a well-defined mandate,
based on the resolution that established the Committee.

Finally, on a personal note, I would like to inform
the Council that my term as Permanent Representative
of the Sudan and representative of His Excellency the
President of the Sudan will come to an end next week.
Consequently, it is an honour for me to have addressed
the Council, whose priority is the maintenance ofpeace
and international security, on more than 20 occasions.
On behalf of my country and for the sake of peace,
I hope that I have been able, alongside the members
of the Council, to implement part of the purposes of
the United Nations Charter and to make the Sudan an
example of interaction with the United Nations, while
focusing on the importance and centrality of economic
and social cooperation as the core of international
peace and security.

