Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important open debate. Ireland
aligns itself fully with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union (EU).

Ireland was proud to be a sponsor of resolution 2331
(2016) on trafficking in persons in conflict, adopted
last December. It is crucial that we continue to build on
that momentum.

We welcome the report of the Secretary General
(S/2017/972), as well as his remarks here this morning.
While some progress has been made on this issue, a
great deal clearly remains to be done. We know that
human trafficking is complex in its nature, scope
and causes. Poverty, economic hardship and a lack of
opportunity are of course significant factors in making
people vulnerable to human traffickers. That is why
we must all work to ensure implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. But we also know
that armed conflicts and humanitarian crises increase
people's risk of falling into the hands of traffickers.
Our collective focus on sustaining peace, particularly
in the context of support to conflict-prevention
initiatives at the national, regional and international
level, will also directly contribute to stemming the tide
of human trafficking.

As others have said, it is often the most vulnerable
who are targeted by human traffickers - women,
children, migrants, refugees and displaced persons. In
particular, women and children are more vulnerable
when social, political and legal structures break down.
Trafficking for sexual exploitation is a form of gender-
based violence. That is why we believe that there
should be an increased focus on programmes aimed
at preventing girls from falling prey to traffickers.
The New York Declaration on Refugees and Migrants
commits all States to ensuring that our response to
large flows of refugees and migrants mainstreams a
gender perspective. As a strong supporter of resolution
1325 (2000) and the women and peace and security
agenda, and as current Chair of the Commission on the
Status of Women, Ireland believes that women must be
empowered to act as agents of change in addressing the
issue of human trafficking.

Ireland's commitments to preventing and combating
human trafficking are set out in our national action
plan, which is now in its second phase. We have
contributed substantial funds in support of the fight
against human trafficking. That includes providing
support to the EU's Emergency Trust Fund for Africa,
which has a particular focus on the fight against human
trafficking, as well as the anti-trafficking mechanism
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. We also provide funding to a range of
international organizations and civil-society partners
focused on conflict-related sexual violence around
the world. We believe that raising public awareness is
key to preventing and combating human trafficking.
Civil society has a crucial role to play as a watchdog
in conflict situations, a role that should be respected
and supported.

As the Secretary-General has said, we must
strengthen our efforts to better protect people affected
by conflict and at risk of trafficking and to bring those
responsible for trafficking to justice. That includes
strengthening national responses, as well as working
better together internationally. It also means that the
issue of human trafficking must be embedded in our
discussions on peace and security.

