Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The draft resolution before us today is a most
timely and important Security Council response to the
breakthrough that has occurred in the inter-Tajik settlement
and to the request addressed to the United Nations by the
Tajik parties for assistance in implementing the agreements
concluded between them.

In recent months, the peaceful settlement process in
Tajikistan has become increasingly irreversible. As a result
of the recent meetings between Tajik President Rakhmonov
and the leader of the United Tajik Opposition (UTO),
Mr. Nuri, and of the agreements they have signed, as well
as of the last two rounds of inter-Tajik talks, it has been
possible to achieve a breakthrough towards implementing
national reconciliation. The Russian Federation welcomes
these results and urges the parties to pursue their efforts in
that direction.

An important step in the T ajik settlement was the
signing in Moscow on 8 March of the Protocol on Military
Issues and the joint statement on the outcome of the
Moscow round of inter-Tajik talks. The Protocol, which
was signed by the parties and the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Merrem, contains detailed
measures on the reintegration, disarmament and
disbandment of the armed units of the UTO and on the
reform of the power structures of the Government of
Tajikistan. These basic documents can open the door to
a final settlement.

We understand that the agreements reached remain
fragile. In view of the forthcoming round of inter-Tajik
talks, work must be completed on the protocol on political
issues and other instruments. In these circumstances, the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, has a decisive role to play in consolidating and
implementing the outcome of the negotiations.

We attach particular significance to an early
elaboration by the United Nations of the parameters of its
contribution to the achievement of the inter-Tajik
agreements so that it can render speedy assistance in the
implementation of these agreements immediately after
their entry into force. We consider central to the draft
resolution before us those provisions in which the
Security Council welcomes the inter-Tajik agreements and
expresses its intention to consider the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the manner in which the United
Nations can assist in their implementation, in accordance
with the requests of the parties.

There remain in Tajikistan open and covert
opponents of a peaceful settlement, as attested by recent
terrorist acts, including the taking of hostages and other
steps aimed at the personnel of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan, the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and other international personnel. The
Russian Federation has made great efforts to achieve the
hostages' release; it condemns such acts and supports the
draft resolution's call upon the parties to take rigorous
measures to ensure the security of international personnel,
thereby allowing the international community fully to
resume and to expand its activities in Tajikistan.

The humanitarian situation in the country remains
acute. The civil war has almost completely destroyed the
country's economy. Many Tajiks have been compelled to
abandon their homes, joining the many thousands of
refugees. Together with other countries, Russia is
providing assistance to Tajikistan. We believe that this
nation must be actively supported in its difficult transition
from armed conflict to normal life. We hope that this
appeal will be heeded by all interested parties.

In supporting the noble efforts of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Tajikistan, the
Russian Federation intends in the future - in cooperation
with the United Nations, the Conference on Security and

 

Cooperation in Europe, the observer countries at the
negotiations and all interested States - actively to promote
consistent progress in the inter-Tajik negotiating process
and a final agreement on national reconciliation in
Tajikistan.

