The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Singapore. Several
speakers before me have noted that Singapore is
situated in South-East Asia and is one of East Timor's
neighbours. Singapore is, therefore, particularly
pleased to join all others who have spoken in this
Chamber in celebrating, together with the people of
East Timor and the international community, the
independence of East Timor, which came into effect
just a few hours ago. Given the lateness of the hour, I
do not intend to read the entire text of the statement,
which has been circulated, but let me just summarize
these key points.

First, it is only right that the leaders and people of
East Timor should be commended and congratulated,
first and foremost. They have chosen their destiny and
displayed fortitude and resilience in the face of
adversity to achieve it. From restoring peace and
stability to building public administration capacities,
helping refugees return to reviving the economy, the
leaders and people of East Timor have worked hand-in-
hand with the United Nations with much success. Their
efforts have paid off. The new nation of East Timor has
been born.

Secondly, at the dawn of this new being, the East
Timor leaders have taken the reins of Government with
enthusiasm. The people have shown their readiness to
work with the democratically elected Government. In
one of the widest consultative processes seen
anywhere, almost 40,000 East Timorese, covering
virtually every suco, or village, in the country were
consulted. The end result was a list of challenges that
East Timor faces and has to address head-on - from
education and health to agriculture and the economy, to
helping the poor and national unity.

Thirdly, it is clear from the national development
plan that the leaders and people of East Timor
recognize that independence is only the start of another
long and difficult journey. But they have incisively
come up with a national vision that will guide them on
this arduous voyage. They have great leaders in Mr.
Xanana Gusmao, Mr. Mari Alkatiri and Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta to guide them. Singapore shares the
confidence that the Security Council and the wider
United Nations membership have in the East Timor
Government and people. We wish them all the best in
their quest to build a democratic, stable and viable
State.

Fourthly, even as they embark on this quest, the
East Timorese cannot go it on their own just yet. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) said
in its latest report that East Timor, having a population
of more than 700,000 people, is Asia's poorest nation
with an annual per capita gross domestic product of
$478. Sustained international assistance to bolster the
country's efforts is not only essential, but also
paramount, during East Timor's early years of
nationhood.

The United Nations system, Member States, and
non-governmental organizations have played an
important role in the last two and a half years to bring
East Timor to where it is today. Their efforts are
laudable, and should be applauded. Special tribute must
certainly go to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
personal efforts and his Special Representative Sergio
Vieira de Mello for the outstanding work that he had
done together with his team in the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
The contributions of Member States to UNTAET
should also receive special mention. For East Timor to
succeed, the support of the United Nations and the
international community will continue to be crucial.

Fifthly, the future of East Timor is also
inextricably linked to the future of the region. Good
relations between East Timor and its neighbours are
therefore crucial. The commitment of East Timor to
build strong and robust ties with Indonesia is therefore
very much welcomed. So, too, is Indonesia's readiness
to cooperate with East Timor towards building a
peaceful, unified and sustainable society. The visit of
Mr. Xanana Gusmao to Jakarta earlier this month to
meet President Megawati and other Indonesian leaders
and the attendance of President Megawati at East
Timor's independence ceremony are very positive signs
of the maturing relationship between the two countries.

Finally, in conclusion, let me emphasize that the
people of East Timor have made huge sacrifices. The
United Nations has made great efforts to restore peace
to that territory. The international community has made
massive investments in the country. All of us,
therefore, have a responsibility, if not an obligation, to
make East Timor a real success story. We should not
accept anything less. We must run the full course.

We have at this meeting welcomed East Timor
into the community of nations. We must now look
forward with eagerness to East Timor joining the
United Nations family in the not-too-distant future.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council. I wish to say that following
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
attainment of independence by East Timor on 20
May 2002, which marks the culmination of a
process of self-determination and transition that
began in May 1999. The Council pays tribute to
the people and leadership of East Timor for their
efforts in achieving the goal of independence.

"The Security Council affirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of East Timor within its internationally
recognized boundaries.

"The Security Council takes this
opportunity to express its deep appreciation for
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, and notes with
satisfaction the role played by the United Nations
in restoring peace to East Timor, and in building a
solid foundation for a democratic, viable and
stable East Timor. The Council commends the
United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) for the important work
that it has done to achieve these important goals.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
support for the leadership of East Timor as it
assumes authority for governing the new,
sovereign State of East Timor. The Council
recognizes that the people and democratically
elected Government of East Timor bear the
ultimate responsibility for the establishment and
maintenance of a viable State. It expresses its
confidence that the people and leadership of East
Timor will demonstrate the necessary political
will and determination to fulfil their aspirations.

"The Security Council appreciates the
efforts made by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples towards East Timor's achievement of
independence. The Council expresses its
appreciation to the Government of Indonesia and
the Government of Portugal for their cooperation
with the United Nations in concluding the 5 May
1999 Agreement which led to the establishment
of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) to conduct the popular consultation.
It also expresses its appreciation to Australia and
all other countries that contributed troops to the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET)
and the UNTAET, which helped restore stability
following the post-referendum violence.

"The Security Council welcomes the

Government of East Timor's commitment to

develop close and strong relations with Indonesia,
and the Government of Indonesia's stated
readiness to cooperate with East Timor towards
building a peaceful, unified and sustainable
society in East Timor. The Council stresses that
good relations with neighbouring States will be
essential to East Timor's future stability and that
of the region, which are inextricably linked.

"The Security Council is concerned that
challenges to the security and stability of East
Timor remain after independence. It notes with
concern that shortcomings exist in a number of
critical public administration elements of East
Timor in the post-independence period. The
Council reaffirms that a strong international
commitment will be required in East Timor to
ensure continued stability and development of the
country for some time after independence. The
Council expresses its confidence that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), established through resolution 1410
(2002) on 17 May 2002, will help consolidate and
strengthen a stable environment in East Timor.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of complementing the United Nations
peacekeeping contribution with other United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, international financial institutions,
bilateral donors and non-governmental
organizations to assist the people of East Timor to
develop a sustainable social system and economy.
It also reaffirms the continued need for effective
and close coordination among these programmes
and donors to ensure a smooth transition towards
a normal development assistance framework. The
Council appeals to Member States to respond
positively to the urgent appeal of the Secretary-
General to fill vacancies in the Civilian Support
Group. It also urges Member States and other
actors to respond positively to the appeals for
assistance in the development of the East Timor
defence force, police service and justice sector;
and in supporting social and economic
development and poverty reduction.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
day in the near future when East Timor will join
us as a Member of the United Nations and to

working closely with its representatives. The This statement will be issued as a document of

Council notes that the East Timor Government the Security Council under the
today submitted a letter to the Secretary-General S/PRST/2002/13.

requesting the admission of East Timor as a
Member of the United Nations.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
"The Security Council will remain actively present stage of its consideration of the item on its

seized of the matter." agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 17.171.
