Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation notes with great
satisfaction that, after long years of armed conflict and
instability, Central America has now embarked on a stage
of consolidating peace processes and strengthening
democratic institutions and economic recovery. It is one
of the few regions of the world in recent times to achieve
genuine and tangible progress in the settlement of internal
conflicts. This has been possible largely because of the
efforts of the international community, and above all of
the United Nations.

The signing between the Government of Guatemala
and the insurgent movement Unidad Revolucionaria
Nacional Guatemalteca on 29 December 1996 of the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace was an important
event, marking the culmination of a long-standing internal
conflict in that country and the last hotbed of armed
resistance in the Central American region. We are sure
that the achievement of peace in Guatemala, after 36
years of civil war, will promote the strengthening of
stability and security not only there, but throughout all
Central America.

Russia, which has consistently advocated a firm
political settlement in Guatemala, feels that the efforts of
the international community should now be directed
towards strengthening the peace process in that country.

 

For our part, we are prepared to help further in the interests
of favourable external conditions for a successful
completion of that process.

Highest commendations deservedly go to the activities
of the United Nations mediation group in the negotiations
between the Guatemalan parties. We would like to express
to the members of that group our gratitude for their
contribution to achieving peace in Guatemala.
Bearing in mind the requests addressed by the
Guatemalan parties to the United Nations, the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the views of
the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process,
Russia supports the proposal to give to the United Nations
Mission for the Verification of Human Rights and of
Compliance with the Commitments of the Comprehensive
Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala (MINUGUA),
on a temporary basis, a group of 155 military observers for
a three-month period, with a clearly defined one-time
mandate.

In light of what I have said, the Russian delegation
voted for that draft resolution. We regret that it was put to
a vote with such haste, at a time when consultations on the
issue could have been continued.

