Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on a very successful
presidency during the month of May.

First, let me touch upon the Security Council mission
to the Horn of Africa. At such an important juncture in
Somalia's Statebuilding, the mission was both timely
and beneficial. I thank the Egyptian presidency for
taking the initiative to organize that visit. With regard
to the political process, the most pressing issue is the
electoral process. During the meeting in Mogadishu,
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud promised to hold
elections in August in order to build a united Somalia.
In keeping with his word, he issued a presidential
decree regarding the elections on 22 May. It was a
very encouraging development and demonstrated the
difference the Council can make on the ground when it
visits the countries on its agenda.

The Council should continue to do all that it can
in supporting the Somali-led transition process. In
Somalia, after more than 20 years of the absence of a
central Government, it may be difficult for the people
to really recognize the legitimacy of the Government.
Choosing their leaders through elections does not
necessarily mean accepting the State's authority. The
Government should provide security and administrative
and social services to the people as peace dividends in
order to gain their trust. In following the formula of
Abraham Lincoln, the Somalis have built a Government
of the people and by the people, but it remains a big
challenge to turn it into a Government for the people.

Above all, we need to urgently establish a strong
security sector. If State authority is not extended
sufficiently to the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab,
power vacuums will be created and terrorists will take
advantage of them. Strong administrative institutions
also need to be firmly in place. The Federal Government
in Mogadishu will then have authority with substance.
Only a Government with strong institutions will allow
the Council to consider a possible exit strategy for the
African Union Mission in Somalia in the long run.

Japan will highlight the importance of institution-
building in the open debate on peacebuilding in Africa
during its Council presidency in July.

On 3 May, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2286 (2016) on health care in armed conflict,
with 85 sponsors. It was our great honour to co-author
the resolution, together with Spain, New Zealand,
Egypt and Uruguay. A few days after the adoption, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) sent
an open letter to all United Nations Member States. In the
letter, the ICRC welcomed the adoption of the resolution
and urged Member States to reaffirm the importance of
compliance with international humanitarian law and to
take action in accordance with resolution 2286 (2016).
We are glad to hear of the positive reaction on the part
of the ICRC. The situations on the ground in Syria and
other countries, including Yemen, Afghanistan, Libya
and Mali, are still grim. We must remain vigilant and
urge all parties to conflict to abide by the resolution.

In closing, I would like to commend you,
Mr. President, and the entire Egyptian team for your
splendid, very well organized and skilful work.

(spoke in French)

I take this opportunity to wish every success to
Ambassador Francois Delattre during his presidency
next month. He can rely on my team and particularly on
me in ensuring the best outcome of the Council's work.

