The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
begin its intervention by publicly thanking all Council
members and their delegations for their support during
our presidency for the month of February. We would
also like to publicly thank all members of the staff of
the secretariat of the Security Council, in particular
Mr. Movses Abelian, as well as the interpreters,
technicians and other support staff for their full
cooperation during our presidency.

The month of February has been one of intense
work. We are ready to hand over the presidency on
29 February at midnight, as is the custom, to our
brother, the representative of Angola. Over the month,
we promoted our work in a constructive and transparent
fashion, holding more than 21 meetings of different
formats. That number includes three debates, two of
which were open to all Members of the United Nations.
Twenty consultations were held, and six resolutions,
seven press statements and one note by the President
were adopted. In addition, within the framework of
consultations, we considered 14 updates under the item
"Other business".

With regard to the debates held this month, we
would like to begin with the debate held on 11 February
(see S/PV.7620) on the working methods of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, in particular
those of the sanctions committees. That was a very
valuable meeting on the dynamics of the Security
Council. It allowed us, for the first time, to hear those
countries that are currently or have been subject to
United Nations sanctions regimes, and to the Chairs
and former Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, in particular the sanctions committees, as well
as those countries that participated in the 2015 high-
level review of United Nations sanctions.

The outcome of that debate was the adoption of
a note (S/2016/l70) by the President of the Security
Council on the work of the subsidiary organs of
the Security Council, which was distributed on
22 February. In that note, Council members committed
to the implementation of a number of measures.

The first is to improve the transparency of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, including by
encouraging all Chairs to provide non-members of the
Council with interactive briefings, as appropriate, and
to consider any other possibilities for non-members to
provide input to their work. It also includes encouraging
all Chairs to continue to brief the Council in open
meetings, including on relevant reports, as appropriate;
and encouraging them, as appropriate, to provide an
agreed brief summary of the relevant meetings of the
subsidiary organs of the Council to non-members of the
Council, including through press releases. Moreover,
it includes requesting the Secretariat to announce all
meetings and provisional agendas of the subsidiary
organs of the Council to the public in the Journal ofthe
United Nations and on the websites of the subsidiary
organs, and encouraging all Chairs to seek the views
of affected or concerned Member States and to foster
early and periodic engagement and dialogue between
them and the relevant sanctions monitoring teams,
groups and panels of experts throughout the course of
their mandate. It includes, furthermore, encouraging
all Chairs to continue to travel periodically to regions
applicable to their work to seek the views of, and
engage with, affected or concerned States and explain
and promote the objectives of the subsidiary organ's
mandate. The Secretariat will be encouraged to
maintain the translation of all United Nations sanctions
lists into all of the official languages of the United
Nations, and to continue to ensure that the information
on the websites of the subsidiary organs of the Council
is accurate and updated in all of the official languages
ofthe United Nations, including the reports of sanctions
monitoring teams, groups and panels.

The second measure is to improve the process of
the selection of Chairs by, inter alia, undertaking an
informal process with the participation of all Council
members with regard to appointing the Chairs of
the subsidiary organs in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way. The measure also includes
encouraging the early appointment of Chairs of
subsidiary bodies. To that end, members of the Council
will start the informal process of consultations referred
to in the note (8/2012/937) by the President of the
Security Council of 17 December 2012 as early as
possible after each election of members of the Council.
Thirdly, improvement will also be made to
preparing the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. To that
end, the note recognizes the support the Secretariat
provides to the incoming Chairs and asks it to consider
adopting other measures to provide incoming Chairs
and their staff with additional substantive information,
including on methodology, on the work of the relevant
subsidiary body. Outgoing chairs would be encouraged
to provide information to incoming Chairs, in writing
and orally, on the work carried out during their
chairmanship. The note also encourages the holding of
timely consultations between the incoming Chairs and
the teams, expert groups and related groups responsible
for overseeing sanctions.

Fourthly, the note encourages improving the
interaction and coordination among the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council and between the
subsidiary bodies and the Council as a whole. That
includes, among other things, that all Chairs will
be encouraged, in particular those presiding over
subsidiary bodies covering similar themes and
geographic areas, to meet regularly to discuss common
problems, improve best practices and enhance mutual
cooperation, and to request the Secretariat to provide
support to those meetings. Moreover, members of the
Security Council will be encouraged to promote greater
coordination between the Council as a whole and its
subsidiary bodies when thematic issues or situations
involving specific countries are considered.

Fifthly, Council members are encouraged to
continue to consider how to improve the work of its
subsididary bodies.

Venezuela expresses its satisfaction at having
promoted that particular debate aimed at improving
the work of the Council's subsidiary bodies in terms of
transparency, coordination and democracy.

We would also like to mention the open debate
(see S/PV.762l) on the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as a basic element for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
At that meeting, held on 15 February, more than
70 representatives of Member and Observer States
participaed, with our Minister for Foreign Affairs
presiding. Member and Observer States expressed
their opinions with regard to the observance and
respect of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
They stated that in order to ensure international peace
and security, greater efforts needed to be exerted to
promote the purposes and principles of the Charter,
including respect for its provisions. The purposes and
principles - including sovereignty, the equality of
States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States
and refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity and independence of other
countries - are the basic and essential elements to
ensure the full application of the Charter of the United
Nations. And they are essential elements for peaceably
resolving conflicts, thus becoming the path to ensuring
international peace and security.

In similar fashion, we were unambiguous in
emphasizing that attacks on the sovereignty of States,
interference in the internal affairs of States, the
promotion and resort to war as a tool of foreing policy,
among other actions, constituted a threat to the peaceful
coexistence of nations. Many of the statements delivered
underscored the importance of resort to the measures set
out in Article 33 of the Charter and the need for States
abstain from applying coercive measures to conflict
situations that did not represent a threat to international
peace and security. Also emphasized was the role of
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Participants also called
for developing synergies between such organizations
and the United Nations to that end.

The second open debate (see S/PV.7629) held during
our presidency focused on post-conflict peacebuilding
and the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We believe that the statements and
observations made during the meeting will inform the
ongoing discussions at the United Nations on how to
improve the response of the Organization to preventing
conflicts, rebuilding States and ensuring lasting peace.
Some of the main conclusions of the debate included
the need to bear in mind the fact that peacekeeping
activities, aimed at ensuring the outbreak, re-emergence
and continuation of war, require medium- and long-
term measures to help societies immersed in conflict or
emerging from one.

Participants reiterated that peacebuilding required
the sustained political and financial support of the
United Nations over a prolonged period, even after
peacekeeping operations are no longer deployed. In that
regard, it is crucial to overcome social and economic
problems, provide people with a way to make a living
and lay the foundation for broad-based and inclusive
economic growth - the latter being a fundamental
element of any peacebuilding process.

We also noted that the review of the peacebuilding
architecture currently taking place in the Security
Council and the General Assembly required that we
looked at peacebuilding with a broader perspective
and greater determination. What we need now is a new
mindset, not just with regard to the architecture itself
but also the entire focus of peacebuilding as carried
out by the United Nations. Participants also focused on
the need to make greater progress on cooperation on
peacebuilding between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

Furthermore, with regard to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, it is important to point
out that on 7 February Council members held closed
consultations on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's launch of a missile carrying a ground
observation satellite. That launch entailed the use of
ballistic missile technology, in violation of existing
sanctions. Council members unanimously condemned
that event via a press release, which underscored that the
launch, as well as any other carried out by that country
using ballistic missile technology, was a violation of
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013) and
2094 (2013). Council members reiterated their intention
to develop significant additional measures through a
draft resolution in response to the missile launch and
the nuclear test conducted by North Korea on 6 January.

In addition, during our presidency of the Council we
also paid particular attention to the issue of Palestine.
We did so based on the demand by the majority of the
international community that the Council, consistent
with the its responsibilities under the Charter with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security, play a proactive role to address the question of
Palestine with determination and a sense ofjustice. In
that regard, we held three rounds of consultations under
the tiem "Other matters" to discuss that issue. The lack
of political will on the part of some actors to resolve
the question of Palestine in the Security Council has to
date prevented the reaching of a definitive solution to
the more than 60-year-old conflict. We regret that the
calls by the Security Council to put an end to the illegal
occupation and the violations of human rights law and
international law by the occupying Power against the
inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian territories,
as well as for the parties to go to the negotiating
table, have not led to concrete actions to resolve that
complex situation.

On 25 February, we considered in consultations
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories - the West Bank and Gaza - with
particular emphasis on the children who are victims of
that tragic reality. That was the first time that Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
addressed that issue at the Council, during which he
spoke of the lack ofbasic services, medicines, food and
freedoms - all the result of the economic blockade,
siege, policy of expanding illegal settlements and,
especially, the military aggression by the occupying
Power, which has led to the deaths of so many civilians
in recent decades.

With regard to the conflict in Yemen, the Security
Council considered the situation on two occasions, on
16 and 17 February (see S/PV.7622 and S/PV.7625).
The dire reality being endured by this Arab country
ever since the conflict started in March last year
clearly demonstrates that conflicts cannot be settled
with weapons but with a peaceful, negotiated political
settlement. In that regard, we continue to call for an end
to the fighting, including aerial bombings that have led
to loss of civilian life and a speedy deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in this brother country.

That is why we believe that it is critical to honour
the agreements made during the talks held in December
2015 in Switzerland, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a climate of mutual trust to defuse
tensions and thereby ensure better results in talks on a
peace agreement. The meeting held on 16 February on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen was an opportunity
for Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien to deliver
a briefing on the humanitarian situation in the country.
Mr. O'Brien's detailed briefing was particularly useful
for updating Council members on the humanitarian
dimension of the conflict in Yemen, which, according
to information given during the meeting, regrettably
shows that the situation is far from encouraging.

In conclusion, the situation in Syria was addressed
seven times by the Security Council during this month
and covered the political environment, chemical
weapons and the humanitarian situation. In that regard,
the Council continued to closely monitor the peace
talks, paying special attention to the outcome of the
Munich conference on 11 February, during which major

agreements were reached on the ceasefire to start on
27 February, Damascus time. We hope that the Council
will lend its strong support to the initiative. In that
regard, we are awaiting the adoption of a draft resolution
to be submitted to the Council for consideration in the
next few hours, and will assist in finding a peaceful
political solution to the armed conflict. It requires
effort, dedication and determination from the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, in such an important mission.
We are leaving the presidency of the Council with
the belief that we have made our best effort to promote
the cause ofjustice and international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

