The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2265 (2016), renewing for one year
the mandate of the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan, because we are convinced of
the need to preserve the unity of the Security Council
in addressing this important issue, and because the
Council plays a positive role in promoting a negotiated
political solution to the prolonged conflict in that
kindred African country, especially in the Darfur
region. We believe that the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur creates a framework that should serve as the
basis for negotiations among the parties to the conflict,
complemented by such initiatives as the national
dialogue convened by the Government in Khartoum and
the internal consultations in Darfur. We also believe
that the efforts made by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, led by former President Thabo
Mbeki of South Africa and the Joint Chief Mediator,
are essential to ending the conflict.

With regard to the working methods of the Security
Council with respect to the sanctions committees,
Venezuela also has serious reservations concerning the
functioning of the committees. Tomorrow, when we
shall hold a debate on working methods, we will express
our opinions on this subject, but I wish to explain that
our main observation about the document initially
proposed by the penholder on this subject concerns
the sovereign right of countries to manage their own
natural resources. We wish to invoke and stress the
validity of General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII)
of 1962, in which the United Nations recognized the
sovereign right of countries to manage their natural
resources.

Like many other developing countries, my country
is a major producer of natural resources, which are a
fundamental factor in maintaining the stability of our
economy. We believe that the Security Council - much
less a sanctions committee - should have no say
whatsoever in the ability of countries to enjoy their
right to profit from the management of their own
natural resources, which we hope will always be to the
benefit of their peoples.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

