Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): On
7 October, Ambassador Power had the privilege of
leading the Security Council's first visit to Rwanda
since 2009. Council members began that leg of our trip
by visiting a demobilization centre in Mutobo, where
we had a chance to hear testimonials from former
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
combatants who had voluntarily returned and, with the
help of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Rwandan Government, are
trying to reintegrate into society. These individuals
told us about the difficulties they faced while living on
the run in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
about the hard choices they had to make in deciding
to leave the rebel force. In many cases, the FDLR has
threatened to retaliate against them and members of
their families. We were pleased to hear of the key role
that MONUSCO continues to play, in collaboration
with Rwandan authorities, to ensure that these former
fighters can successfully resume their lives.

The Council then travelled to Kigali, where
we had a tour of the children's wing of the Gisozi
genocide memorial. Even those of us who had already
visited Rwanda's memorial were overwhelmed by
the devastating eloquence of the memorial. Since the
memorial opened in 2004, more than 100,000 visitors
have viewed the exhibits - an impressive number, but
a mere fraction of the 250,000 people whose bodies
are buried in mass graves beneath the four acres of
memorial gardens and grounds. The facility serves as a
permanent repository for photos and testimonies related
to the 1994 genocide and a permanent warning for the
world community. That warning has special meeting
for the Council, which failed dismally in responding to
the slaughter of 19 years ago.

As Council members are aware, the waves crated
by the genocide continue to disrupt and claim lives.
Prior to arriving in Kigali, we met with displaced
persons outside of Goma in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where many thousands of families have
been victimized by recurring attacks and atrocities.
We were struck by the contrast between conditions in
and around Goma and the relatively calm and stable
environment in Rwanda. In our meetings with Rwandan
officials, several of us made the point that Rwanda has
an opportunity to take steps that would help spread the
peace and greater prosperity it has achieved to people
across the Great Lakes Region.

Following our visit to the Gisozi memorial, we
met in Kigali with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Finance, and with senior representatives
responsible of intelligence and economic planning. In
those meetings, we discussed a comprehensive range of
issues, including the status of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Foreign Minister
Mushikiwabo assured us of her Government's readiness
to be a full partner in creating a sustainable peace, and
said that she was encouraged by the proactive initiatives
undertaken by the Secretary-General, the President of
the World Bank and the new leadership of MONUSCO.
The Foreign Minister also raised Rwanda's concerned
about the ongoing security threat posed by the FDLR and
requested greater collaboration between the Security
Council and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. We were able to reinforce the message
that Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler had delivered - that MONUSCO would not
allow the FDLR to wreak havoc in eastern Congo any
more than it would the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).

Council members then had a frank 90-minute
dialogue with President Paul Kagame. The President
echoed his Foreign Minister in calling attention to the
dangerous activities of the FDLR. Council members
again noted MONUSCO's clear mandate to neutralize
all irregular armed groups and expressed their
commitment to seeing that that aspect of the United
Nations Mission's mandate was implemented. Council
members cited the threat posed by, in addition to the
FDLR, the M-23, and observed that, if the regional
Framework is to succeed, all armed groups must be
neutralized.

Building on this point, we emphasized the
imperative for every country, including Rwanda, to
neither tolerate nor provide support to any militia or
armed force, and appealed to President Kagame to use
his country's influence with the M-23 to promote peace
and help bring the Kampala talks to a decisive close.

The President pledged that Rwanda would be
a genuine partner in the peace process but noted his
concern with how events in the region had been
characterized, questioning whether the causes of the
current conflict are accurately understood. Further,
he urged the Council and the international community
to help establish adequate judicial and accountability
mechanisms in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Overall, we found our exchange of views with
Rwandan Government officials to be very substantive
and constructive, and we are hopeful that the dialogue
will help to further efforts to achieve regional peace.

In closing, I would like to thank the United Nations
Resident Coordinator for Rwanda, Lamin Manneh, and
other United Nations staff, including Neneh Bah, James
Sutterlin and Davey McNab, for helping to make this leg
of our trip successful. I express my appreciation, too,
to our Rwandan Government hosts for their hospitality
and open exchange of views.

