Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
States members of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
would like to start by expressing the Movement's
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this debate
under your presidency to address the critical situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine,
at this crucial juncture as the moment of truth is
drawing closer than ever. I would also like to express
our appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive briefing
before the Council today.

Despite all the serious and credible efforts
exerted by different international and regional parties
to ensure the resumption and continuity of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian track towards the
achievement of the well-known and internationally
supported objectives of peace, a just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine remains
regrettably far from being achieved, as Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to pursue its illegal
policies and practices, which are not only endangering
the two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders,
but also rendering it practically impossible.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call on
the international community to be resolute in
demanding that Israel, the occupying Power, abide by
its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the Quartet Road Map. Israel must cease its unlawful
colonization in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem; place a complete and
indefinite freeze on all settlement activities, including
so-called natural growth; and respond favourably and
in good faith to the international consensus in this
regard, including to the repeated demands of the
United Nations, the European Union and the Quartet.

The Non-Aligned Movement expresses grave
concern over the many possible repercussions of
Israel's determination to continue illegal settlement
construction and not to extend the partial ban or the so-
called lO-month moratorium on settlement activities.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that serious and
genuine negotiations cannot be conducted while Israel
continues to carry on such illegal actions and
provocations, which are totally contradictory to the
known tenets of a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

Moreover, Israel's continuous expansion of
settlement-building in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem - the latest example of
which is the recent announcement of the approval of
238 new housing units in East Jerusalem - destroys
the mutual trust and confidence required for any
successful negotiations and reveals that Israel has yet
to abandon its expansionist goals and truly commit to
the bases of the peace process, including the principle
of land for peace. We reiterate our demand that Israel
refrain from all such illegal and provocative actions
aimed at prejudging the outcome of the final status
negotiations, fulfil its obligations under the Road Map,
and cooperate constructively with efforts to ensure the
continuity of direct peace negotiations for the
achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the conflict in the Middle East.

In this regard, we are all aware of the unanimous
global conviction that Israel must respect its
obligations as an occupying Power as an imperative
condition for materializing the two-State solution and
creating an environment conducive to achieving a
lasting solution based on the agreed terms of reference:
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid terms of reference,
10-59122
including the principle of land for peace; the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map.

We are assured that the Palestinian Authority is,
in word and deed, determined, with Arab support, to
pursue the path of peace. This was reflected clearly in
the statement of the Arab follow-up committee,
convened in Sirte recently, and it is now incumbent
upon Israel to show equal commitment, despite all the
negative signals from the Israeli side in the past few
months. Further, on the ground, the Palestinian
Authority, with international support, also continues to
exert efforts positively and constructively to lay the
foundations and build national institutions in
preparation for the independence of the Palestinian
State. Those efforts must be fully supported.

On the Israeli side, however, we continue to
witness growing acts of violence by settlers against
Palestinian civilians, including children, as well as the
burning of Islamic places of worship, orchards and
agricultural fields. The Non-Aligned Movement is also
alarmed by the increased issuing of additional home-
demolition orders in occupied East Jerusalem and the
revocation of residency rights of yet more Palestinian
J erusalemites, including elected Palestinian Legislative
Council representatives. The Movement is deeply
concerned regarding these illegal actions, which
represent clear attempts to alter the demography and
character of the city and to prejudge the outcome of the
future permanent status negotiations, imperiling the
basis of the two-State solution. Moreover, the Jewish
loyalty oath bill, adopted recently by the Israeli
Cabinet, represents yet another attempt to isolate the
Palestinian-Arab minority in Israel and to illegally
force their movement outside the State of Israel at the
same time that more Palestinian land is being seized
and occupied by settlers supported by the Israeli
Government.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
concrete steps need to be taken during the coming
period to immediately resume direct negotiations. The
complete freeze of all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is essential for such a resumption. The
international community should put forward a formula
for a final settlement, or rather an endgame based on
the well-known and internationally agreed parametres
in this regard, which will lead to the independence of
the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
10-59122

The situation in Gaza also remains among the
Non-Aligned Movement's top priorities. The Movement
reiterates that the unacceptable and unsustainable
situation of the Gaza Strip has to come to an end. This
unresolved crisis continues to have serious
repercussions on the efforts for peace and to inflict deep
suffering on the Palestinian civilian population.
International humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention and United Nations resolutions,
must fully apply and be respected by the occupying
Power. In this regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
emphasizes the need to press Israel to lift fully its illegal
blockade, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant United
Nations resolutions. This is essential to addressing the
critical humanitarian and socio-economic situation in
Gaza and to alleviating the many hardships being
endured by the Palestinian civilian population.

In this connection, the Movement re-emphasizes
the urgent need for the reconstruction of Gaza and calls
on Israel to allow the import of essential reconstruction
materials, including those necessary for the long-
overdue reconstruction of United Nations facilities and
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to
enable economic revival in Gaza. We reiterate the need
for a sustainable regime for opening all Israeli border
crossings with Gaza and enabling the free movement of
persons and goods in accordance with international law
and international humanitarian law.

Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement remains deeply concerned over Israel's
ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty, in breach
of resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all
concerned parties to fully implement resolution 1701
(2006) in order to end the current fragility and to avoid
the recurrence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null and void and have no
legal effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
3
