Mr. Spatafora (Italy): My delegation was honoured
to coordinate the process that has led to the adoption by
consensus of this resolution. I wish to thank all delegations
and, above all, you, Mr. President, and your team, for the
invaluable contributions that we received from each and
every one of them throughout the process.

The vote is all the more rewarding for us since the
Council has adopted this resolution as a presidential text
showing cohesion and unity on a critical issue at a critical
juncture. As our Foreign Minister stated before the Council
three days ago (see S/PV.5641), we were convinced that the
people of Afghanistan and the women and men of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) needed a strong signal of support.

We believe that this resolution is such a signal. We
are not modifying the mandate of UNAMA, of course, but I
believe that we are doing something even more important
for the Mission. We are offering a new vision, we are
giving a new pulse, we are shaping a new framework for
action.

The text before us is not business as usual. In fact, it
is particularly rich, and it addresses all the priorities for the
next months identified by the Secretary-General in his
report - promotion of the coherence of the international
engagement, outreach, support for regional cooperation,
humanitarian coordination, protection of human rights, and
monitoring of the situation of civilians in armed conflict.

As an overarching priority, the resolution affirms the
crucial importance of the synergies among the different
aspects of the international community's engagement in
Afghanistan, stressing the need for a comprehensive
approach to address the challenges that Afghanistan faces.
We hope that such a comprehensive approach will be put
into practice in the shortest term and at the highest level
through the unique format offered by the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB) and under the
leadership of the Afghan Government. This is the only way
to be in a position one year from now to adopt a resolution
with a long list of developments to welcome and no
concerns to express.

