Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): For the second time in less
than three months, the Security Council is deliberating the
situation in the Middle East at a particularly crucial and
delicate time in the peace process, when it seems that the
parties to the Middle East conflict are beginning to lose
faith in the negotiating frameworks to which they have
agreed since the signing of the Declaration of Principles on
13 September 1993. That is why my delegation welcomes
the opportunity of this debate to remind the parties - both
of them - that there is no alternative to a peaceful and
negotiated settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian question in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
in particular with the agreements which they themselves
have signed. It is also an appropriate and timely occasion
to renew our support for the Middle East peace process
and its achievements.

During the past two years, we have witnessed
historic progress, unimaginable only a few years back, in
the efforts to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East, starting with the Madrid
initiative of October 1991. My Government welcomed the
historic signing in Washington of the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements
between the Government of Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) in 1993, and we expressed
the hope that the agreement would pave the way for more
substantive transformations in the Middle East.

Ever since, our hopes have generally been confirmed
and were certainly not misplaced. Important steps that
followed in 1994 included the Gaza-Jericho agreement of
May and the Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of
Powers and Responsibilities in August, both of which
have made possible the establishment of the Palestinian
Authority. That Authority is a crucially important first
step in the fulfilment of the historic aspirations of the
Palestinian people for self-determination and nationhood.

Furthermore, on 26 October 1994, another historic
peace treaty, between Israel and Jordan, was signed.
Besides opening a new phase in bilateral relations
between the two countries, this treaty also put the whole
region on the threshold of peace by enhancing the
possibilities for progress in the Israeli-Lebanon and
Israeli-Syrian tracks of the peace process.

The international community has never been under
any illusion that the peace process was going to be hitch-
free, given the long history of hostility, antagonism and
mistrust between the parties to the conflict. None the less,
we have remained confident that the momentum for peace
that has been generated will never be allowed to slip
away. In this connection, the entire international
community must continue to assist the parties, encourage
them and nudge them in the right direction in times of
difficulty to ensure that they do not lose sight of the
larger interest and goal of a just and lasting peace in the
region. That is why my delegation, during the debate on
this question in February, commended the vision, courage
and determination of the leaderships of Israel, the PLO
and of the other States in the region that have maintained
their commitment to peace regardless of the bombings

 

and terrorist acts that seemed to have been precisely timed
and aimed at derailing the peace process.

The Declaration of Principles signed in Washington on
13 September 1993 and the Gaza-Jericho agreement,
together with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), set
out, inter alia, a clear timetable for the negotiations towards
the permanent status of Palestine. They also contain
obligations on both sides and set out the rules and modes
of behaviour that should guide all parties in the course of
the process. It is for this reason that, in February, my
delegation expressed grave concern over the continued
building of new settlements in the West Bank. We believe
that such settlement activities are illegal, that they
contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention and that they
represent a clear obstacle to an overall peace that could be
exploited by radical groups on both sides of the divide to
undermine the spirit of the peace process and reverse the
progress that has so far been achieved.

It is therefore a matter of regret that Israel has
continued with this unfortunate policy by its recent decision
to expropriate 53 hectares of land situated in the East
Jerusalem area. We cannot support this act, which we
believe is capable of undermining the faith of one party in
the true intentions of the other and may well play straight
into the hands of extremists on both sides - i.e., those who
are entirely set against the peace process. It is in this regard
that my delegation will call upon Israel to rescind its
decision on land expropriation and make the necessary and
difficult compromises with the Palestinians in order to
accelerate the implementation of relevant agreements.

We are of course not unaware of Israel's legitimate
security concerns and the pressure of Israeli public opinion
on its Government to do something to reassure the
population. However, we find it difficult to see how land
confiscation can be regarded as the best way to respond to
those legitimate concerns. We call on the Palestinian
Authority, for its part, to do all it can within its area of
competence to combat any and all acts of terrorism.

