Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for his briefing. Let
me also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir Tanin, to this table and
thank him for his important contribution.
Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later in this debate by the representative of the
European Union.

The London Conference has initiated a new phase
of transition to greater Afghan leadership and
responsibility. It has also set the agenda for the Kabul
conference in June, which is expected to focus on a
reform-oriented nation-building agenda. We agree with
the Secretary-General's view that, in this process of
transition, it is essential to take into account the
concerns of the Afghans. In this spirit, Austria and the
Liechtenstein Institute at Princeton University
organized the Afghanistan Implementation Colloquium
in Austria at the end of February, which brought
together a significant number of Afghans and
international experts. We believe that the results of
those discussions can prove useful in the preparation of
the Kabul conference, and we will share them with
partners.

As to the parliamentary elections to be held in
September, effective electoral reform, building on the
commitments made at the London Conference, will be
critical to ensuring that the elections can contribute to
the consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan. We
also hope that measures to facilitate the participation of
women and minorities, both as candidates and voters,
will be put in place.

We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
accelerate the implementation of the National Action
Plan for the Women of Afghanistan and to foster the
process of integrating women into political, economic
and social life.

Following President Karzai's inauguration speech
of November and the London Conference, the concepts
of reintegration and reconciliation have moved to the
forefront of attention. There is no purely military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that
both reintegration and reconciliation should be fully
Afghan-led and must respect the Constitution as well
as international commitments. Furthermore, broad
involvement by and consensus among all relevant
stakeholders of the Afghan political system will be
critical. Women's participation in the reconciliation
process - in line with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) - will be of particular importance for
achieving sustainable peace. We therefore hope that the
national Peace Jirga scheduled for the end of April will
be prepared in a transparent and inclusive manner,
engaging all relevant segments of Afghan society. Any
genuine reconciliation process will have to be
complemented by accountability for serious crimes of
the past.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Security Council's recent decision to remove five
former Taliban officials from the list established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999)
was welcomed in Afghanistan as a confidence-building
measure and can help lay the foundations for an
eventual political process. We take note of the
Secretary-General's evaluation that further confidence-
building measures would be useful. In this context, as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), I look forward to cooperating
with the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
ensuring the full implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), including in the
framework of the ongoing efforts to update the
consolidated list and, more specifically, through the
current review process.

The negative impact of the security situation on
the protection of civilians remains a major challenge.
The fact that last year saw the highest number of
civilian casualties since 2001 is deeply worrying, with
the Taliban and other extremist groups being
responsible for, by far, the greatest number of civilian
deaths. At the same time, we wish to welcome the
progress made by the International Security Assistance
Force and other international forces in significantly
reducing the number of civilian casualties in the
context of their operations, and hope that these efforts
will be further pursued.

We believe that regional cooperation will be
crucial to the stability and prosperity of Afghanistan.
All of Afghanistan's neighbours ought to be included
and take part in this process. We would like to
encourage intensified confidence-building and
cooperation in economic and political terms, as well as
mutual assistance in the fight against drugs, terrorism
and criminality. We are pleased to see UNAMA
provide support to such regional cooperation in
accordance with its mandate.

Austria also appreciates the activities undertaken
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
facilitate regional cooperation, such as the Paris Pact
Initiative, the Rainbow Strategy, and the development
of regional programmes for Afghanistan and its
neighbours.

In view of the challenges ahead for Afghanistan
during the coming months, we are convinced that
UNAMA will continue to play a key role in support of
the Government. We therefore support the extension of
UNAMA's mandate for another 12 months, with the
modifications suggested by the Secretary-General in
order to increase the effectiveness and impact of the
Mission's work. Austria is looking forward to working
with the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and wishes him every success in his important
and challenging tasks.

