Mr. Feltman: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi.

One year ago, on 5 November 2014, the Security
Council held its last discussion on the United Nations
Office in Burundi (see S/PV.7295) before it closed at
the end of the year at the request of the Burundian
Government. In the briefing given to the Council, the
then-Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, underlined our
hope that the groundwork laid by Burundian authorities
to preserve stability and consolidate democracy would
not be reversed during the 2015 electoral cycle.

Today, one year later, Burundi finds itself in a
deep political crisis and rapid escalation of violence
that has serious implications for stability and ethnic
harmony in Burundi, as well as for peace and security
in the region. The political, economic, social and
security gains that came out of the landmark Arusha
Agreement are already at risk. The killing, on 22 May,
of Zedi Feruzi, a key opposition figure, marked the
beginning ofa troubling pattern ofpolitically motivated
assassinations and attacks. Neither the conclusion of
Burundi's legislative and presidential electoral cycle
this summer nor the inclusion of some key opposition
figures in the governing coalition calmed the situation,
which has instead grown more troubling. As the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will further elaborate,
the number of reported human rights violations and
casualties is rising by the day and spreading beyond
Bujumbura.

In the capital the situation is currently very tense.
Several neighbourhoods, especially those perceived
to have opposed President Nkurunziza's third term,
experience nightly exchanges of gunshots and grenade
explosions. Traumatized residents frequently discover
mutilated bodies, victims of executions. Just this
morning, at least two people were killed in a grenade
attack in the Musaga neighbourhood in Bujumbura. On
7 November, at least nine people, including a United
Nations staff member, were killed when unknown
gunmen opened fire inside a bar in the Kanyosha
neighbourhood in Bujumbura. The bar was alleged
to have been a previous meeting venue of anti-third-
mandate demonstrators. Saturday's incident is the
second time within a month that a staff member of the
United Nations family in Burundi has been killed. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights will provide
other examples of human rights violations and killings.

In this very tense environment, inflammatory
and chilling public statements from authorities have
provoked concern and alarm in Burundi, the region
and beyond. In a 29 October speech, the President
of the Senate, Mr. Reverien Ndikuriyo, told local
administrators to be ready and to set their emotions
aside if a signal were given to the police to "go to
work", which has been widely interpreted as implying a
pre-planned operation. He also said that "plots of land
are about to be available".

On 2 November, President Nkurunziza gave
armed civilians five days to surrender their arms or
face being dealt with as "enemies of the nation". The
President said that the police have the right to use "all
available means" to find illegally possessed arms.
While police forces do have the right and responsibility
to maintain law and order many incidents, described as
crackdown activities appear to cross the line into extra-
judiciary attacks, striking fear among the residents
of some neighbourhoods. Consequently, we have
received reports that the President's ultimatum has
prompted a large number of people living in affected
neighbourhoods to flee their homes, ahead of the
deadline this past weekend.

Many recent statements have also been interpreted
as having an ethnic dimension, contrary to the spirit of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, which
ended Burundi's civil war. The Secretary-General has
strongly condemned such dangerous incitement.

The crisis in Burundi is political at its core and
cannot be resolved by a security clampdown. It is not
credible to claim that a small group of criminals or
traitors are behind the current violence. The problem is
much deeper, and therefore more worrying. To address
the deteriorating situation, Burundian leaders will need
to address the political deadlock that preceded and
transcended the summer elections. In that regard, the
Government of Burundi has established a commission
for inter-Burundian dialogue, said to be open to all
except those implicated in the failed coup d'etat on
14 May.

While the United Nations in general supports
national dialogue efforts, the Commission will not be
able to make progress in the tense security context
where members of political parties and civil society are
frequently found dead on the streets. With many media
outlets closed down since spring and opposition leaders
abroad afraid to return home, the Government has not
established the conditions for credible and inclusive
political dialogue. We encourage the Burundian
authorities to do so as quickly as possible.

On 17 October, the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council agreed on a multi-pronged approach
to address the situation in Burundi. It included
increasing the number of its human rights observers
and military experts and the initiation of contingency
planning for the possible deployment of an African-led
mission in the country. The Peace and Security Council
also gave its strong support to the resumption of a
political dialogue in Kampala or Addis Ababa, with the
facilitation of Uganda.

The United Nations is in close consultation with the
African Union Commission on how to provide technical
and logistical assistance and expertise to advance the
implementation of the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council. We have also offered
to provide support and assistance to the Ugandan-
led facilitation under the rubric of the East African
Community (EAC). In the coming days, the Secretary-
General will announce the appointment of a Special
Adviser who will lead and coordinate United Nations
efforts in support of Burundi. The Special Adviser will
work closely with the AU, the EAC and other partners
to prevent a further escalation of the conflict and to
build peace in Burundi.

The sharp deterioration of the political and security
situation is happening at a time when the mandate of the
current political mission - the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi - is ending. There
is clearly a need for continuing political engagement
and presence on the ground to support Burundi during
these difficult times. But that requires a mandate
from the Security Council and the cooperation of the
Government of Burundi.

Burundi finds itself at a critical juncture. A
political solution must be found to resolve the crisis
before it spirals out of control and affects peace and
security regionally. We hope that all international
partners, particularly those in the region, speak with
one voice in urging and supporting Burundi to find a
political settlement to the crisis. The Secretary-General
calls on all Burundian parties, inside the country and
abroad, to cease immediately the propagation of hate
speech, to renounce violence and to engage in good
faith with the ongoing facilitation of the East African
Community. The United Nations is prepared to do what
we can do support a credible and inclusive dialogue that
can address the deep political challenges the country
currently faces. We must all work to ensure that it takes
place and succeeds.
