Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Let me join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. I would also like to thank you
for your initiative in organizing this important debate
on piracy, as well as for the concept note (S/2012/813, annex) that provided direction to our discussion today.
And I thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his introductory remarks. We commend your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting,
which for the first time aims to address piracy as a
global security threat by taking an integrated look at
the situation across regions.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also wish
to thank the Singapore delegation for acknowledging
Nigeria's efforts to ensure security in the Gulf of
Guinea. We resolve to do more.

Nigeria supports the presidential statement adopted
this morning (S/PRST/2012/24), and we wish to take
this opportunity to present our perspectives on this
topical issue.

Piracy in Nigerian territorial waters and adjacent
sea lanes has become prevalent in the past 15 years due
to an upsurge in oil bunkering and hijacking on the
high seas. The security challenges that Nigeria faces
in its maritime zone include criminal activity within
its harbours, piracy on the high seas, robbery along
coastlines, illegal fishing activities, the dumping of
toxic wastes, and so forth.

The upsurge in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
made it imperative that we pay greater attention to
our collective security. The phenomenon has attained
disturbing proportions and is adversely affecting
international maritime activities, with serious
implications for international trade, fishing and other
socioeconomic activities, especially through the danger
it poses to the lives and security of seafarers. Besides
compounding the security problems in the region, acts
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea continue to seriously
threaten maritime navigation and the stability and
security of coastal countries and beyond. The cost of
piracy in stolen goods, huge security outlays and high
insurance premiums has been estimated at $2 billion.
That has also affected shipping in the region. Sharp
decreases have been experienced in the number of ships
docking at regional ports. In one country alone, it is
estimated that port activity fell by more than 70 per
cent due to pirates" illicit activities.

Several factors have contributed to the rise in the
incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, of which
some important ones, in our view, are weak institutions,
uncoordinated regional responses, unfettered access to
small arms and light weapons, and a lack of prosecution
mechanisms. In particular, the lack of synergy and
coordination among Gulf of Guinea States on maritime
security mechanisms has created a vacuum that is being
exploited by criminal elements.

Nigeria has spared no effort in working with
bilateral and multilateral partners to chart a course that
truly addresses the challenges of piracy and ways to
meet the objectives of this debate. We are implementing
our cooperative agreement with the Republic of Benin
in order to tackle piracy in a spirit of collective security.
That is now beginning to yield positive results and will
no doubt have to be reinforced with a wider effort to
develop a collective regional counter-piracy strategy.

The Security Council is also supportive of our
subregional efforts, and has backed the convening of
a summit of Heads of State of the Gulf of Guinea to
discuss a regional response. To that end, a conference
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on maritime safety and
security was held in Cotonou from 27 to 29 March. The
outcome was two draft documents, a memorandum of
understanding and an ECCAS-ECOWAS collaborative
engagement mechanism on maritime safety and security
in the Gulf of Guinea. Those documents are being
studied in various capitals with a view to convening
a summit of the Heads of State of the two regions.
The legal framework will assist in the verification and
arrest of vessels suspected of being engaged in piracy,
information exchange, combined operations and cross-
maritime-boundary pursuit.

We therefore call upon the international community
to support ongoing regional efforts. We acknowledge
and appreciate the contribution and assistance of
international partners that have so far played a
significant role in strengthening regional capacity to
confront the menace.

At the national level, we are seeking to strengthen
our collaborative efforts. We have also taken steps
to improve our domestic capacity to counter piracy.
The Nigerian Navy and the Nigerian Maritime
Administration and Safety Agency (NIMASA) have
achieved tremendous success in efforts to rid Nigerian
maritime space of piracy and illegal offshore activities.
Those two bodies have now embarked on the process
to acquire radar installations to provide total radar
coverage to all shipping activities in the Nigerian
maritime environment. That would enable the Navy
and NIMASA to effectively monitor shipping and the
activities of pirates. Joint maritime patrols with the
navies of neighbouring countries will continue to be
undertaken to safeguard the sea lanes and check all
illegal activities.

Finally, it is clear that piracy has become an
international challenge that requires concerted and
enhanced international action. It is imperative for all
actors, particularly the United Nations, to deepen their
engagement in order to guarantee our common security.
Our discussions today have indeed set the tone and
outlined the objectives for international engagement.
This will be attained only when decisive steps are taken
to confront the challenges posed by piracy. We therefore
wish to join in the call made by the delegation of New
Zealand that the same priority be accorded to the Gulf
of Guinea region that the international community has
given to the situation off the coast of Somalia.

