Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I should like in turn to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts to achieve a lasting
peace in Afghanistan. I thank Ms. Sima Samar for her
briefing and for her commitment to the promotion of
women's rights in Afghanistan, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for her statement.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

I will focus my remarks on three points: the peace
process; elections; and the importance of the promotion
and protection of human rights in Afghanistan.

First, concerning the peace process, Belgium
welcomes the intensification of national and
international efforts aimed at ending the lengthy and
devastating conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that a
lasting peace agreement can be achieved only through a
comprehensive and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue. To
that end, we reiterate our call on the Taliban to engage
in direct peace talks.

In particular, Belgium calls on all parties to
promote the meaningful and equal participation of
women at all stages of the peace process. Lasting
peace begins with the appointment of a representative
and inclusive negotiating team. In addition, we would
stress that any future peace agreement must preserve
the political, economic and social gains of the past
18 years, especially concerning the rights of women,
children and minorities.

We are fully aware of the fact that peacebuilding
is a long-term process. For an agreement to be
lasting, the international community must be united
in its support. We call on all international partners to
closely coordinate their efforts in order to launch an
intra-Afghan dialogue and achieve an Afghan-directed
and Afghan-led peace process.

My second point concerns the presidential elections
announced for September 2019. Belgium stresses the
need to learn from the elections held last year. Given
the tight timetable, we call on all parties to work to
restore confidence in the electoral process.

Elections are a responsibility shared by all
political actors. I emphasize the importance of
creating a favourable environment by avoiding
political interference in the decisions of the election
management bodies and engaging constructively so
that the presidential elections are free, transparent
and credible.

My last point concerns the human rights
situation in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the
recommendations made by Ms. Samar. Belgium is
deeply concerned by the impact of the armed conflict
on the civilian population and in particular by the
high number of civilian casualties. Belgium urges all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to take immediate steps to avoid
loss of life.

With particular reference to the situation of
violations of the rights of children, the Council awaits
the submission of the country report to the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict later this year.
Persistent violence against journalists and human
rights defenders is also unacceptable. All parties to the
conflict must comply with international standards for
protection. We are further concerned by the reports
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on the treatment of detainees linked to the
conflict. Nearly one-third report credible accounts of
torture or ill-treatment in detention. We welcome the
steps taken by the Government in response and call for
stronger accountability measures.

With regard to demining efforts, Belgium welcomes
the Government's efforts to align national standards for
the clearance of improvised objects that were abandoned
with international best practices.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
full support for the Afghan people and our strong
commitment to an Afghan-led and Afghan-led
peace process.

