I would like to thank Estonia for organizing this timely meeting, as well as the Secretary-General for his insightful presentation. I also thank the briefers. It is 70 years since the adoption of the Geneva Conventions, and 2019 marked the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the protection of civilians on the agenda of the Security Council. We are equipped with comprehensive rules, reliable tools and a strong framework. However, while the number of human-made disasters is increasing, we cannot provide adequate and timely responses to such crises. We witness the erosion of humanity, day by day. As the Secretary-General reports, conflicts forced millions of civilians to flee their homes last year, adding to the 70.8 million people already displaced by conflict and violence by the beginning of 2019 (see S/2020/366). We now live in a world where one person is forcibly displaced every two seconds as a result of conflict or persecution. In 2019, more than 41 million people were displaced in their own country. In Libya, the number of internally displaced persons has almost doubled, to around 350,000, due to the military campaign to overthrow the legitimate Government in Tripoli. In Syria, only last year 1.8 million people were displaced, 1 million of whom escaped from the indiscriminate attacks of the Al-Assad regime in the north-west towards the Turkish border. In Myanmar, fighting displaced more civilians in the first three months of this year than in all of 2019. The number of refugees continues to grow, reaching 25.9 million, more than half of whom are under the age of 18. Millions of these people have been denied access to basic rights such as education, health care, employment and freedom of movement. In humanitarian crises women and children continue to suffer the most from sexual violence and other violations of international humanitarian law. The spread of the coronavirus disease has further worsened the already dire conditions in many parts of the world by exacerbating the vulnerability of the least protected people. The current situation of health-care systems in certain parts of the world gives a grim outlook for the upcoming months. In Libya, conflict and the pandemic present a significant threat to life. According to a recent survey of the World Health Organization, only 20 per cent of primary health centres are delivering services in the country. The recent attacks on health infrastructure by General Haftar's forces and their backers diminish the capacity of Libyans to mitigate the effects of the pandemic. In Syria, a health facility was attacked every four days last year. The majority of the attacks occurred in the north-west. In Yemen, where civilians face the largest humanitarian crisis of our time, 8.9 million people remain in acute need of medical care; yet only 50 per cent of medical facilities function due, in part, to conflict-related damage. It is therefore more urgent than ever that the global ceasefire appeal by the Secretary-General is implemented in order to help create conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. This is also important for the adaptation of peacekeeping operations to evolving situations so as to ensure the protection of civilians. The suffering that engulfs people in the different complex emergencies 1s also experienced by humanitarian personnel, who are doing their best to provide relief for those in need. We would like to commend the tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, as well as other United Nations humanitarian agencies, in their life-saving work. As Member States, we need to increase our financial resources in order to help the United Nations in its humanitarian activities. Turkey is committed to continuing its leading role in various humanitarian efforts across a wide geographical area, from Syria, Yemen and Palestine to Somalia and Myanmar. The medical assistance we have provided to 93 countries since the start of the pandemic is in addition to our regular humanitarian aid deliveries throughout the world. Meanwhile, Turkey now hosts 20 per cent of all refugees around the globe. We will continue to assist Syrians in need in our homeland, and also across our borders with Syria. We will continue to mobilize our resources for these people, including by facilitating United Nations cross-border operations - a lifeline mechanism for Syrian civilians. Delivering humanitarian aid is our common responsibility, and we see it as a crucial element to achieve international peace and stability. In fact, humanitarian access is a requirement of international humanitarian law, and it cannot be a matter for negotiation. I therefore reiterate the request that I made to the Council last week. In the face of the pandemic, we need the United Nations cross-border mechanism for Syria more than ever, and the Council has the responsibility to authorize it without delay and for at least 12 months. This will be a litmus test for the Council and its members as to how able they are to address the request of millions of people who are completely dependent on these deliveries. Targeting civilians can have no justification. All parties to conflict have an international legal obligation to respect international humanitarian law. We must act and establish genuine accountability mechanisms in order to end impunity. In that regard, we welcome the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the establishment of the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar. We also commend the efforts of the Gambia in bringing a case before the International Court of Justice in 2019, which led to a landmark provisional ruling for Rohingya Muslims. At the same time, much work still needs to be done to hold perpetrators accountable. This also requires avoiding any engagement with terrorist organizations that would risk conferring legitimacy. Since the start of the pandemic, the Kurdish Workers Party/People's Protection Units have perpetrated more than 30 terrorist attacks in northern Syria, including mortar and rocket shelling, targeting civilians. It is noteworthy that all these attacks have occurred at a time when the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces pretend to comply with the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Whether we are donors or recipients, or both, we share a responsibility towards humankind. The protection of civilians is a long-term investment for our collective security, peace and prosperity. This week marks the fourth anniversary of the first- ever World Humanitarian Summit, which has been key in advancing the agenda for humankind. It is time to revisit existing commitments to strengthen the centrality of protection.
