Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): The
Palestinian Authority has made a choice that no longer
leaves any shadow of a doubt. That choice is for
violent confrontation, which nourishes and supports the
other strategic choice adopted and declared openly by
Chairman Arafat during the Islamic conference held at
Doha last week. That strategic choice is what he called
the intifada of independence.

While Prime Minister Barak committed himself at
Camp David to a bold enterprise aimed at ending the
conflict with the Palestinians, Chairman Arafat has
made a devastating choice, namely, to achieve his
political ends through fire and blood. Although on 9
September 1993 - the eve of the signing of the Oslo
Accords - the same Chairman Arafat committed
himself in a letter to Prime Minister Rabin to renounce
terrorism as a means of achieving political objectives,
he seems to have quickly returned to the same abject
practices he employed in the past that had lastingly
disqualified from being Israel's interlocutor.

With calculated and refined ambiguity, an order,
instruction, command or allusion from Mr. Arafat
invariably lends itself to interpretation on different
levels. The double and triple language of Chairman
Arafat - one for the international community, another
for his people and a third for his entourage - is very
difficult to decipher. We should therefore not be
surprised to see Mr. Arafat asking, on the one hand, for
an international protection force while, on the other,
releasing terrorists from his own prisons and pitting
them against Israel while stepping away from their
actions. Chairman Arafat's absurd dance and
convoluted language cannot continue forever to
mislead either his peace partners - the Israelis - or
the international community, which, at its most
inspired and objective, will not be misled indefinitely
by his twists and turns or his shadowy actions.

For the first time since the beginning of this
crisis, we see from the statements of several members
of the Council the semblance of reproach for the
various inadmissible and indescribable acts carried out
by Palestinians in recent days at Kfar Naum and
Hadera. We take good note of that. Whether those
statements in disapproval of Palestinian terrorist acts
are muted or amplified, we believe that the fact they
were made is important because it represents a more
just approach towards both sides. In that regard, the
statements by the representatives of Argentina and
Canada in particular seem to us exemplary in their
relevance.

We also take good note of the virtually
unanimous appeal for a return to calm and negotiations.
I must recall that before Israel put legitimate self-
defence measures into place, the Government had been
trying to implement its peace policy. As the
international community knows full well, Prime
Minister Barak adopted a very innovative peace policy
at Camp David, one conducive to putting an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Before the helicopters and
the tanks, Mr. Barak had offered an unprecedented
peace proposal that would have made the intangible
concrete and the previously untouchable tangible. Huge
obstacles related to the various issues involved in
achieving a definitive solution of the conflict were thus
beginning to be lifted at the time Chairman Arafat
chose to revert to violence and terrorism.

I want to be clear: through a negotiated solution
at Camp David Chairman Arafat could have, through
terms agreed upon by both sides to benefit both parties,
given rise to the advent of a Palestinian State next to
Israel and to the beginning of true reconciliation
between the two peoples. That solution was
conditioned on the fact that it was to be achieved
through a bilateral Israeli-Palestinian agreement, and
that solution is not very far from our reach. In large
part, although not entirely, that solution is up to
Chairman Arafat and his willingness to respect the
same commitments that made him a partner to the
dialogue with Israel.

But it was not we Israelis who froze that peace.
However, we can reach that peace only with a partner
who is committed to becoming part of the history of
coexistence, and not that of recoiling in rejection and
negation of the other. Israel has made the choice for
peace and has signed agreements with Egypt and
Jordan.

Moreover, the Interim Agreements that followed
the Oslo Accords resulted in various achievements
through which 98 per cent of Palestinians in Gaza and
the main cities and hundreds of villages of the West
Bank now live under the control of the Palestinian
Authority, rather than under occupation. The choice of
territorial compromise, of a definite solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, of coexistence and of
reconciliation is a choice that Israel wants to
implement as soon as possible. That is the goal towards
which we should turn our efforts. If this appeal were to
be heard today, we would at least make some progress
today.

