Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain voted in favour of resolution 2292 (2016) and
wishes to thank Security Council members for their
support for Operation Sophia to ensure compliance
with the arms embargo on Libya by sea.

The European Union supports the security of the
Mediterranean. We share a series of problems that
neither of the two coasts can deal with on its own:
terrorism, human trafficking and arms proliferation,
among others. Operation Sophia has been successful in
its first year of life and has responded to traffickers
who endanger the lives of thousands of people on a
daily basis.

Spain is one of the largest contributors to the
Operation. Last May, in agreement with the Government
of Libya, we started training coast guard officials.
With the authorization of the Security Council, we now
wish to improve the enforcement of the arms embargo
on Libya as its authorities have requested for some
time now and in accordance with the commitment it
undertook at the ministerial conference in Vienna in
May. We also believe that a strengthened embargo will
strengthen the authority of the Presidency Council and
the Government of National Unity already installed in
Tripoli.

Ultimately, Operation Sophia is only one illustration
of Europe's commitment to Libya. We have offered our
cooperation to Prime Minister Serraj in other areas,

such as emergency humanitarian assistance, health care
and strengthening local institutions.

Spain has also cooperated with Libya in other
areas, such as the promotion of freedom of the press
and fighting hate speech through a series of seminars
for the Libyan media, organized with the cooperation
of UNESCO. The third such seminar was held in June
2015 in Madrid. We will closely follow the development
of the political situation in the coming months and are
ready to contribute to the Libya's stability, always with
utmost respect for its national sovereignty.
The path we have chosen, as High Representative
Federica Mogherini said in this Chamber a few days ago
(see S/PV.7705), is of constant coordination between
the European Union and the United Nations to serve the
collective interest of the international community as a
whole. That will be our main objective as we implement
the resolution we have just adopted.

