Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
The United Republic of Tanzania wishes to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. We wish to recognize and appreciate
your personal presence and that of Ministers Phil Goff
of New Zealand and Mr. Michael Ambiihl of
Switzerland this morning. We also welcome the
videolink contribution of Mr. James Wolfensohn,
whose personal commitment to development and
poverty eradication is greatly valued in my country.

The reform of the United Nations will not achieve
the desired results if it is not accompanied by other
measures to reinforce the Organization's capacities.
The close interlinkages between security, development
and human rights have revealed the imperative of an
integrated approach to peacebuilding. It is therefore
important that we examine how best we can promote
peace and the sustained rule of law in post-conflict
societies.

Lasting prevention means altering the conditions
that give rise to conflicts. That is the centrepiece of
peacebuilding: building peace by building good
governance, meeting basic human needs and fostering
social harmony. The United Nations has a
commendable record in peacemaking and
peacekeeping. However, it is weak in the area of
peacebuilding, the problem being that, as currently
constituted, it lacks an institutional framework to
effectively address the challenge of helping countries
transit from war to lasting peace.

It is in that regard that we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to create an
intergovernmental Peacebuilding Commission,
including a Peacebuilding Support Office, within the
Secretariat. We share the view that the Peacebuilding
Commission should, among other things, improve
planning for sustained recovery in the immediate
aftermath of war, focusing on early efforts to establish
the necessary institutions. It should also improve
coordination of the many post-conflict activities of the
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies.

We believe that the advisory and coordinating
functions of the Commission should necessarily
involve three integrated components: policy
formulation, institutional partnership and resource
mobilization. Of those, we wish to emphasize the value
of institutional partnership because, even within the
United Nations system, the Security Council is just one
among the relevant players in peacebuilding efforts.
The creation of the Economic and Social Council's Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on African Countries Emerging
from Conflict attests to that. The Advisory Group is
instrumental in linking up the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council in areas of common
concern related to peace and development. We are
therefore in agreement with the Secretary-General that,
in order to combine efficiency with legitimacy, the
Peacebuilding Commission should report to the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in sequence, depending on the phase of the conflict.

Outside the United Nations system, the
Organization must work in unison with regional and
international actors. The challenge here is how to build
an effective partnership between the United Nations
system and other actors for a well-coordinated role in
peacebuilding. The United Nations partnerships with
the African Union and such African subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of West
African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Southern Africa Development
Community have been quite exemplary in the areas of
peacemaking and peacekeeping. That important
collaboration must be extended in the area of post-
conflict peacebuilding as well.

Coordinating resource mobilization is crucial
because, without adequate resources, the reconstruction
of political, economic, social, security, judicial and
administrative sectors will not be possible. Currently,
peacebuilding activities rely on voluntary
contributions. Practical experience indicates that there
is a lack of predictability in mobilizing adequate
resources for peacebuilding based on voluntary
contributions. It is important that a discussion on the
divide between assessed contributions to peace
operations and voluntary contributions be initiated.
That will help to determine the best way of mobilizing
adequate resources for peacebuilding activities.

It is in the context of coordinating resource
mobilization that we welcome the proposal to establish
a standing fund for peacebuilding. Such a fund should
play a central role in resource mobilization. It should
be not an alternative to international and bilateral
donors, but a facilitator for additional resources for
peacebuilding. One of its major functions should be to
help ensure predictable financing for early recovery
activities - an important stopgap measure to
overcome delays in disbursement.

In resource mobilization, the standing fund must
link up with regional and international financial
institutions, particularly the Bretton Woods
institutions. It is encouraging to note that the Bretton
Woods institutions have become more responsive to the
economic needs of the countries that have been
disrupted by conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to recognize
the special attention that the United Nations is paying
to African conflicts. Lastly, we want to thank you, Sir,
once again for providing us with this opportunity to
participate in this important discussion.

