Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like to express
our appreciation for the presence of our Secretary-
General, at least at the beginning of this meeting, and,
of course, we very much welcome the opportunity for
an exchange of views on the content of the new draft
resolution on Iraq with the old and new Foreign
Minister, Mr. Zebari. We have been advocating this
dialogue all along, because we firmly believe that the
new Iraqi interim Government must have a say with
regard to the framework that this draft resolution is
going to provide for the months to come.

Germany, in the negotiations so far, has always
been in favour of an overriding principle - that is, that
the political process and the security architecture for
this interim period should not be imposed on Iraq by
the Security Council or by anyone else, even if it is
done with the best of intentions. I think that it is fair to
say that it is very important for the credibility of that
interim framework that it is the result of direct
consultations between the designated interim
Government and the Security Council and is not just
the result of bilateral arrangements or agreements.

We therefore support the idea expressed by other
Council members in former meetings not to limit this
dialogue with the representatives of the interim
Government to a one-time event. Of course, we would
also appreciate it very much if the new political
leadership were willing to continue these discussions
with the Council early next week.

The key issues with respect to the future draft
resolution will, from our perspective, be twofold: first,
it has to send a clear signal which marks a genuine
break with occupation and thus generates the necessary
acceptance among the Iraqi people; and secondly, it
will have to define the respective roles and
responsibilities of the interim Government, the
multinational force and the former occupying Powers,
and the United Nations, in their triangular relationship,
in a manner that is consistent with the desired signal of
a transfer of full sovereignty and authority.

We are fully aware that the presence of some
140,000 foreign troops and of several thousand foreign
civilians has to be harmonized with the concept of a
real and credible restoration of full sovereignty. While
we acknowledge that the revised version of the
American-British draft resolution is an honest attempt
to achieve that reconciliation, we believe that there is
still room for improvement towards a more credible
restoration of Iraqi ownership and full sovereignty, in
particular in three key areas of the text as it stands now.

My first point pertains to the transfer of
sovereignty. In our view, it has be clear that full
authority is transferred, and I think that I heard from
the Foreign Minister as well as from the representatives
of the Coalition that that is the intention. We feel that
any restrictions that might arise in some areas should
only be self-imposed restrictions that arise out of the
character of the interim Government as a caretaker -
as an interim Government.

My second point pertains to the duration of the
mandate of the multinational force. We agree with what
was said by the Foreign Minister and by Ambassador
Negroponte that a premature withdrawal of troops
would not be desirable, but we think that a deadline -
that is, a specific date for the expiration of the force's
mandate - is an important signal that should be
included in the text, notwithstanding the possibility of
renewing the mandate or of basing the presence of
foreign troops in Iraq subsequently on a different legal
basis, such as a status-of-forces agreement.

Furthermore, the clear-cut right of the transitional
Government to terminate the mandate earlier if it so
wishes should be clarified in order to make clear the
fact that it is a fully sovereign Government.

My third remarks pertain to the security
architecture - the description of the general principles
that will govern the sharing of security responsibilities
between the interim Government and the multinational
force - the partnership, as it was called by
Ambassador Negroponte. That does not mean going
into micromanagement, which should be left to the
parties on the ground.

But I would like to pose two questions to the
Foreign Minister in that respect. Which general
principles does he think should be the determining
factors in the relationship between the multinational
force and his Government, especially if it comes to
conflicting views on some issues? In that context, my
second question is, the draft resolution refers to a
request of his Government with regard to a further
presence of the multinational force and to a
multinational-force-related letter to the President of the
Security Council. Could he inform us of its content or
elaborate on the current state of affairs?

We would very much appreciate the views of his
Government on those issues as well as on other aspects
of the draft text. Of course, we understand that the
interim Government has been designated only a few
days ago and that it may not yet have had a chance to
discuss all the aspects of the draft resolution in detail,
but this, we feel, is an important draft resolution, and
its message may well influence the acceptability of the
political transition in Iraq. We are therefore deeply
interested in his preliminary views today and look
forward to an ongoing dialogue with those responsible
in his country.

