Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom fully shares the thoughts of, and the
statement to be made by, Italy as the presidency of the
European Union. I have just a few comments to make
in my national capacity.

My first comment is to welcome and congratulate
both the Government of Timor-Leste and the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), under Mr. Kamalesh Sharma and his
team, for their achievements since we last heard from
Mr. Sharma, not least in enhancing the capacity of the
public administration and the police force. We agree
with the Secretary-General's remark quoted this
morning by Mr. Sharma that peacekeeping and peace-
building are two sides of the same coin. After
UNMISET, international assistance will be essential for
the peacekeeping now under way to be successful. As
we move to the end of the peacekeeping phase, we
must first ensure a smooth transition to peace-building,
with continuing international assistance. Secondly, we
must identify solid arrangements in advance for that
international engagement. Thirdly, there must be clarity
about the part to be played by the United Nations in
that international engagement, a United Nations role
that we believe will be essential.

The Secretary-General's report in early 2004
must therefore set out clear proposals to the Council
for the further development of Timor-Leste in the final
months of UNMISET, and then after the drawdown. We
look forward in the coming weeks and months to
continue dialogue with Mr. Sharma and his team, as
well as with interested countries both inside and
outside the Council.

Meanwhile, despite all the effort already under
way, we must look for further maximum effort to
achieve what can be achieved in UNMISET's
remaining seven months. This will require significant
commitment by the Government of Timor-Leste, the
United Nations and by other development partners.

The United Kingdom would single out three areas
for particular focus but these are not intended to be
exhaustive.

The first area is border delimitation. We are
concerned at the delay in finalizing border delimitation.
It is important that this be completed before UNMISET
goes. We look to Indonesia and Timor-Leste to
continue to develop their relations. We hope the
commitment made by both sides to finalizing
agreement on border delimitation will lead to a speedy
resolution.

The second area is the continuing weaknesses in
the judicial sector described this morning by
Mr. Sharma. In relation to the Ad Hoc Tribunal, we
agree with the Secretary-General's statement in his
report that the perpetrators of human rights abuses
must be brought to justice, and we would be interested
in Mr. Sharma's suggestions as to how this would be
best achieved.

We welcome the progress made by the serious
crimes unit and look forward to receiving, in due
course, the United Nations recommendations on how
serious crimes should be handled after May 2004.

Finally, a further area for attention is the
continued capacity-building of the Timor-Leste police
force. Mr. Sharma has described the considerable
challenges. The United Kingdom is working closely
with Australia on possible projects in policing
assistance, and we hope other countries will also assist
in this area.

