Mr. Schieb (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for hosting today's debate. I also thank all
the participants who have provided us with insightful
briefings. Germany also extends its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2015/409).

Germany aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

We consider it to be of great value that the Council
continues to pay close attention to the children and
armed conflict agenda. Parties to conflicts that hurt
children for the sake of strategic advantage are guilty of
some of the worst crimes imaginable. The perpetrators
show an abominable degree of treachery and cowardice.
They destroy not only the lives of children but the very
foundation of societies. Germany therefore strongly
believes that it is the Security Council's responsibility
to firmly oppose such practices wherever they occur.
We need to shed light on those who use and abuse
children in the most horrible ways. We must hold them
accountable and, even more importantly, we must
redouble our efforts to prevent such crimes from being
committed. Germany therefore welcomes the Council's
decision to list abductions as a trigger for inclusion
in the annex to the Secretary-General's annual report
(see S/2015/409). As a strong supporter of the children
and armed conflict portfolio, Germany was pleased to
co-sponsor resolution 2225 (2015), adopted today.

Allow me to make three points. First, the Secretary-
General's report notes that the number of abductions
is increasing. That is a matter of great concern, all
the more so because abductions are a precursor to
other grave violations. The heinous abuse of children
at the hands of such terrorist groups as Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
for example, shows this fact clearly. We hope that the
additional trigger and the mechanism associated with
it will be effective in preventing future abductions. We
would find it particularly helpful if the next report of
the Secretary-General indicated where abductions are
occurring beyond the well-known cases in Nigeria, Iraq
and Syria, and away from the media spotlight.

Secondly, we reiterate our call to use the existing
sanctions regimes more effectively to increase
accountability for grave violations against children. The
sanctions committees must define designation criteria
relating to children and armed conflict and encourage
the Special Representative to share information with
them. The Security Council must not shy away from
using the information collected through the monitoring
and reporting process.

Thirdly, I would like to point out that those
entrusted with the protection of children must never
become perpetrators themselves. We condemn all
cases of sexual abuse in the context of peacekeeping
missions led or mandated by the United Nations.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's zero
tolerance approach. We call on all troop contributors
and the Secretariat to hold all perpetrators accountable.
We call for stronger internal oversight in the Secretariat
and in its justice mechanisms, and for the protection of
whistle-blowers. We look forward to the results of the
independent external review initiated by the Secretary-
General with regard to reported abuse.

