Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Conference on Safeguarding Endangered Cultural
Heritage, held in Abu Dhabi from 2 to 3 December
2016 on a joint initiative of France and the United Arab
Emirates, has already allowed us to broaden the scope
of our reflection on the crucial importance concerning
the protection of cultural heritage in areas of conflict.
It is a major challenge for which the international
community - beginning with the Security
Council - must quickly find a rapid and coordinated
response. I would therefore like to enthusiastically
commend France and Italy for their leadership with
regard to that initiative, as well as you, Sir, for having
organized this meeting allowing us to follow up.

I would also like to thank the following briefers for
their respective quality briefings: Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs; Ms. Irina
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO; Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime; and Brigadier General
Fabrizio Parrulli, Commander of the Italian Carabinieri
Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage.

I believe that, on a similar tack, this would be
an appropriate juncture to pay tribute to the often
anonymous but numerous and important actors who
work tirelessly around the world for the protection and
preservation of the cultural heritage of peoples. In that
regard, I pay particular tribute to UNESCO.

Humankind has been scarred by the massive
and brutal destruction perpetrated by terrorists in
Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq or Libya, as well as in Mali,
where we have witnessed, powerless and alarmed, the
destruction of tombs and precious manuscripts that
are often hundreds of years old. I recall that Senegal
actively contributed to the important Saint Petersburg
Declaration of June 2012, condemning the destruction
of the aforementioned tombs.

The spread of armed conflict throughout the world,
exacerbated by the violent extremism advocated by
terrorist groups, whose calling card is the destruction
or looting and trafficking of cultural heritage, is an
aggravating factor of the threat to world heritage. We
must therefore take the physical and symbolic dimension
into account in the international community's efforts
to adopt new strategies to respond to the destructive
and even nihilist fury of terrorist groups. We therefore
think it important to begin to compile the most precise
inventory possible of cultural goods and objects
of architectural, historical, cultural and religious
importance that have been illegally moved, removed
or transferred from trafficked out of conflict zones.
We must be able to trace such objects, in cooperation
with the relevant international institutions, United
Nations agencies and international stakeholders, such
as museums and even private collectors, with a view to
repatriating stolen goods.

Paragraph 4 of resolution 2347 (2017), just adopted,
is key in its stipulation that

"unlawful attacks against sites and buildings
dedicated to religion, education, art, science
or charitable purposes, or historic monuments
may constitute, under certain circumstances and
pursuant to international law a war crime and
that perpetrators of such attacks must be brought
to justice".

The Senegalese delegation welcomes the recent
decision of the International Criminal Court of
27 September 2016, which for the first time in the
history of humankind identifies the destruction of a
religious and cultural heritage site as a crime of war
and condemns the perpetrators of such atrocious acts
to an exemplary sentence of nine years. That sets an
important international legal precedent.

The protection of cultural heritage is first and
foremost the responsibility of the State custodian. The
United Nations and other relevant bodies must provide
requesting Governments with the support and assistance
they need to establish national protection mechanisms.
We also welcome the announcement made at the Abu
Dhabi conference that a global fund would be set up to
protect endangered cultural heritage, complementary
to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Fund.
It is also essential for States to strengthen bilateral,
subregional and regional cooperation through joint
initiatives, particularly in the framework of relevant
UNESCO programmes.

Those who have spoken before me have described
as historic the strong and unanimous message that
we have sent through the adoption of resolution 2347
(2017). The resolution strengthens and expands the
scope of similar, existing international instruments,
including resolution 2199 (2015), the 1954 Convention
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, and
the 1972 Convention concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage, not to mention
the relevant provisions introduced by the Security
Council into peackeeping mandates, such as those for
operations in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Mali.

Resolution 2347 (2017) offers a good road map
and calls for more proactive global mobilization and
multiform and multistakeholder cooperation. For all
of those reasons, the delegation of Senegal supproted
the adoption of the resolution in co-sponsoring it and
voting in its favour.

