Mr. Williamson (United States of America): I
would like to discuss some of the challenges faced by
the Central African region and underscore that regional
stability can be built only on the foundation of thriving
nation-States. Several of the Central African nations
are coming out of a period of instability and even of
open warfare. While historic steps have been taken to
bring formerly warring factions and neighbours to
peace, there remain many challenges ahead. One such
significant challenge is the reintegration of former
combatants into their home countries or their
hometowns.

The challenge of repatriation and reintegration of
former combatants, who in many cases have become
internally displaced persons, is a great one that the
Security Council may become increasingly compelled
to address. Although neighbouring Central African
States are moving toward peace, subregional conflicts
like that in Uvira, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
are locally a source of fear and violence and could
cause renewed fighting among Central African States.

Finally, I would like to comment on a point made
in the background paper distributed by the presidency
which takes note of the myriad United Nations offices
in the region and the six different representatives of the
Secretary-General with mandates there.

Central Africa today is undergoing considerable
change. Neighbouring States to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have recently withdrawn their
troops from that country. Angola is coming out of a
decades-long period of internal war. The recent Summit
of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central
Africa in Libreville, which addressed the situation
between Chad and the Central African Republic, is an
example of what regional organizations can contribute
to conflict resolution in the region. We urge the
continuation of such efforts, and we will consider ways
to assist the efforts of these organizations to achieve
peace throughout Central Africa. But we would be
fooling ourselves if we failed to recognize that conflict
between the States of this region is still a threat and
that several States remain hobbled by a lack of good
governance, the absence of a rule of law and a
fundamental disregard for human rights.

One of our aims here today is to strengthen
cooperation between regional organizations, the
international community and the United Nations
system. But we must be upfront; regional cooperation
can be built only on the solid foundation of healthy and
wholly functioning States. These are nation-States with
cohesive and transparent forms of government based
on the rule of law, an active independent judiciary and
a professional military distinct from civilian life.
Robust regional cooperation among the Central African
States can truly come only about when all nations
within the region reach this threshold of domestic
stability and integrity, and when each nation provides
security for its entire citizenry. Ultimately, we cannot
provide effective bilateral or multilateral assistance
unless and until each nation functions and thrives.

The Central African region is now faced with the
complex and essential challenge of making way for
peace. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
recent peace accords have made specific and detailed
provisions for the return of foreign troops to their
countries and for former combatants to return to their
home regions. The success of these plans means more
than the separation of forces; the individuals returning
home after many months or years must be made
welcome if their reintegration is to be permanent. The
last thing that the region needs is thousands upon
thousands of the permanently displaced.

We are all acutely aware of the staggering cost of
warfare and conflict in the Central African region, in
terms of both human suffering and monetary value.
Last year, the United Nations spent $296.5 million on
its peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo alone, of which the Government of the
United States of America contributed $83.4 million. In
addition, the Government of the United States spent
$34 million last year on assistance to displaced persons
in the Central African region, not including assistance
to Angola. These are large sums and I cite them
because they are indicative of the dimensions of the
problems facing the region as a result of conflicts.

The United States takes this occasion to
encourage those countries faced with the reintegration
of former combatants to work with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other relevant agencies to monitor the security and
safety of returning combatants. There will need to be
impartial third-party verification of the safety of former
combatants in order for there to be full reintegration.

At the same time, we cannot be complacent and
take recent progress for granted. We need only look to
the recent violence in fighting in Uvira, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, between the Mai Mai, the
RCD-Goma and other armed groups, which has
increased instability and tensions, as well as the risk of
spillover violence in both Burundi and Rwanda. This is
why it is imperative that the parties cease hostilities
immediately and without preconditions. The United
States Government calls on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Government of Rwanda to exert their influence on all
the parties to refrain from any action that would further
inflame the situation.

Finally, I note that there are six separate Special
Representatives or Envoys of the Secretary-General in
the Central African region. I ask that we use this
discussion to step back and look at the mandates of
those offices to ensure that United Nations activities in
the region are coherent and effective. I would ask the
Secretary-General to brief the Security Council on the
goals of those offices and on the benchmarks he would
look to in fulfilling those aims. I also would ask for a
specific benchmark regarding the recent call by the
Security Council urging the use of the good offices of a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
serve as a mediating influence in Uvira, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

With Angola at peace and foreign troops
withdrawing from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African region merits praise. If the
momentum for peace can be maintained, then the
fragile nature of the Central African region can be
improved. Now the regional actors must look to the
hard work of creating the constant conditions for
peace. This is the hard work of developing functioning
States that ensure the security of all their citizens. This
includes the necessary task of welcoming back those
displaced by war. In these endeavours, they have our
full support.

