Mr. Stareevie (Serbia): At the outset, allow me to
express the satisfaction of the Republic of Serbia with
the Security Council's recent press statement
(SC/10265), and particularly with the congratulations
my country received for the recent arrest of Ratko
Mladic' and the acknowledgment that the arrest was a
clear demonstration of the Government of Serbia's
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to
thank all of the Council members who commended
Serbia in their statements today.
I would also like to extend our thanks to the
President and the Prosecutor of the ICTY, Judge
Patrick Robinson and Mr. Serge Brammertz, for their
ongoing efforts related to the Republic of Serbia's
cooperation with the Tribunal. These efforts have been
additionally intensified by the activities related to the
conclusion of the Tribunal's mandate and the
preparations for the successful commencement of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

At the same time, I would also like to welcome
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Judge Dennis Byron
before and Judge Khalida Rachid Khan now, and
Justice Hassan B. Jallow, who, in parallel with the
President and the Prosecutor of the ICTY, play an
important role in closing one of the important chapters
in the history of international justice and, at the same
time, contribute to the establishment of the new body
that will continue the legacies of the two Tribunals.

Concerning Serbia's cooperation with the ICTY, I
will briefly comment on the current report of the
Prosecutor (S/2011/316, annex II).

Serbia shares the Prosecutor's assessment
regarding all areas of cooperation except, obviously,
for the part on the fugitives. As recent developments
have shown, that part of the Prosecutor's report has
been rendered largely obsolete, and I am pleased that
the Prosecutor, in his recent statements, including
before the Council today, has recognized that fact.

In any case, Serbia is pleased to say that the
arrest of Ratko Mladic' came as a result of the
continuous and intensive efforts of all those
participating in the investigations and searches for the
fugitives. The arrest of the last remaining fugitive,
Goran Hadzic', will continue to be a priority for Serbia
in the coming period. No impunity will be allowed and
no issue in relation to cooperation with the Tribunal
will remain unresolved.

Serbia has arrested and transferred to the Tribunal
45 out of 46 persons that were believed to be in Serbia.
All documents requested from Serbia have been
promptly delivered for the purpose of the ongoing
trials and appeal procedures. Access to witnesses and
State archives has been granted to the Office of the
Prosecutor and to the defence teams without a single
exception. For all these reasons, Serbia believes that it
has now undoubtedly achieved full cooperation with
the ICTY.

Nevertheless, Serbia will continue to maintain its
cooperative relationship with the Tribunal in all
aspects, and will continue with its proactive approach
to the stabilization process in the region, hoping that,
as the Security Council has also stated, the recent
actions of Serbia will bring the Western Balkans even
closer to reconciliation. In this way, Serbia will
continue to actively contribute to the achievement of
international justice and, at the same time, to the
strengthening of the European perspective of all States
established in the territory of the former Yugoslavia.

Serbia remains strongly interested in the
implementation of the Tribunal's completion strategy
and has already expressed its interest in participating,
to the greatest extent possible, in the deliberations on
issues related to the archives and in the commencement
of the Residual Mechanism. Serbia therefore retains its
position submitted to the Security Council in October
2008 and March 2009, and reiterates its readiness to
actively participate in all future discussions on these
issues. My country is confident that the full level of
cooperation with the ICTY it has achieved will
continue in the upcoming period and that it will secure
a smooth transition to future cooperation with the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

Taking all of this into consideration, the Republic
of Serbia wishes to address once again the grave issues
of organ trafficking and persons unaccounted for after
the Kosovo conflict in 1999. My country is firmly
resolved to insist that the truth be established regarding
all the missing persons and victims of the armed
conflicts in the Balkans during the 19905. The rejection
of impunity has to apply equally to all such cases, and
Serbia, which is fulfilling its obligations in this regard,
has every right to insist that others do the same.

In this regard, I would like to reiterate our request
that the Security Council establish an independent
mechanism to conduct an overall investigation of organ
crimes. Only such a mechanism established by the
Security Council would have the power to conduct an
impartial and full investigation of these crimes and the
prosecution of all those found responsible for them.
That is precisely why all other crimes committed
during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia have been
and are being investigated by mechanisms established
by the Security Council. To do differently with these
most atrocious of crimes would truly be a monumental
injustice, and we hope and believe that the Council will
not allow it.

