Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia appreciates the
leadership of the Netherlands and Ambassador van
Walsum personally as President of the Security Council
for this month and welcomes your personal initiative, Sir,
to convene this open debate on the situation in Africa.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
impressive progress report on the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. The progress report provides
valuable insights into the practical work which has been
taking place since April last year and shows that the
problems of Africa are very much at the centre of
attention and action of the Secretary-General.

The Security Council, in turn, has been giving much
of its attention to specific situations in Africa, and at the
same time has tried to establish the necessary conceptual
framework for its own future action. Much of that work

 

was accomplished in the ad hoc Working Group of the
Security Council, ably chaired by Ambassador Denis
Dangue Rewaka of Gabon.

In my statement I wish to refer to several areas in
which I believe further action is necessary. The first is
inter-institutional cooperation, especially cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and a number of subregional organizations in
Africa. The Security Council is consistently supporting the
efforts of the OAU and subregional organizations, and is
prepared to enhance the effectiveness of that support. We
were therefore pleased to see Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the
Secretary-General of the OAU, in our midst this morning.
We would like to see him as often as possible in our midst,
with the aim of strengthening coordination and cooperation
between the two Organizations. Together we must ensure
the synergetic effects of the implementation of our
respective mandates and avoid situations in which complex
regional procedures produce undue delays and diminish the
effectiveness of the support of the United Nations for the
OAU.

Another area where the Security Council needs to
engage in further thinking and specific action relates to
sanctions. It is indicative of the tragedy of Africa that the
majority of sanctions imposed by the Security Council have
been directed against Member States or specific groups in
Africa.

Sanctions, as the Secretary-General pointed out in
paragraph 25 of his last year's report on Africa, have a way
of inflicting costs on unintended victims. In response to the
pressing need to make sanctions a more targeted, effective
and less blunt instrument, the chairpersons of the sanctions
Committees launched an initiative in September last year
which resulted in the preparation of an issue paper and a
set of practical proposals concerning sanctions imposed by
the Security Council. These two documents led to the
adoption of a note by the President of the Security Council
on the work of the sanctions Committees. That note
includes a number of concrete measures to improve the
effectiveness of sanctions regimes and to alleviate their
unintended side effects. This line of Security Council
activity has to continue.

In the context of efforts aimed at improving the
Security Council's applied sanctions in Africa, it is
important to note the recent experience of the Libya
sanctions Committee, established by Security Council
resolution 748 (1992). The events of this April have shown
that the Security Council is not only capable of imposing
sanctions, but, when the necessary conditions are created,
of suspending them as well.

We share the opinion that greater use should be
made of targeted sanctions and that more attention should
be paid to their unintended adverse effects. However, we
also believe that there is a need to ensure more serious
enforcement of the existing sanctions regimes by the
international community. We especially support efforts
aimed at improving the implementation of arms
embargoes and stemming illicit arms flows to and within
Africa. In this connection, we would like to recognize the
indefatigable efforts of Ambassador Robert Fowler of
Canada to facilitate a political solution of the Angolan
crisis by limiting the ability of UNITA to pursue the war
option.

Illicit flows of arms and other conventional weapons
represent one of the major obstacles to peace. We are
witnessing this in Angola, in Sierra Leone and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which are the most
acute problems of the continent today. We are aware of
the fact that the availability of arms is not the main
reason for fighting, but it does help and encourage the
latent problems to erupt. On 19 November 1998 the
Security Council adopted resolution 1209 (1998), which
addressed this question and considered what role the
United Nations and Member States might play in
responding to the challenge of illicit arms flows to and
within Africa. We are pleased to see that this Security
Council action complements several regional initiatives.

We welcome the initiative of Mali, through the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to declare a moratorium on the production
and transfer of small arms, involving 16 countries. It is
also heartening that the Secretariat of the OAU has
strengthened its Centre for Disarmament in Togo. We
welcome the decision of the OAU to organize a regional
conference on small arms that will provide specific
recommendations on the halting of the use, transfer and
illegal manufacturing of small arms, and on all other
ongoing activities that are mentioned in the Secretary-
General's progress report.

The Security Council last year adopted a number of
specific proposals for the strengthening of African
peacekeeping potential. We are pleased at the ongoing
efforts to deepen the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OAU, as well as with other regional and
subregional arrangements. Effective peacekeeping
operations on the African continent require military

 

contingents that are skilled in specialities such as tracking,
anti-mine warfare, low-intensity conflict and law
enforcement activities. It is recognized that the military
potentials in Africa are very well suited to these tasks.

However, as the Secretary-General pointed out in
paragraph 26 of his progress report, the enhancement of
African capacity for peacekeeping is contingent on the
provision of logistic support. For at least some time in the
future, Africa will therefore need help in constructing the
foundations of regional security systems and in dealing with
conflicts that occur along the way. It is imperative that the
United Nations and the international community provide the
necessary assistance.
Ultimately, Africans must assume the lead in
transforming their security environment and must help the
United Nations understand how it can best support them in
their efforts, given the extent of its global responsibilities.

Most, if not all, military conflicts in Africa are
characterized by severe humanitarian problems, which need
to be addressed with the greatest urgency. In the past year,
the Security Council has held several open debates on
various aspects of this issue. The conclusions of these
debates are relevant to the conflict situations in Africa and
need not be repeated at any length today. Let me therefore
mention only that we agree with the Secretary-General in
his appeals to increase humanitarian assistance and to
further improve coordination between the organizations and
agencies active in this field. In particular, we emphasize the
importance of expanding the concept of children as "zones
of peace" and, more generally, the work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We would like to encourage him and others
involved in these activities to pay particular attention to
such measures as anti-polio and other vaccination
campaigns which have in the past helped to establish
ceasefire arrangements and have produced a number of
valuable humanitarian effects.

I wish to note that many conditions for peace and
sustainable development in Africa do not belong on the
immediate agenda of the Security Council. Nevertheless,
the Council must be aware of their importance in order to
understand the limits to how far its decisions can reach and
to harmonize its actions with the activities of other United
Nations organs.

In our opinion, one of the most powerful messages of
the Secretary-General's report (S/1999/318) is the emphasis
on the intrinsic link between the promotion of economic
growth and the construction of durable peace. Good
governance and sound economics are the best guarantees
against armed conflicts. In this connection, it is worth
noting that much of the current debate on economic
growth offers some reasons for hope.

Hypotheses about dynamic gains in trade are at the
core of many new economic models of so-called
endogenous growth. According to these models, long-term
economic growth depends on increased productivity and
innovation, and the incentives for both depend on the
scope of the market. As such, these models provide
encouragement for local efforts to strengthen the private
sector and carry out the necessary macroeconomic
reforms.
Economists still stress, however, that the gains in
economic growth might not actually be shared by all.
Lack of adequate basic infrastructure, especially absence
of an effective transportation network, severely limits
opportunities for extensive trade. Climate may also have
serious adverse effects on economic growth. The tropics
impose additional burdens of debilitating infectious
diseases - most notably malaria - not found in the
temperate zones. In 1995, for example, countries with
severe malaria had income levels only one-third of
countries without malaria. For these reasons, it is safe to
say that a significant portion of Africa's population faces
severe geographical obstacles to development.

It is important to bear these special African
constraints in mind when discussing issues of such major
significance to Africans as access to foreign markets and,
most importantly, the unsustainable debt burden. The
recent Cologne initiative on debt represents a welcome
effort to provide fast relief through major changes to the
heavily indebted poor countries framework. Nevertheless,
more needs to be done. Adherence to International
Monetary Fund (IMF) structural adjustment programmes
is still a prerequisite for receiving debt relief. Serious
thought has to be given to the calls for debt cancellation
and to rethinking the role of IMF in Africa. The current
arrangements do not seem to be solving Africa's basic
problems and tend to divert attention away from
fundamental challenges such as disease control,
development of human resources and environmental
management. These issues should of course be discussed
further, and in depth in the Economic and Social Council
and in the General Assembly.

The problems of peace in Africa require constant
attention. The current open debate is an important phase

 

in that process. The Security Council should be able to
offer both vision in addressing the underlying causes and an
ability to address specific crisis situations in Africa
effectively.

