Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would first like to thank the delegation of India
for its initiative in convening this timely open debate
on maritime piracy, which is a major challenge for
the international community. We also express our
appreciation to the delegation of India for presenting
a concept note on the subject (S/2012/814, annex).
And we thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his introductory remarks on the issue before the
Council today.

It is interesting that the international community
must not only face new challenges to international
security, but also has to deal with one of the challenges
that have plagued our ancestors for centuries, namely,
piracy. Piracy and armed robbery at sea are a serious
threat to the lives of the personnel and passengers aboard
ships. They make navigation unsafe, hinder the supply
of international humanitarian assistance to countries
such as Somalia, and harm international trade, causing
substantial economic losses to many States. It therefore
becomes imperative for us to act decisively to combat
this worrisome trend.

For the past few years this issue has been on the
agenda of the Security Council, which has already taken
steps to address the challenge. Its decisions, consistent
with the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, create a legal basis for safety measures for
navigation in various regions and send a powerful signal
to Member States on the importance of a committed
response to piracy. It is important that Security Council
resolutions respect existing international law.

That is why the fight against piracy must become a
truly concerted effort, wide-ranging and transnational
in nature. We are certain that only full cooperation
between the United Nations, the countries affected,
the relevant international organizations and the private
sector will bring about successful results. We are well
aware that no country can tackle piracy by itself and
that in recent years the phenomenon has reached a
global scale, particularly affecting the Gulf of Aden
and more recently the Gulf of Guinea.

The United Nations should help mobilize resources.
The United Nations agencies in the region, in particular
the United Nations Office for West Africa, the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the International
Maritime Organization, should play an important role
in regional efforts to combat piracy and address issues
related to terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and arms
proliferation, which together conspire to destabilize the
region.

It is regrettable that most cases of piracy and
armed robbery go unpunished, due in large part to the
inadequate legal and practical processes in place for
their prosecution. We support the more active use of
international legal instruments to ensure the safety of
navigation and the improvement of legal regulation in
this area, taking into account the unique characteristics

of the situation.

Achieving the swift and appropriate prosecution
of those suspected of acts of piracy and ensuring their
imprisonment following trial is essential to preventing
impunity and deterring further attacks. We fully
support the strengthening of United Nations assistance
to the States of the region to build their capacities to
prosecute and imprison pirates. The United Nations
should focus its efforts on the following key elements:
legislative reform, capacity-building in prosecuting and
processing piracy cases, effective law enforcement,
and improving prison infrastructure in the States of the
region, in particular Somalia.

We share the View expressed in the concept note
prepared for this debate that a comprehensive approach
is needed to combat piracy, and that we must address
the underlying causes of this phenomenon to eradicate
it. We are concerned, for instance, that a significant
gap still exists in land-based programmes in Somalia
to address piracy, as noted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/783). In the specific case of Somalia,
we believe that the time has come to strengthen the
capacities of both Somalia and neighbouring countries
in funding and capacity-building. We also believe
it is important for Somalia to proclaim an exclusive
economic zone off its coast, as provided for by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Finally, although the attacks and kidnappings
committed by pirates have decreased, as has their
income, we are deeply concerned that parallel illegal
activities sponsored by pirate financing continue
to threaten the stability and security of States. The
Security Council would have a greater impact on the
fight against piracy if it could succeed in adopting
forceful measures to limit the capacity of leaders who
finance and instigate piracy.

