Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 would like to welcome Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Secretary of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan. We are grateful for his comprehensive
statement.

The priorities of the Kazakh chairmanship-in-
office of the OSCE that have been described to the
Security Council are a sound basis for the
implementation of objectives that we hope will take
that organization to a qualitatively new level. All of us
want the OSCE to become a more effective
organization that meets the interests of all its
participating States. We welcome Kazakhstan's
initiative to convene an OSCE summit in 2010. The
Chairman-in-office's intention to include on its agenda
such issues as current problems of European security
and tolerance is worthy of support.

From our point of View, we would like to
highlight a number of key issues on the OSCE's agenda
to which Russia intends to give special attention in
2010, including within the framework of the Corfu
discussions. Among these are the development of
dialogue on military-political issues, including
confidence- and security-building measures,

modernizing the 1999 Vienna Document on
confidence-building measures and the fight against
terrorism and the drug threat.

The next task is to reform the OSCE and to shift
all of its work to a clear, collectively agreed normative
basis, including adopting a charter for the organization;
streamlining the work of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights and its field missions;
countering neo-fascism and xenophobia; protecting the
rights of national minorities; agreeing common
principles for conflict management; and dialogue on
freedom of movement and liberalizing visa regimes.

The Russian Federation supports multilateral
development and improved cooperation with the
United Nations, its Security Council and regional and
subregional mechanisms, among which the OSCE
occupies an important position. Such coordination
must be based on the firm foundation of the Charter of
the United Nations and its Chapter VIII in particular,
taking into account the comparative advantages
inherent in the global Organization and its
mechanisms. What is unalterable here is respect for the
Security Council's lead role in the responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.

As a regional mechanism, the OSCE has
established close and fruitful cooperation with the
United Nations in a whole range of key areas, first and
foremost of which are security and the settlement of
regional conflicts. The primary mission of the OSCE is
to ensure equal and indivisible security for all
participating States. We believe that this key postulate
of the Charter for European Security has yet to be
fulfilled. In this context, Russia is eager to create
conditions such that no country would be able to
promote its own security at the expense of another's.

We hope that the conception of the Kazakhstan
chairmanship's work, as Mr. Saudabayev has presented
it today, will help us to overcome the crisis situations
encountered by the OSCE in the last few years and to
adapt it to the world's new realities. Russia is ready to
cooperate constructively with the Kazakh
chairmanship-in-office and all other participating
States on these issues.

