Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish, Sir, to express my delegation's pleasure at seeing
you presiding over the work of the Security Council; we
wish you every success as you discharge your important
responsibilities and once again offer you and your
delegation our full support. I wish also to express thanks
for the very generous words addressed to Ambassador
Somavia in connection with his work as President of the
Council last month.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for the
report he has submitted. We agree with its assessment
that there is an overall situation of progress in the process
and believe that this should be duly acknowledged. Yet it
is a source of deep concern that there are delays in
meeting the objectives agreed upon in the Lusaka
Protocol, particularly with respect to demobilization. This
is a problem that the Council must emphasize and that
obliges it to request that urgent measures be adopted,
particularly by the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA), to accelerate the process,
consolidate the progress achieved thus far, and move
towards the results to which the international community
and the people of Angola aspire.

We deplore in particular the death of two peace-
keepers, from Jordan and Zimbabwe, and of a British
representative of OXFAM, which occurred during an
ambush. We call upon both the Government of Angola
and UNITA to inform the Security Council of the identity
of those responsible for that attack.

The important agreements reached by the
Government and UNITA in the course of talks between
their top leaders, which the Council welcomed
enthusiastically, have regrettably been repudiated in
practice. The first signs that agreements were being
obstructed were statements that it had been a mistake to
accept those agreements. Such attitudes seriously affect
the process and gravely undermine belief that negotiations
were carried out in good faith. We urge Angolan leaders
to avoid making statements that engender such uncertainty
about what has been agreed.

 

UNITA must shoulder its responsibilities in key areas
such as the timely quartering of its troops and the speedy
incorporation of its forces into the joint armed forces; it
should, as soon as possible, provide personnel to act as
bodyguards for UNITA leaders.

Qualitative aspects of the demobilization process,
especially relating to the type of weapons being handed
over, signal a lack of good will in the fulfillment of
commitments. This is another source of legitimate concern
for the international community. We believe that the leaders
have displayed insufficient political will to make progress
in the peace progress. We consider that, if the Council is to
continue its support for Angola, this lack of political will
must be reversed through genuine demonstrations of a
readiness to fulfil agreements that have been reached in the
course of the long process of negotiating peace in Angola.
One concrete demonstration of change towards a
willingness to meet commitments would be the
establishment without further delay of the independent
United Nations radio for which this Council has so often
called.

We have supported the further extension for two
months of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) because we are
optimistic enough to trust that Angolan leaders will make
fresh and greater efforts to consolidate the peace process in
their country and to ensure that the United Nations can
maintain its stabilizing presence in support of the integrity
of Angola. It is time for those leaders to recognize that,
after so much suffering, what is most important is not the
leaders themselves, or their own interests, but rather the
people of Angola as a whole, who want peace and
tranquility for their families. That is what the world expects
of Angola.

