Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): Ireland welcomes this
opportunity to address the Security Council during its
open debate on the situation in Timor-Leste. I am
delighted to join others in saluting the presence here of
President Ramos-Horta and welcoming the statement
he delivered earlier.

Let me immediately associate Ireland with the
statement that has just been delivered by the
Ambassador of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

We endorse the Secretary-General's
acknowledgment in his comprehensive report
(S/2009/72) of the remarkable progress made by the
leaders and people of Timor-Leste since 2006. As a
country that has also struggled with the challenges that
face a small, newly independent nation, Ireland
recognizes the magnitude of Timor-Leste's
accomplishments. We commend it for its many
achievements.

President Ramos-Horta's recovery from the
attack of February 2008 and his continued leadership
have played no small part in the maintenance of peace
and stability in Timor-Leste. On behalf of my
Government, I would also like to acknowledge the role
of Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao and
opposition leader Mari Alkatiri, who have displayed
true leadership and patriotism during many challenging
times.

Ireland has actively supported the people of
Timor-Leste during their struggle and throughout the
process of transition to independence. We continue to
be actively engaged there. Following the vote for
independence in 1999, the focus of our support was on
the deployment of Irish troops, who served as members
of three successive missions: the International Force,
East Timor, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. In addition, Ireland
participated in United Nations and EU observation
missions for the referendum in 1999 and the elections
in 2001 and 2002.

Our multi-year priority development programme
in Timor-Leste, which is managed through our mission
in Dili, has focused on efforts to promote post-conflict
reconstruction through good governance, the
strengthening of democracy and the justice sector,
public sector development, the promotion of human
rights and gender equality, and support for the
development of a strong civil society.

Under Ireland's new conflict resolution initiative,
we have added a further dimension to our support with,
I am happy to say, the full agreement and
encouragement of the Government of Timor-Leste. The
purpose of that new engagement on our part is to assist
Timor-Leste in its transition from conflict to peace,
with particular focus on peacemaking, peacebuilding
and lesson-sharing. The initiative is being led by our
first roving ambassador for conflict resolution and
special envoy to Timor-Leste, Dame Nuala O'Loan. I
am delighted to acknowledge her presence among our
delegation today for this important discussion.

Ireland's conflict resolution engagement in
Timor-Leste, in close cooperation with Irish Aid's
development programme there, is designed to address
key issues directly related to the sources of fragility.
Initiatives taken so far include support for structured
high-level dialogue among Timor-Leste's leaders, a
programme on peace, remembrance and reconciliation,
and advice on security sector reform.

The need to address security sector reform and
the respective roles and responsibilities of the Falintil-
Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste and the National
Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL) have rightly been
acknowledged, in the current report of the Secretary-
General and in earlier ones, as being absolutely crucial
to peace and stability. Ireland also plans to launch an
early-warning and response system in Timor-Leste,
based in civil society there.

I am pleased to report that our Special Envoy has
had many very constructive discussions with the
leaders of Timor-Leste. These discussions have
demonstrated the shared desire to avoid further
upheaval and to build on the progress made. I would
also like to note our appreciation for the advice offered
by Special Representative Atul Khare and the UNMIT
team and for their support for Dame Nuala O'Loan's
engagement; they continue to do an outstanding job in
Timor-Leste.

My Government's Conflict Resolution Initiative
has a specific focus on lesson-sharing, which draws
from the experiences we garnered from the Northern
Ireland peace process. The experiences and insights
brought to bear by our Special Envoy, drawn from her
former role as Northern Ireland's first Police
Ombudsman during a critical transition period, are, in
our view, a particularly valuable asset with regard to
the current issues to be addressed in Timor-Leste's own
transition to the full resumption of policing powers by
the PNTL and the eventual withdrawal of UNPOL.

We fully endorse the view of the Secretary-
General that this process of transition must be
undertaken with great care and great prudence,
carefully assessing the fulfilment of all the critical
benchmarks. The role of the security sector reform
experts within UNMIT - which enjoys Ireland's direct
support - and the input of the security sector reform
unit in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will be vitally important in this process. We, of course,
welcome the Secretary-General's latest report to the
Council (S/2009/72) and look forward to early action
by the Council in response to it.

Ireland has also launched a lesson-sharing
process between organizations working on gender
issues in Northern Ireland, Ireland as a whole, Liberia
and Timor-Leste. The cross-learning process on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, is designed to facilitate the
sharing of national experiences with a view to
encouraging best practices and is intended to act as a
catalyst for discussions on effective implementation. In
addition to a meeting of representatives from those
areas that was held in Dublin last November, an Irish
project team recently carried out missions to Monrovia
and Dili. The outcome of this process will also feed
into the development of Ireland's own national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000).

In drawing to a conclusion, I should like to state
that Ireland is encouraged by the progress made by
Timor-Leste towards overcoming the obstacles and
issues that that country has faced in recent years. We
are committed to continuing our engagement in Timor-
Leste - with the Government, with civil society, with
the United Nations and with the European Union - in
support of the positive efforts being made by the
Timorese people to build this young State in a way that
will enable it to realize its full and manifest potential.

In this context, I join others in commending the
Security Council's continuing attention to this urgent
and vital issue.

