Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation
voted in favour of resolution 1846 (2008) on the basis
of a number of considerations, and we would like to
put them on record.

The security situation off the coast of Somalia
has deteriorated markedly due to acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. These acts have become more
blatant and impose greater costs on the international
community, in particular the transportation of
humanitarian assistance into Somalia and the security
of international navigation in the area. They have also
had an adverse impact on the social and economic lives
of the affected countries. We condemn and deplore all
acts of piracy and armed robbery against vessels in the
waters off the coast of Somalia. We would also like to
extend our strong support to the flag States and others
who have already fallen prey to such illegal acts.

We fully support concerted measures to assist
Somalia in fighting such acts. Let there be no doubt of
the importance of enhancing cooperation and, not least,
coordination among States in curbing such acts.
Resolution 1816 (2008) and subsequent resolutions,
including the one that we have just adopted, provides a
strong legal foundation for States to meet this
objective.

We remain convinced, however, that the root
cause of the piracy threat is the situation in Somalia
itself, which is due to political conflict, lawlessness
and lack of capacity for law enforcement. While the
international community needs to address the scourge
of piracy off the coast of Somalia, it is ultimately on
the ground that the international community needs to
translate its words into deeds. This includes greater
support for the African Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) and the political process in the short term,
and the mustering of international military resources in
the medium to long term.

Finally, our support for the resolution is based on
the fact that it seeks to help Somalia, is focused on
Somalia and spells out clearly that its provisions shall
not affect the rights, obligations or responsibilities of
Member States under international law, including under
3
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and shall not be considered as establishing
customary international law.

