Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): I thank you and your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening and presiding
over this very important meeting.

I have the honour to speak today on behalf of the
five Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and my own country, Sweden.

Seventy years ago, with extraordinary foresight,
our nations did something remarkable, and to this
day unrivalled. In the service of coming generations,
we reaffirmed the core principles of human rights
to protect humankind from the scourge of war. We
decided to unite our strengths to maintain international
peace and security and not use armed force, save for the
common interest. That was the purpose for which the
United Nations was created.

Today, that is still our task and common goal. Today,
that is still what needs to be respected by all - respect
for the sovereignty of the country that faces external
aggression or occupation of its territory, respect for
the dignity and worth of any human person who is
denigrated and denied his or her human rights. Today,
however, that task is more challenging than ever. We
live in an interconnected world, where what happens in
another's country will eventually effect what happens
in mine. Conflicts can be inter-State, but more often
intra- State and multifaceted. Transnational threats, such
as terrorism, organized crime and global pandemics,
show that security threats are no longer confined within
borders. Now more than ever, collective threats need to
be dealt with collectively. Based on the norms of the
Charter, we need to act through prevention, mediation,
regional cooperation and, as a last resort, force. To be
effective, those efforts require the active involvement
of women as well as men.

Our ability and willingness to act decisively and
collectively leave much to be desired. We have conferred
on the Security Council the primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. We have
agreed that the Council acts on our behalf in carrying
out its duties. We therefore expect individual Council
members to always act in the spirit of the Charter, to
never to give way to any threat, and to never abuse the
trust we have vested in them by using their Council seats
to pursue national interests. Our faith that this spirit
will prevail, despite the many challenges against it, is
what motivates us Nordic countries in our unwavering
support of the many peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities mandated by the Security Council. It is also
the guiding light whenever we take a seat at the Council
table and assume our share of the responsibility.

When stating the principle of sovereign equality
of all Member States, and in that regard particularly
mindful of the security and territorial integrity of
small and medium-sized States, the founders of the
United Nations never intended sovereignty to be an
excuse for the international community to avert its
eyes from flagrant atrocity crimes. The principle of
sovereignty, therefore, must have a dimension of human
security - for men, women and children - as well as
for the security of States. Those are the standards and
norms that underpin the Charter of the United Nations
and that should underpin our collective security
today. Those are the standards to which Trygve Lie,
Dag Hammarskjold and their successors tried to hold
the world. As the nature of today's conflicts tells us,
nothing else will do.

