Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank the Russian presidency and the African members
of the Council - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea
and South Africa - for having brought us together
today to discuss partnerships in strengthening regional
peace and security in Africa. I would also like to thank
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,

Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their comprehensive and insightful briefings.

The African continent is particularly conflict-
prone and has been the arena of more than one fourth
of global Violent conflicts, unrest and crisis in recent
years - in Mali, the Central African Republic,
Libya and Somalia, to name but a few. In 2018 alone,
50 per cent of the Security Council's country-specific
or regional-situations-related meetings were devoted
to Africa. The root causes of violence and conflict in
Africa are complex. Poverty and political, social and
economic inequalities compound Africa's deep-seated
historical problems. In addition, State and non-State
actors are increasingly interfering through the use of
foreign military groups in a quest for influence, thereby
undermining already fragile situations.

The security challenges on the continent are
changing rapidly, with ethnic clashes and drug
and human trafficking. Elections-related violence,
irregular migration flows, border security problems
and extremism and terrorism are on the rise. Violent
conflicts have erupted in part over the abundance of
lucrative mineral resources. Tackling these problems
on the ground requires tailor-made actions and joint
international efforts.

Allow me to attempt to answer the questions raised
at today's meeting and to speak from the perspective of
a country that has had the experience of a peaceful and
democratic political transformation and benefited from
local and regional partnerships.

First, let me stress that the principle of African
solutions to African problems must remain relevant. We
believe that strong and accountable State institutions
are critical to ensuring political stability and economic
growth. A weak State apparatus and a lack ofregionally
led solutions are among the sources of insecurity and
instability in Africa.

However, the concept of African ownership needs
to be strengthened by strong political will, and that is
where the Security Council should seek its role. There
is a need to enhance the dialogue on challenges to peace
and security and to support the African integration
agenda through increased cooperation with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, which should
present clear and timely positions to the United Nations
Security Council.

Secondly, we applaud the fact that the United
Nations engages regularly with regional and subregional
organizations on peace and security issues. That
partnershipshouldstrivetobridgethedevelopmentdivide
through the strengthening of economic cooperation
and the promotion of sustainable development. Here
Africa's regional economic communities constitute key
building blocks for economic integration. To be more
effective, those communities should enhance policy
convergence, harmonize their mandates and strengthen
their coordination with member countries. The
communities could also consider the idea of creating
multinational task forces in order to successfully fight
terrorists, extremists and cross-border crime.

More generally, we find it necessary to strengthen
coordination and coherence between the United
Nations and the African Union in terms of proper
analysis, planning and decision-making frameworks.
In February, we, as a member of the Security Council,
endorsed our commitment to peace and security
on the African continent through the adoption of
resolution 2457 (2019), whereby the Security Council
acknowledged that the task of building peace and
stability lies essentially with the African Union and
its 55 member States. It also recognizes the need for
international cooperation and partnership in support
of local and regional solutions. The resolution serves
as an example of the efforts made to strengthen the
partnership with the African Union.

Thirdly, we should regularly ask whether we
could do more in support of peace and security in
Africa, and what has proved most efficient. Poland
emphasizes the importance of conflict prevention and
of strengthening peacekeeping operations through a
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations. Africa's peace-operations capacity
has increased significantly. We need a proper debate
on the role of the regional organizations responsible for
maintaining peace and security in their own regions
and their cooperation with the Security Council.

At present four out of five United Nations Blue
Helmets are based in Africa. African States have
conducted operations of their own and contribute a
very large number of United Nations peacekeepers. The
United Nations peacekeeping model, however, was not
aimed at conducting enforcement or counter-terrorism
operations or at dealing with transnational challenges
such as organized crime or regional violent extremism.
The African Union and other African bodies such
as the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force or the
Multinational Joint Task Force seem to be well suited
to addressing these kinds of challenges.

Africa is a continent whose great potential is yet to
be fulfilled. Its many bright young people deserve access
to quality education and job opportunities. People who
see a better future for themselves at home do not take
the risky decision to embark on a dangerous journey
abroad. The key to reaching political, development
and security goals is the trust and involvement of
local populations. Africa is no exception. The United
Nations should remain closely engaged, in cooperation
with the African Union and other partners, in laying
solid and inclusive foundations for sustainable peace in
the region.

