The President: I thank the representative of
Argentina for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Malaysia.

Malaysia joins the other members of the Council in
expressing its most profound condolences to His Majesty
King Sidi Mohamed VI and to the Government and
people of Morocco on the passing of the great leader
King Hassan II, leader of the faithful, whose contributions
to international peace will always be remembered by
many around the world. May the blessings of Allah be
upon him.

Let me also join the members of the Council who
spoke before me in welcoming Mrs. Ogata and
commending her for her comprehensive and forthright
briefing on the refugee situation in Africa and her equally
pertinent remarks on the situation in Kosovo. We
particularly appreciate the remarks on the problem of the
disparity between the two situations. I am sure that these
will be reflected upon by the Council and by members of
the international community as it continues to consider
these and other situations.

Mrs. Ogata has highlighted both the positive aspects
of the refugee problem in Africa and some of the less
positive aspects - the remaining problems which need to
be addressed by the international community, including
the Council. It is true that many of those views had been

 

highlighted previously, but they bear repeating, as was done
in her presentation. Clearly the work of the High
Commissioner for Refugees is very much relevant to the
work and responsibility of the Council insofar as they relate
to the successful implementation of peacekeeping operations
and related work in respect of the implementation of peace
agreements and the rehabilitation of countries and peoples
caught up in conflicts.

Mrs. Ogata has rightly said that the existing problems
in Africa can be solved if there is the political will and
determination by African leaders to resolve African
problems. It is, however, important - and Mrs. Ogata has
stressed this - that these achievements and breakthroughs
be sustained and strongly supported by the international
community, particularly the Council. Fear of financial costs
of international intervention should not inhibit us from
making the necessary commitments and supporting peace
agreements concluded among African countries that had
found themselves in conflict situations.

Mrs. Ogata has also drawn the attention of the Council
to the fact that the situation in many parts of Africa is still
fragile, that even as peace agreements are being forged the
window of opportunity might not remain open for long, and
that the international community and the Council in
particular must seize the opportunities when they present
themselves.

These are, indeed, weighty words coming from Mrs.
Ogata, who - unlike members of the Council, who are
mostly concerned with these issues on an abstract level -
has grappled and continues to grapple with this refugee
issue and related problems virtually on a daily basis. As she
briefed the Council fresh from her extended field trips to
Africa, her words have a particular resonance as the
Council considers the important peace agreements that have
just been concluded in Sierra Leone and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, even if, in the latter case, not all
the parties have put their signatures to the agreement. It is
the hope of my delegation that the Council will not be
found wanting in supporting the implementation of these
agreements and of other agreements that we hope will be
concluded in the future.

We should remind ourselves that international
involvement in Africa has not always been negative: there
have been some successes. But unfortunately, the failures
have most often attracted attention. Of course there is a
need to learn from both if we wish to remain continuously
engaged in Africa. Briefings of this nature, followed by
frank and in-depth exchanges of Views between members of
the Council and people such as Mrs. Ogata, heads of
United Nations and other international agencies, on issues
of importance and relevance to the Council have proven
to be extremely useful. We all know that the realities of
intra-State conflicts are complex. Clearly, interventions
can be and often are difficult and even dangerous, but
very often such interventions cannot be avoided if we are
to prevent humanitarian catastrophes and the insidious
spread of instability. We feel that if the Council is to live
up to its Charter-mandated responsibilities it cannot shy
away from involvements which often times require robust
and substantive intervention.

In conclusion, Malaysia shares the Views that have
been expressed by Council members this morning and
will therefore not repeat them. This includes some of the
questions that I myself had wanted to raise. I am sure that
Mrs. Ogata will find time to respond to some of these.

I join other members in paying gracious tribute to
you, Mrs. Ogata, and to your organization for the
outstanding work that you have done in the name of our
common humanity. It is my delegation's hope that your
important briefing and your strong appeal for continued,
strong and sustained support for the work of your Office,
particularly in the context of the implementation of peace
agreements in Africa, will be particularly relevant as the
Council continues to consider these issues in coming
days. I thank you once again for your briefing.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mrs. Ogata to respond
to comments and suggestions raised by members.

