Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Holkeri for his briefing, which
comes after the excellent report of the Secretary-
General of 30 April (S/2004/348). I welcome among us
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro, Mr. Vuk Drascovic. We have listened to
him attentively.

I wish to state in advance that I associate myself
with the statement to be made shortly by the
Ambassador of Ireland on behalf of the member States
of the European Union, so I shall confine myself to a
few remarks. By way of introduction, I would like
to say a few words about the violence last March and
its consequences.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
Albanian Kosovo officials, as representatives of the
largest community in Kosovo, have a clear obligation
to protect and promote the rights of all communities.
The feeble commitment of the Kosovar leaders to
preventing, and their belated condemnation of, the
ethnic violence give rise to questions, even if we note
that they disseminated a more encouraging letter on 2
April. Clearly, the burden of proof rests on them.

The violence has only strengthened our resolve to
see the standards rapidly implemented so that the
question of status might be settled. We will pay special
attention to progress achieved in multi-ethnicity and
reconciliation, the return of displaced persons, dialogue
with Belgrade, a code of ethics for the media, and
decentralization. In fact, that is what was just affirmed
by the Security Council in its statement of 30 April
(S/PRST/2004/ 13). I note, however, that the quarterly
evaluation of the progress in the latest report of the
Secretary-General confirms setbacks on all the
standards.

I now wish to emphasize two specific topics: the
role of the media, and decentralization.

The report of the new Representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for Freedom of the Media confirms that the
media in Kosovo played a very negative role in the
violence in March. Mr. Haraszti has especially
highlighted the lack of professionalism, the biased
nature of reporting and the lack of pluralism in the
media. With the OSCE, the international community
must create the conditions so that the Kosovo media
might respect basic ethical rules. It seems that for its
part, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) should without further
delay take steps against those press organs that have
incited hatred and inter-ethnic violence.

The Special Representative quite rightly pointed
out that decentralization is a priority for action by the
international community. Decentralization could allow
for peaceful coexistence among the various
communities in Kosovo. There exist several models,
including those drawn from the Ohrid agreements. We
note that Belgrade has just made proposals, and we
welcome its willingness to dialogue on this crucial
issue.

In conclusion, I wish to say a word about method
and emphasize transparency and cooperation. We are
all aware that we must make progress on several fronts
in order to go forward in the settlement of the question
of Kosovo and the protection of all communities.
Consideration of that is under way in the United
Nations, including UNMIK, as well as in the capitals
of the countries most concerned. All of this thinking is
welcome. In due course we will have to compare all
those proposals. At any rate, we will have to work with
full transparency and full cooperation so that the
members of the Security Council might be able to take
the necessary decisions with full knowledge of the
facts.

