I congratulate you, Sir, on the Russian Federation's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of October 2020 and thank you for organizing this open debate on this issue of great importance to Namibia. I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing on the situation in the region. My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the distinguished Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I would like to begin my statement by expressing my concern at the rising rate of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infection in the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel. This pandemic has shattered the lives of many around the world and impacted the most vulnerable. Chief among them is the Palestinian population in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. I wish to remind Council members that Gaza has one of the highest population densities in the world, a weak health-care system and lingering humanitarian and economic crises. This represents an auspicious environment for COVID-19 to spread and cause more heartache and destruction to the people of Gaza. The financial crisis currently affecting the Palestinian Authority further compounds its ability to respond to COVID-19 in the Palestinian territories, as service provisions have been direly impacted. In this regard, Namibia welcomes the United Nations engagement with all sides to ensure the unimpeded provision of humanitarian assistance. I would also like to take this opportunity to reiterate Namibia's support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as the needs and demands for the services provided by the Agency to the 5.6 million Palestine refugees drastically increase because of the COVID-19 pandemic. In his 29 September address to the Security Council (see S/PV.8762), in which he presented the fifteenth report on the implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General noted that no concrete steps had been taken during the reporting period to implement the provisions of this resolution. This follows a similar pattern since the adoption of the resolution in December 2016. Mr. Mladenov underscored that no steps had been taken to "immediately and completely cease all settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem" (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 2). I wish to highlight the decision taken on 14 and 15 October by Israeli authorities to advance nearly 5,000 housing units, most of which are in outlying locations deep inside the occupied West Bank. I take this opportunity to reiterate that settlements are illegal under international law and represent an obstacle to peace and to the two-State solution. Furthermore, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned structures by Israeli authorities continued across the occupied West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, and have reached the highest demolition rate in the past four years. These actions also represent an obstacle to peace. Since my last statement to the Security Council under this agenda item in July (S/2020/736, annex 39), the normalization of relations of Israel with both the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain has been announced. Parties have underscored that the signing of these Abraham accords would provide a new impetus for peace in the region. The advancement of new settlements and the highest demolition rate in four years does not represent a new impetus for peace for the Palestinian people. Furthermore, the suspension of annexation plans included in the Accords does not bring any respite or peace to the Palestinian people. I wish to draw attention to the call made by President Abbas during his address to the General Assembly, on the occasion of the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session (see A/75/PV.10), to hold an international conference at the start of 2021. Namibia expressed support for this proposal. As the international community celebrates the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, the support for the Palestinian cause remains steadfast, as demonstrated by the countless expressions of support during the general debate of the high-level week held in September. Nevertheless, we continue to fail the Palestinian people. This is notably demonstrated in the lack of implementation of the historic Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), adopted almost four years ago. That resolution provided Palestinians with hope and expectations for a solution to be found to this drawn-out conflict. However, since its adoption, the humanitarian, social and political situation has only worsened and tensions have risen drastically, now compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic. Actions taken have severely undermined the process of reaching a mutually acceptable, just and lasting solution. The people of Palestine have the fundamental right to self-determination and independence, with East Jerusalem as their capital. We must achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians, with the establishment of two States, coexisting in an atmosphere of peace and security.
