Mr. Jallow: I would like to join President Meron
and President Joensen in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you all the best in that respect.
I am also pleased to report once again to the Council
on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals over the past six months.

The current report (S/2014/546) follows on the
heels of a series of events organized by the ICTR in
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of its
establishment. In that context, my Office hosted
the 7th Colloquium Of International Prosecutors
on 4 and 5 November, with the participation of the
prosecutors from the various international and hybrid
courts and tribunals and prosecutors from some
20 national jurisdictions, as well as representatives of
regional courts, academic institutions and civil society
organizations. With the imminent closure of the ad
hoc tribunals, the theme of the Colloquium - "Local
Prosecution of International Crimes, Challenges and
Prospects" - was not fortuitous; it was dictated by
the transition before which international criminal
justice stands today. It was part of the efforts of
the international prosecutors to share lessons and
good practices of the past two decades with national
prosecutors and to create a forum for consultation
between prosecutors dealing with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes at the national level.
The theme of the Colloquium recognized the transition
from primacy to the principle of complementarity. A
point also underscored by the representative of the
Secretary-General at the commemoration event, the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, in
his closing statement at the Colloquium.

We detect today an increased willingness of local
jurisdictions to prosecute international crimes. That
is a welcome development, as progress in the struggle
against impunity requires a very strong partnership
between international and local justice mechanisms.
At the same time, we need to be conscious of the
magnitude of the challenges that task represents for
local jurisdictions. The experience of the ICTR Office
of the Prosecutor in working closely with Rwanda to
create the necessary enabling environment for the
eventually successful transfer of cases to Rwanda for
trial illustrates both the challenges that countries face
as they pick up the baton in this fight, and possible
solutions that national jurisdiction can adopt.

While my Office continues to engage national
authorities, particularly in East Africa and the wider
Great Lakes region, in the sharing of good practices
and lessons learned in a variety of areas, we have to
contend with the challenges of limited resources and
manpower as the ICTR, on the one hand, continues
to downsize and, on the other, in the face of the much
smaller resource base of the Mechanism of the Office
of the Prosecutor. The international community must
therefore continue to play a leading role in ensuring
that national jurisdictions have the requisite human and
material resources to engage in those challenging tasks,
and that States and international organizations support
national efforts in the acquisition of the skills, training
and expertise and the creation of the legal and political
framework necessary to enable local jurisdictions to
discharge their responsibility.

The prosecutors and other participants at the
Colloquium unanimously adopted a resolution
emphasizing the importance of accountability for
international crimes to enhancing justice, peace,
security and the well-being of the world. The resolution
also outlines the role that States, individually and
collectively, as well as the international community as
a whole, can play to give concrete effect to the primary
responsibility of States.

Regarding the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTR, I am happy to report that much of the
workload has been concluded in the past six months. As
the President indicated, the Appeals Chamber delivered
final judgements in several cases: the Bizimungu
case, concerning the former Chief of Staff of the
Rwandan Army; the Karernera and Ngirumpatse case,
concerning the former President and Vice-President
respectively of the ruling political party in Rwanda
at the time, the National Revolutionary Movement
for Development; the Nzabonimana case, concerning
a former Minister of Youth; and the Nizeyimana
case,concerning a former captain in the Rwandan
Army. Their convictions for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity - including mass rape
-, were affirmed on appeal. The judgement in the
case of Karemera and Ngirumpatse, as in the Akayesu
case, today stands as a major jurisprudential landmark
in ensuring accountability for sexual and gender-
based violence in situations of conflict. We seize the
opportunity to commend both the Trial Chambers and
the Appeals Chamber of the ICTR for reaching those
important decisions.

The Butare case, the only ICTR case still
outstanding on appeal, with six accused, has now
been rescheduled for hearing. Consequently, the ICTR
Appeals Division has concluded a staff retention
exercise and has now identified an appropriate level
of staff to be retained beyond 31 December to see the
Butare appeal through to its end. The retained staff will
remain engaged in that case and will also continue to
assist the Mechanism. The rest of the staff of the Office
ofthe Prosecutor ofthe ICTR, representing some 46 per
cent of the total office staff strength, have now been
given notices of separation from the ICTR, effective
31 December. I take this opportunity to thank all the
separating staff for their service to the Office of the
Prosecutor, the ICTR and, indeed, the cause ofjustice
and accountability.

In the months ahead of closure, the Office of
the Prosecutor of the ICTR will focus on the Butare
case, the archiving of the remaining records and the
completion of its legacy and best practices projects,
including the writing of the genocide narrative,
documenting the experience in the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions, and preparing the final report of
the Office of the Prosecutor.

Turning now to the Mechanism, I am pleased to
report that it continues to take over functions from the
Office of the Prosecutor ofboth the ICTR and the ICTY,
as mandated by its statute, with a full complement of
staff now at both the Arusha and The Hague branches.
Recently, in addition to the Special Assistant to the
Prosecutor, a P-4 investigator has also been recruited
for the Kigali sub-office of the Arusha branch as part
of the tracking team, in order to intensify efforts to
track fugitives, including the three earmarked for trial
by the Mechanism. Work on the case files of the three
fugitives continues in order to ensure trial readiness in
the event of an arrest.

A vigorous diplomatic and outreach initiative is
also being pursued by the Mechanism, in collaboration
with INTERPOL, the Rwandan National Public
Prosecution Authority and the United States War
Crimes Rewards Program under the State Department's
Office for Global Criminal Justice. In July, together
with those other organizations, we launched in Kigali
a renewed campaign to track those fugitives, with
the aim of disseminating information about them,
encouraging broader public reporting of their activities
and movements, and offering incentives for their arrest.

The arrest and trial of these fugitives remains
the greatest challenge and utmost priority for the
Mechanism and the global community alike. In that
regard, we very much welcome the recent statement of
support by the Council on the occasion of the ICTR's
twentieth anniversary commemoration calling on all
States to cooperate in the arrest of the fugitives.

The hearing in the Ngirabatware case, as the
President indicated, has been concluded and we expect
the judgement in the course of this month.

Due to delays in the rendering of the ICTY
trial judgement in the Vojislav Ses'elj case, further
recruitment for that particular trial team has been put
on hold in the Office of the Prosecutor at The Hague
branch. But we will commence next year to fill ad hoc
posts to handle potential appeals in the case of Radovan
Karadzie, and possibly that of Goran Hadzic'.

In September of this year, I visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia, where I held
meetings with senior State officials, representatives of
international organizations, diplomats and prosecutors
to discuss the transition of functions from the ICTY
to the Mechanism, as well as cooperation between the
States concerned and the Mechanism. In that regard, I
signed memorandums of understanding with the War
Crimes Prosecutor and the ChiefProsecutors in all three
States setting out the framework for continued mutual
assistance and cooperation with them. I concluded my
visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina by paying my respects
to Bosnian Muslim, Croat and Serb victims of the war
at three memorial sites.

My Office will continue to be actively engaged with
the countries in the former Yugoslavia to assist them
to meet the international community's expectations
to prosecute the numerous persons at all levels who
are responsible for the crimes committed in those
territories. Last week, I participated in a meeting of
prosecutors from the three countries at Palic', Serbia,
hosted by the War Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia,
which aimed at finding ways of intensifying regional
cooperation among their offices and other parties. I am
greatly encouraged by the level of cooperation among
the region's prosecutors. I congratulate the Chief
Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the War
Crimes Prosecutor of Serbia for their recent successful
joint operation that resulted in the arrest of 14 persons
for war crimes based partly on information provided
by the Mechanism Office of the Prosecutor. I urge
the international community to continue to strongly
support the efforts of the prosecutors.

The Mechanism continues to attend to its other
responsibilities, such as the servicing of requests for
assistance, the archiving of evidence and records,
the monitoring of the cases transferred to national
jurisdictions, the promulgation of policies and
guidelines for the effective and efficient discharge
of our mandate, and the transition of functions to
the Mechanism. During the period under review,
my Office in the Mechanism serviced a total of 178
requests for assistance - a very considerable increase
in the workload of the Office - from 13 countries and
international organizations, and made 17 submissions
before the Chamber in relation to variation of witness
protective measures for the purpose of national
proceedings. I also continue to receive regular reports
from the monitors of the cases transferred to Rwanda
and France, which continue to be managed satisfactorily
in the respective national jurisdictions.

Finally, I wish to thank the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for their
constant support to the ICTR throughout its 20 years of
existence. They have done a great deal to bring justice,
peace and reconciliation to the people of Rwanda.

