Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open meeting and giving
us the opportunity to participate in the Council's latest
consideration of East Timor.

Frankly, the level of interest in today's open
meeting, both among Council members and non-
members, is welcome and reassuring. It is very natural
for Australia, as a country in the Asia-Pacific region
and one of East Timor's closest neighbours, to be
interested and engaged. But East Timor is at this time
the direct responsibility of the United Nations, with a
unique transition underway, mandated by this Council.
The people of East Timor have placed great faith in the
United Nations. They know, as do we, that continuing
international interest and commitment is essential to
the achievement of a successful long-term outcome in
East Timor.

In that connection, we are especially pleased that
Mr. Xanana Gusmao, President of the National Council
for Timorese Resistance, and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
Cabinet member for foreign affairs in the East Timor
Transitional Administration, are able to be here today.
Their presence and their insights, their dignity and their
passion, bring the reality of East Timor vividly into this
Chamber, and they demonstrate more clearly than any
briefing or report could do the nature of the transition
process as it affects and involves the East Timorese
themselves, the priorities and challenges which they
are confronting now and those which they will need to
address in the future.

I also want to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for his comprehensive briefing on the
Secretary-General's interim report on the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). Australia welcomes the Secretary-
General's account of progress in the transition process
over the past three months, and we endorse his
judgements about the current political and security
situations in East Timor, particularly the view that we
must maintain a prudent approach which will safeguard
the international community's considerable investment
in East Timor's future.

Continuing uncertainty about the security
situation in West Timor certainly dictates this cautious
approach. My Government remains deeply concerned
about the West Timor camps, where tens of thousands
of East Timorese refugees are literally stranded, unable
to make a free choice about their future. This is both a
humanitarian and a security concern. The prompt
repatriation or resettlement of the remaining refugees is
an important and pressing priority for East Timor's
future stability and security. The fast-approaching
election and the real possibility of political
disenfranchisement for a significant proportion of
potential East Timorese voters make an urgent
resolution of the situation all the more important.

An end to militia intimidation, unimpeded access
to camps by humanitarian workers, effective measures
to counter disinformation and a credible registration
process all remain key prerequisites for this to succeed.
We welcome recent discussions between the Indonesian
Government and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on plans for
registration and repatriation, but we emphasise the
need for prompt and decisive action. We urge all
parties now to take whatever steps are necessary to
move the process forward.

Australia strongly endorses the Secretary-
General's view that the military component of
UNTAET should be maintained at its current level for
the time being and that UNTAET should review this
question again after the election of a Constituent
Assembly. As so many speakers before me have said,
any review must take careful account of the security
situation on the ground, in our View particularly along
the border, but also in West Timor. In addition, it is
Australia's view that any decision to commence a
drawdown of peacekeeping troops must be based also
on a clear assessment and understanding of the likely
security needs in East Timor after independence.

We would also emphasize that any drawdown
needs to be part of an overall exit strategy. This
Council and the wider United Nations membership
have consistently emphasised the importance of
developing clear exit strategies for United Nations
operations, whether in East Timor or elsewhere. In this
respect, we believe the Secretary-General's report
would have benefited from greater attention to this
important issue.

If the United Nations and the international
community make the right decisions now and in the
coming months on political as well as security issues,
the East Timor transition process has the potential to be
a significant success story for the United Nations.

So far, UNTAET has been successful in
establishing a sound political transition process. But
this process is far from complete. If wrong decisions
are made over the coming months, there is a risk, not
just to East Timor and its people, but to the
Organization's own standing and credibility. Cutting
corners or costs may be tempting, especially when
things seem to be going reasonably smoothly and when
the Organization and its Member States have so many
other pressures and crises to address, but such action
carries real risks. It may actually cost more in the long
run, dealing as we are with a situation which is yet
fragile and an emerging nation which is clearly yet
vulnerable. Although I am referring here to costs in the
broad sense, it follows that the precipitate withdrawal
of the support currently provided through assessed
contributions would severely disrupt the transition
process and is something that Australia opposes firmly
at this time.

Just as it is clear that East Timor needs strong
United Nations support and engagement to bring it
successfully to independence, so it has become clearer
and clearer that the newly independent East Timor will
require substantial international support, including
military and civilian police components and support for
civilian administration, if it is to become a self-reliant,
democratic nation.

We strongly support the efforts of the working
group on post-UNTAET planning and the integrated
mission task force to produce an accurate picture of
post-independence needs and available resources. The
results of these planning efforts will be critical to
decisions about the size, scope and administration of,
and the financial support for, a post-independence
presence. These are all relevant topics for the
international donor conference that Australia will be
hosting in Canberra in mid-June.

That June conference will also provide an
important opportunity for international donors to renew
their support for East Timor. One of the key measures
for determining confidence among donors in this newly
emerging nation is its approach to economic
management. Fiscal responsibility is a fundamental
element of effective government anywhere, and it will
certainly be essential for an effective future East
Timorese Government. In this regard, any further
expansion of East Timor's budget significantly beyond
the level agreed with donors at the Lisbon and Brussels
international donors' conferences would be a matter of
concern, given the implications for prudent financial
management and possible longer-term debt-financing
burdens.

I have consistently stressed to this Council, in
previous discussions on East Timor open to non-
members of the Council, the importance of the
progressive transfer of responsibility to the East
Timorese, which in United Nations terminology has
come to be referred to as "Timorization", as the future
East Timor Government establishes itself. Successful
Timorization and capacity-building are both essential
to the successful transfer of authority from the United
Nations to an effective East Timorese administration.
Frankly, not enough progress has been made in this
area. For that reason, I was very pleased to hear this
morning from Jose' Ramos-Horta about the intention of
the East Timorese leadership to intensify this process.

Capacity-building in the area of maintenance of
law and order, including the gradual establishment of a
functioning East Timor police service, is one critical
element of the East Timor transition. Australia is
committed to the maintenance of a United Nations
civilian police presence in East Timor after
independence until the achievement of a fully fledged
local police service.

Justice, reconciliation and effective
accountability are also essential elements of long-term
stability in East Timor. We welcome President Wahid's
recent decree establishing an ad hoc human rights court
to prosecute human rights Violations in East Timor in
1999, and we urge the Indonesian authorities to include
all serious abuses of human rights that occurred both in
the lead-up to and after the August 1999 ballot. Here I
must add Australia's voice to those we have heard
today expressing deep concern that the recent sentences
delivered by the North Jakarta district court against
those responsible for the deaths of three staff members
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in Atambua were in no way
commensurate with the gravity of the crimes. Clearly,
as we heard so eloquently from Jose Ramos-Horta, this
is not viewed by the East Timorese as justice. That
certainly could not serve as a deterrent to others; nor
could it encourage humanitarian personnel to return to
West Timor.

The Secretary-General's report makes it very
clear that, despite progress so far, there are still many
uncertainties as East Timor continues its transition
towards independence. I began by welcoming the
continuing international commitment to the East Timor
transition. I feel compelled to conclude by repeating
that this commitment is not only welcome, it is
absolutely necessary. Australia agrees fully with the
Secretary-General's judgement that premature
decisions to reduce the United Nations security or
civilian presence in East Timor could undermine the
considerable efforts and investment which have been
made so far and could result in considerable long-term
costs for the United Nations - costs which would
ultimately be much higher than those the United
Nations and the international community will face if
we maintain the current steady and prudent approach to
the transition. I think it is fair to say that over the past
two years the United Nations has played an exceptional
role in East Timor. But it is much too early to declare
the job done or the commitment to the people of East
Timor fulfilled.

I must emphasize that UNTAET is a complex and
unusual operation, conceived in crisis and founded on a
strong political commitment from the international
community. If it is to succeed, it needs ongoing
commitment and continued, thoughtful planning and
management - not just from dedicated people on the
ground, like the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and his team,
or individuals in the United Nations Secretariat and
United Nations agencies, but from the Member States,
led by members of this Council.

We have the opportunity to get things right if we
continue to make careful, measured decisions, based on
the facts, based on the situation on the ground and
based on objective assessments of what is actually
needed. We also have the possibility of getting things
wrong. We cannot afford to do that - not for this
Council, not for the United Nations, not for the
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers who have died
in East and West Timor, and certainly not for the East
Timorese, who are counting on the international
community and the United Nations to help them build a
sound future.

