Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Sidikou and Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for their briefings.

Japan welcomes the timely adoption today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/18, following the
Council's visit to the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
last month. With 19 December two weeks away, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering a critical
phase on the peace and security front. Japan would like
to urge the Congolese stakeholders to heed the following
three points. First, the Government and the opposition
should engage seriously in a direct dialogue. During
the Council's visit to Kinshasa, I advocated strongly
for ensuring that President Kabila and Mr. Tshisekedi
have direct talks aimed at finding a way forward. Both
parties should show leadership in that regard.

Secondly, preventing and avoiding mass violence is
a responsibility shared by all Congolese parties, in the
opposition as well as the Government. Violence in the
streets must never become the last resort for achieving
any political objectives. We very much hope that the
opposition leaders will show how determined they are to
prevent demonstrations from being spoiled by violence.
I am very much in agreement with Mr. Sidikou when he
rightly said that a display of political will on both sides
is urgently needed.

Lastly, during our meeting in Kinshasa some
members of the ruling party told us that logistical
and financial difficulties were preventing them from
organizing the elections on time. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo is proud of its national
institutions. Many African countries, including nations
that are poorer than the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, have succeeded in organizing elections. If
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is united and
determined to conduct this democratic exercise, I am
confident that it will overcome its difficulties and hold
successful elections. I hope that the strong message
to that effect from the Security Council and the
international community reaches the political leaders
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Japan also reaffirms its full support for Special
Representative Sidikou and for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

