Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, and your brotherly country for the skilful way in
which you are guiding the Security Council's work this
month.

I should also like to welcome Mr. Serge
Brammertz, head of the International Independent
Investigation Commission, who has submitted his
fourth periodic report.

We have studied the report and taken note of the
positive information it contains concerning Syria's
ongoing efforts to meet its commitments and cooperate
with the Commission. The report clearly indicates that
Syrian cooperation with the Commission has been
satisfactory, effective and timely, reflecting again my
country's concern, from day one until today, to ensure
that the Commission can complete its work.

I wish once again to reaffirm before the Council
that the Syrian Arab Republic's cooperation with the
International Independent Investigation Commission
stems from our desire to uncover the truth about the
assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri and to identify the perpetrators and the
masterminds of the crime.

In that regard, we note that our cooperation with
the Commission has extended to all areas of its inquiry.
Mr. Brammertz's fourth report shows that Syria has
cooperated on several fronts and has responded to the
investigators' many requests to reveal the desired truth.
The Syrian judicial commission has provided the

International Independent Investigation Commission
with all the information that it has extracted from the
inquiries being carried out by the appropriate Syrian
authorities with regard to Mr. Hariri's assassination.

Syria hopes that the investigation will continue
and that, on the basis of the three previous reports, it
will lead to identifying those who perpetrated that
crime. In that context, we reiterate our repeated
affirmation that the greatest threat to the investigation
lies in the fact that certain parties in and beyond our
region are exploiting it in order to politicize
conclusions that are entirely unrelated to the
investigation and that are not based on firm evidence.
There is also a danger that certain parties may provide
uncorroborated information, prevent some witnesses
from being investigated, and draw conclusions that
have no bearing on the rationale and objective of the
Commission's establishment. The report points out that
much remains to be done to uncover the truth before
we can achieve the desired outcome.

Syria notes that the Commission has set out new
hypotheses with regard to the assassination of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and the circumstances and
motives surrounding that assassination. We wish to
reiterate the need to examine all of the existing
evidence in a very careful manner, in line with
international criteria for a criminal investigation. We
must also reveal the truth regarding those who
organized the crime. In this regard, we call upon all
States - in particular those who are requesting,
through the media, that the entire truth be revealed -
to assume their own responsibilities through complete
cooperation with the International Independent
Investigation Commission, and we ask them not to give
safe refuge to suspects or witnesses who have lost their
credibility.

My delegation calls upon the 10 other States
referred to by Mr. Serge Brammertz, who have not yet
cooperated with the Commission, to do so immediately.
We would have liked to have the names of those States
that have not cooperated so far with the Commission,
because the media in some countries have continued to
make comments about Syria, despite our continued and
effective cooperation with the Commission.

We do not wish to discuss the details of the
investigation, in order not to prejudge the
investigation, which must be independent, neutral,
objective and free from any political interference.
5
We believe that the International Independent
Investigation Commission should also investigate the
assassination of the al-Majdhoub brothers in order to
explain the link between that crime and the other
crimes. We know that the assassination of the two
Majdhoub brothers is an integral part of the
Commission's mandate. The extensive mandate covers
the provision of technical assistance to clarify the
circumstances of the terrorist attacks that targeted
Lebanese public figures who were influential in the
political and media spheres from 2004 until the
November 2006 terrorist attack against Pierre
Gemayel, the Minister of Industry of Lebanon. The
extension of the mandate could help to illuminate those
crimes and previous crimes, as well as crimes that
followed.

The Syrian delegation agrees with the necessity
to maintain the confidentiality of the investigation. We
appreciate that and call for it to continue, because
confidentiality is closely linked with the impartiality of
the inquiry, in its efforts to achieve concrete and
credible conclusions.
Syria also believes that we must ensure that the
investigation has the time needed to find and obtain
real evidence that cannot be used for political purposes
or be subject to unfounded interpretations. We assert
here that Syria will continue its cooperation with the
International Independent Investigation Commission
and will provide any available information, along with
the results of the investigations being carried out by the
Syrian authorities on the assassination of Mr. Hariri.

Finally, we reassert here today that Syria is
committed to cooperating with the International
Independent Investigation Commission in a
professional, neutral and responsible manner. We are
very keen that the truth be revealed; that will serve the
interests of Syria.

