Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): Let me take this opportunity
to express once again, Mr. President, my appreciation for
the fine manner in which you are guiding the work of the
Security Council.

The Republic of Croatia welcomes the renewed
effort of the international community to bring peace to the
war-torn regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia,
and in particular we welcome the American leadership
demonstrated in the current peace initiative, which holds
much promise.

 

We have always stated that the end of the aggression
and human suffering in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia can be achieved only if the international community
is determined to respect the basic principles of international
law and to implement the resolutions of the Security
Council. We have always advocated the international
community's using a careful balance of diplomatic, military
and economic pressure on the Serbian side, which had until
recently refused to implement the resolutions of this
Council and rejected various peace initiatives.

My Government welcomes the new signs of
cooperation from the Belgrade authorities and their Serbian
proxies in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, which are
a result of the determined use of the combined instruments
at the disposal of the international community, as well as of
the newly established military balance between the forces
of the Serbian aggressors and those of their Croatian and
Bosnian victims.

We strongly believe that sanctions are still one of the
most effective instruments in the hands of the international
community for bringing an end to this tragic and
unnecessary war. Eliminating this instrument would
undermine the already established balance and the
international community's leverage on this conflict.

Croatia firmly believes that the gradual lifting of the
sanctions against Belgrade must be related to deeds and not
to promises. We also remind the Security Council that its
resolution 871 (1993) clearly established the linkage
between ending Belgrade's economic and political isolation
and its cooperation in ending the occupation of parts of my
country. We therefore wish to stress once again that any
exclusion of the question of the remaining occupied
territories of Croatia, in the eastern part of my country,
from the present comprehensive peace plan, especially de-
linking it from the sanctions regime against Belgrade,
would inevitably force my Government to consider other
legitimate means of restoring its sovereignty over, and
bringing order to, its entire territory.

However, we remain hopeful, and will continue to
cooperate in the present effort to bring lasting peace to my
country, to Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the entire
region.

