The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Permanent Representative of Italy.

I wish first of all to associate myself with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of Ireland,
Ambassador John Campbell, on behalf of the European
Union.

Italy strongly supports the draft resolution the Council
is about to vote on for the establishment of a Stabilization
Force (SFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
renewal of the United Nations Mission there.

Despite substantial progress in the peace process, to
consolidate these achievements the international community
must take a careful look at the future. The parties should
renew their determination to respect commitments freely
entered into and work towards full stabilization of the
region. The international Force will undoubtedly play a
major role in this regard.

We believe that priority must be given to
implementation of the agreements on arms reduction and
control signed in Vienna and Florence. In this regard, we
cannot fail to underline that the Bosnian Serb party has
consistently failed to comply with the Peace Agreement.
Economic assistance, which is vital to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, should be conditioned by the parties' full
implementation of the Peace Agreement and used to
encourage democratization of the political and economic
life of the region.

Meanwhile, the international community has a moral
obligation to continue to provide emergency aid to Bosnia.
Also in this regard, I wish to recall that following the
pledging conferences in Brussels in December 1995 and
April 1996, Italy contributed $70 million for reconstruction
and $15 million to the restructuring of Bosnia's debt with
the World Bank.

Another essential aspect of the peace process is full
cooperation by the parties with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We fervently hope that
the parties' commitments will translate into concrete
collaboration. We also share the general concern at the need
to provide the Tribunal with adequate resources.

Italy will be relentless in these efforts to restore
peace, security and stability in the region. My country has
been at the forefront of providing logistical support for air
operations in Bosnia; it has made 21 airports available
and has continuously committed men and resources since
April 1993. Moreover, Italy has participated in the
Implementation Force (IFOR) by providing a brigade of
2,600 men as well as a major naval task force and air
component. Italy is ready to provide the same air and
naval units and a brigade of 1,830 men for the future
Stabilization Force.

The International Police Task Force (IPTF) has a
crucial role to play in the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, especially in restructuring law enforcement
institutions. It will perform the essential function of
reassuring the civilian population and paving the way for
national reconciliation and peaceful coexistence.
Therefore, we welcome the reinforcement of its role in
monitoring and investigating human rights abuses.

In conclusion, the adoption of today's draft
resolution will be another major step in the process aimed
at bringing peace and stability to this region. Italy remains
fully committed to this goal and to sustaining the
important efforts of the United Nations in that part of the
world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/ 1996/ 1032.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,

Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
 

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1088 (1996).

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rime m 9.30 pm.

