Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Like the
speakers who have preceded me, and as this is the last
public meeting over which you preside, Mr. President,
I should like first of all to express to you and your
team the warm congratulations of my delegation on the
dexterity and wisdom with which you have conducted
the work of the Security Council throughout the
month of February. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Myanmar, for her informative
briefing, which once again challenges the Council on
the situation in that country.

The issues of Rohingya internally displaced
persons and refugees and of human rights, particularly
in Rakhine state, remain a source of concern for the
international community. Indeed, the precarious
security situation in the north of the state makes
humanitarian access and refugee return difficult.
In this regard, C6te d'Ivoire calls for the effective
implementation of the tripartite agreement signed on
6 June 2018 with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United
Nations Development Programme. This agreement
is a necessary step towards establishing a framework
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
Government in order to create conditions conducive
to the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable
repatriation of refugees and to help create improved
and resilient livelihoods for all communities living
in Rakhine state. Similarly, Cote d'Ivoire invites the
Government of Myanmar to strengthen its cooperation
with Bangladesh on the repatriation of refugees.

My country would like to commend the mobilization
of the international community in support of vulnerable
and affected communities. This mobilization has
resulted in the campaign launched in recent weeks in
Geneva upon the initiative of UNHCR, the International
Organization for Migration, the World Food Programme
and non-governmental organizations, in order to raise
the necessary funds to provide assistance to more than
900,000 refugees from Myanmar and 300,000 people
in host communities in Bangladesh. It is appropriate
to commend the efforts of the Government of Japan,
which recently decided, in coordination with eight
United Nations agencies, to fund emergency assistance,
protection, confidence-building and crisis resilience
projects in Shan, Kachin and Rakhine States.
On the strength of its commitment to the respect
and protection of human rights, my country would
like to commend the efforts made by the stakeholders
to implement the findings of the fact-finding mission,
including the establishment of the Independent
Commission of Enquiry. In this regard, it calls on the
international community to take the necessary measures
to bring to justice the perpetrators of human rights
violations committed, in particular against women and
children, before the competent courts.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener and urges the
international community to increase its assistance
to refugees through adequate funding of the United
Nations joint response plan.

Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa) We would like
to thank the Special Envoy, Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, for her informative briefing following her
recent visit to the region. We also wish to commend
Ms. Burgener for her continued efforts aimed at finding
solutions to this crisis, including through engagement
with all parties. We would also like to acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh
and again extend our thanks to his Government for the
sterling work they are doing in hosting the refugees in
his country. We also acknowledge the presence of the
representative of Myanmar.

At the outset, South Africa condemns the deadly
attacks and violence that took place in Rakhine state
in January 2019. It is of paramount importance that
the parties immediately cease all acts of violence that
can only serve to further perpetuate the crisis and
prolong and worsen the unbearable human suffering
that it has brought about. On this point, South Africa
remains deeply concerned by the serious humanitarian
crisis that persists, affecting inter alia almost 1 million
Rohingya refugees, including women and children.

South Africa commends the efforts of the
Government of Bangladesh and host communities in
Bangladesh in assisting these vulnerable persons, and
calls on the Government of Myanmar to work with all
relevant actors including the United Nations to urgently
facilitate the conditions that will allow a voluntary
return of displaced persons to take place in conditions
of safety and dignity.

We appreciate the positive developments reported
to us by Ms. Schraner Burgener, which, in summary
were that, first, she has been given permission to open
an office in the capital, Naypyidaw; secondly, there
are processes under way to discuss constitutional
amendments; thirdly, the verification process has been
shortened from two years to five months; and, fourthly,
the Myanmar authorities have allowed Ms. Schraner
Burgener to have more access to all parties and travel
more freely around Myanmar. We must also express
our appreciation for the efforts of China, India and
Japan and their contributions to the construction of
transit camps.

It is evident from the Special Envoy's briefing and
reports that the humanitarian crisis is being perpetuated
by the lack of access to life-saving humanitarian
assistance, including restrictions on access to health
care, education and other essential services, as well as
on ways to make a decent living and live a full life. In
that regard, South Africa encourages the Government
of Myanmar to fully implement the memorandum of
understanding signed on 6 June 2018 with the United
Nations Development. Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
address those challenges. In that regard, it is also critical
that those agencies receive the necessary resources to
allow them to address the humanitarian crisis.

The Council should also take on board the views of
India, China, Japan, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, as well as all other interested parties, across
religious lines, to facilitate unity among the people of
Myanmar. We should also pay attention to the plight of
other ethnic minorities.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the crisis is a negotiated,
inclusive, fair political settlement, which puts the
interests and well-being of all communities, including
the Rohingya people, front and centre, and allows for the
essential processes of truth, justice and reconciliation,
towards lasting peace and healing.

Lastly, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Equatorial Guinea for its excellent
presidency and the manner in which it has elevated
the interests of our continent during the past month.
Sir, you have made us proud and inspired us with
your commitment and the vigour with which you have
undertaken your work and conducted yourself. It has
been a pleasure and honour to work under your guidance.

