Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his 21 April report on the
situation in Timor-Leste (S/2003/449) and thank his
Special Representative for that country, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, whom I welcome here at the Council table. I
thank him for his work at the head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

After reading the Secretary-General's report, we
are more convinced than ever that the Council must
remain engaged in the situation in Timor-Leste.
Bulgaria agrees with the report's conclusion that in
adopting resolution 1473 (2003), the Council showed
that it was determined to provide the support required
for the long-term success of Timor-Leste.

My delegation hopes that modifications to
UNMISET's withdrawal strategy will ensure a more
effective and more rapid training of the National Police
of East Timor. However, we must point out that the
stability and security of East Timor must be considered
within a broader context. The establishment of an
effective judicial system, the development of local
legislation in accordance with international human
rights standards, the judicial process for serious crimes
committed in 1999, the establishment of a non-
politicized administration and the reintegration into
society of former combatants are among the necessary
priorities enabling the strengthening of State
institutions, stability and democratic development in
the young country.

Bulgaria fully appreciates the efforts of President
Xanana Gusmao to promote a national dialogue and to
set up commissions to identify former combatants and
to integrate them into the society of Timor-Leste.

Bulgaria also welcomes the Government of
Timor-Leste's ratification of six core international
human rights treaties and four optional protocols.
Bulgaria supports the appeal of the Secretary-General
to States in whose territory are found individuals
accused of committing serious crimes in Timor-Leste
in 1999 to help bring those individuals to justice as
quickly as possible.

We call upon the Governments of Indonesia and
Timor-Leste to spare no efforts to support the work of
the technical group for demarcation and regulation of
the border, as bilateral relations between the two
neighbouring countries are of great importance for the
future of the young State of Timor-Leste.

The bilateral and multilateral support of the
international community is, of course, crucial to the
economic and social development of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Sharma has spoken in an interesting way of the
economic prospects for Timor-Leste and of the
importance of the continued commitment of the
international community. UNMISET and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) have an
important role to play in developing a strategic plan
outlining the areas in which bilateral assistance is
essential. As I said earlier, Bulgaria is currently
preparing a programme to assist the nascent armed
forces of Timor-Leste with military equipment.

To conclude, I would like to say that my
delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of UNMISET be
renewed. I call the attention of Council members to the
importance of continued commitment from the
international community and the donor community to
this young country with a nascent democracy.

