Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We warmly felicitate the
delegation of the United Kingdom on its assumption of
the Security Council's presidency for this month. We
welcome you, Sir, as the Parliamentary Under
Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office of the United Kingdom. We also thank Togo for
its sterling stewardship of the Council in February. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General for his special
report on Somalia (S/2012/74). We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for his briefing today.

At the present critical juncture in Somalia's quest
for peace and stability, hope outweighs the usual
skepticism associated with the country. The London
conference on Somalia reflected this optimism. We
commend the United Kingdom for organizing the
conference. The London communique reflects the
international community's desire to support Somalia,
as well as the aspirations of the Somali people to a
better life and future. Pakistan would join the
consensus within the Security Council in support of the
London communique.

The end of the transition period in August should
mark the end of conflict spanning more than two
decades. A domestic consensus among all political
stakeholders is essential to oversee this critical period.
We welcome the commitment of the Somali leadership,
first at Garowe in December 2011 and later in London
last month, to work for a representative post-transition
Government in Somalia, in line with the Transitional
Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala
Accord and the transition road map. Such a
commitment is essential to create a positive political
environment to handle successfully the imminent
transformation in Somalia. We hope that the leadership
of Somalia will shoulder its responsibility and seize the
opportunity provided by the strong engagement of the
international community for achieving peace and
stability in the country.

Political progress in Somalia will remain fragile
without corresponding gains in the security area. In
that regard, the role of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) is crucial. Resolution 2036
(2012), adopted last month, increased the scale and
scope of AMISOM. It also expanded the United
Nations logistical support package to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of the
Mission's financing. With that, AMISOM. corresponds
with the benchmarks identified in the United Nations-
African Union strategic concept paper. That
development constitutes a stellar model of cooperation
in the field of peace and security between different
organs of the United Nations and the African Union.
The upgraded AMISOM, with all the requisite enablers
and force multipliers, will meet the objectives set forth
by the United Nations and the African Union and
assume an improved profile to implement its
challenging mandate.

AMISOM. troop-contributing countries deserve
praise for their commitment and resilience. We value
the financial contributions made to AMISOM. by the
African Union's partners, bilateral donors and
contributors to the United Nations Trust Fund for
AMISOM.

Long-term security and stability in Somalia
cannot be ensured without a viable security setup. The
development and enhancement of Somali security

forces was also an element of the strategic concept
paper. International assistance, including through wider
engagement by the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture, will be vital for that purpose.

Pakistan supports the addition of a maritime
component to AMISOM. for the prevention of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. That
would complement the efforts of the international
naval forces in the Gulf of Aden and adjacent waters.
The area of Somali pirate activities is mostly along the
Somali coastal areas, the Gulf of Aden and adjacent
waters. That is the area where the anti-piracy
operations should focus strictly.

Over the years, Pakistan has played an active role
in the international naval coalition against piracy by
deploying its naval assets. We have participated in the
operations of two naval task forces - Combined Task
Force 150, for countering piracy in the Gulf of Aden,
and Combined Task Force 151 (CTF-151), for
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. Pakistan,
which had commanded the task force in the past, has
again been in command of CTF-151 since November
2011.

As part of the international naval coalition, we
can say from experience that coercive measures alone
are not enough to eradicate the menace of piracy. For
its complete eradication, a comprehensive strategy
aimed at addressing the root causes is required. As has
been stated before, the root causes of piracy exist on
land, and include a complex intermix of economic
breakdown caused by political and security strife as
well as environmental degradation of coastal areas
caused by illegal fishing and the dumping of toxic
wastes. All of those factors lead to propensity among
the local population to opt for piracy.

We share the concerns expressed by previous
speakers about the humanitarian situation in Somalia.
Despite improvement with regard to the famine
situation, humanitarian challenges persist and require
our sustained attention. The humanitarian situation can
unravel progress achieved in political and security
spheres. We therefore need to remain seized of the
humanitarian needs of the Somali people.

The international community's engagement to
address Somalia's myriad problems is propitious.
Resolution 2036 (2012), as well as today's debate, with
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/4) backing
the London communique, reflect our collective desire
for peace and stability in Somalia.

Pakistan will continue to support Somalia in
bilateral terms, as well as in its quality as a member of
the Security Council, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation contact group on Somalia and the United
Nations Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia. We look forward to the Istanbul conference as
another milestone in our collective journey for peace in
Somalia. As always, our Somali brethren will find us a
steadfast partner.

