Mr. Aboul-Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting following the attack,
which means that the Council must now carry out its
responsibilities, strongly condemn that act of
aggression and take steps to ensure that it does not
recur.

I should like to read out a statement issued today
in Cairo by our Minister for Foreign Affairs. That
statement reads as follows.

"The international community is
endeavouring to achieve a just and peaceful
settlement in the Middle East in the context of
peace and security for all peoples. At present,
Israel continues to escalate the situation and has
even attacked Syrian territory. This inflames
tension and could broaden the sphere of violence
and counter-violence.

"The Arab Republic of Egypt condemns this
new act of aggression, which is part and parcel of
Israel's usual policies. It expresses its solidarity
with the people of Syria, who remain committed
to international legality. Egypt calls upon the
international community to oppose this new act of
aggression and to ensure that the situation in the
Middle East does not deteriorate.

"We condemn all acts of aggression
perpetrated against civilians, including the attack
carried out yesterday in Haifa."

Israel's continued provocative and aggressive acts
against the Arab States of the region should cause the
international community to use its powers in order to
bring about lasting peace. The entire world understands
that Israel must withdraw from all territories occupied
since 1967 and that an independent Palestinian State
must be established, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Such a settlement - on which
negotiations must resume immediately - would be
consistent with the principles of international law and
common sense, and would be in the interest of all
peoples. Any delay in reaching such a settlement will
cause further civilian victims on both sides and will be
a loss of precious time for people who seek prosperity
and development.
Today, the international community has an
opportunity to reassert its engagement and to condemn
the adventurists, who will bring only suffering to the
peoples of the region. A firm position must be taken
today for the sake of the tomorrow we wish to build
together. Stern measures must be adopted today to
avert further years of suffering. A strong consensus
will open the way for hope, and will convince the
adventurists that they are harbouring illusions that only
perpetuate aggression. They will have to renounce the
desire to hold on to the territory of others. Peace must
reign.

Today the Israeli representative told the Council
that on this day 30 years ago Egypt and Syria attacked
Israel. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel made
a similar statement today; he spoke of unprovoked
Egyptian-Syrian aggression. I cannot fail to recall that
the Egyptian-Syrian military action across the Suez
Canal was legitimate and had the clear-cut goal of
regaining Egyptian territory in the Sinai at a time when
Israel was insisting on retaining the Sinai. Egypt's
action was in full conformity with the United Nations
Charter and with the right of self-defence. It took place
within Egyptian territory and on Egyptian territory.

