Ms. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened today's important debate.

(spoke in English)

On my way here, I ran into a parade of very young
children out for Halloween. This is a very exciting day
to be a kid here in the United States. It was for me a
reminder of why we are having this debate: so that all
kids can be children and can be innocent in a secure
and safe environment.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union as well as with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Italy. We also fully support the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands thanks the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
for their detailed briefings. Behind the chilling trends
and statistics lie an abundance of personal stories such
as Mr. Shaikh's. We owe him gratitude for reminding
us of our responsibility.

I would like to highlight three elements today: the
erosion of international humanitarian law; the strength
and resources of the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and other relevant United
Nations entities; and our joint responsibility to address
the issue of children and armed conflict not only here
in the Security Council but in other relevant United
Nations forums as well.

First, international humanitarian law provides the
very core of the clear legal obligations binding on all
parties to armed conflict. Respect for these obligations
is key, but the trend of eroding respect for international
humanitarian law is alarming. If we do not act now, this
erosion will become an unstoppable landslide.

The Optional Protocols to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child are further instruments binding
on States parties. Non-legally-binding commitments
such as the Paris Principles and the Declaration on Safe
Schools are proven incentives for positive change. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands will therefore endorse
the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the
Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers, to be launched next month. We strongly
encourage others to do the same.

Secondly, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is key to our framework for
action. The monitoring and reporting mechanism is
a powerful instrument for positive change, as is the
listing in the Secretary-General's report. If curtailed
by political influence or a shortage of resources, these
instruments risk losing their current value.

The reports we are discussing today are highly
dependent on a direct presence in the field. Indeed,
peacekeepers, child-protection advisers and civilian
personnel across the board make a critical difference
on the ground.

We welcome the strong engagement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the past
months. As staunch supporters of her mandate, we
appreciate the efforts that she has made in the context
of proactive engagement with the parties listed in
her report.

We applaud the fact that the new format of
the differentiated listing is designed to have a
preventive effect. At the same time, we call for
maximum transparency on how the lists are compiled.
Completeness, accuracy and credibility can be ensured
only through an evidence-based and impartial process.

My third and last point concerns the fact that in
September, the Human Rights Council decided to
establish a group of eminent experts to examine alleged
violations of international human rights committed by
all parties to the conflict in Yemen. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, together with a core group of sponsors,
played an active part in the discussions that resulted in
the consensus resolution formulating that request. It was
a breakthrough with direct relevance for today's debate.

Why is that? It is because ending the plight
of children in armed conflict is by no means the
responsibility of the Security Council alone. The Human
Rights Council, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, UNICEF, regional organizations
and civil society all have a crucial role to play. It is also
because ending the plight of children in armed conflict
in Yemen, Syria or South Sudan, and all too many
other countries, starts with establishing the facts and
identifying perpetrators. And it is also because ending
the plight of children in armed conflict is impossible if
we accept impunity.

The Security Council remains seized ofthis matter,
and we shall all remained seized on the matter until it is
no longer a problem. We owe it to ourselves, but mostly
to future generations, which count on us, to provide
them with a safe, secure and peaceful childhood that
lets them be children.

