Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the convening of this
annual informative meeting in the framework of an
interactive and informative dialogue with Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, and the respective Police Commissioners
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.
My delegation thanks Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona,
Adviser to the Mayor of the Third Arrondissement
of Bangui, for her contribution. Their enlightening
briefings have informed the Council of the progress
made and allow it to remain seized of the opportunities
and challenges facing the respective police units of
those United Nations missions in the implementation
of their mandates.

This is an appropriate moment for my country - a
former host country of a peacekeeping mission - to
commend once again the actions of the men and women
of the police components deployed in United Nations
missions and to pay them another deserved tribute
for their remarkable contribution to the restoration of
peace and stability in countries in crisis.

Peacekeeping operations are intended not to
replace host State authorities but rather to support them
within the framework of an exit strategy that is based
on an inclusive and credible political process. Indeed,
wherever United Nations peacekeeping operations have
been able to engage in dynamic cooperation with host
State authorities and local communities on the basis of
mutual trust and the pursuit of realistic and consensual
objectives, they have created the conditions for a return
to lasting peace and security, thereby paving the way
for national reconstruction and prosperity.

Good-quality relations between host countries
and the population fosters their adherence to United
Nations action, ensuring strong national ownership
and the effective implementation of essential priorities,
such as the protection of civilians, the restoration
of State authority and security sector reform. In a
deployment environment marked by the persistence
of security threats and violence against civilians and
sexual violence, the police components of United
Nations peace missions constitute indispensable pillars.
They contribute to strengthening the security of the
population and restoring the capacities of local police
institutions, enabling the host country's Government
to carry out its sovereign functions throughout its
national territory.

In the light of all that, and in recognizing the
importance and complementarity of the Strategic
Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping, my country would like to stress that,
based on its recent experience, greater emphasis should
be placed on the application of guidelines regarding the
strengthening and development of the capabilities of
police components, as well as their role in the protection
of civilians.

At this point, I should like to seek the insight of
the Police Commissioner Yacouba on the support
provided by the MINUSMA police component for the
capacity-building of the Malian police in collecting and
harnessing information in order to improve its ability
to protect civilians, particularly in central Mali. What
is his assessment of the support provided by the United
Nations police units in restoring the Malian State's
authority throughout its national territory, including the
redeployment of police and judicial institutions? What

is the connection between the role of the United Nations
police and the self-defence groups on the ground?

Women's contribution to peace and security is
today at the heart of the concerns of the international
community. My country believes that women
deployed in United Nations peace missions make
a major contribution to the promotion of national
reconciliation. However, it is clear that the goal of
increasing their numbers is far from being achieved.
We therefore call on the Council to work diligently with
a view to strengthening the presence of women within
these missions.

In that regard, I would like to ask for Mr. Awale
Abdounasir's point of view on the support provided by
the MONUSCO police component for the Congolese
police force in the fight against sexual violence and
the civilian-police activities to raise awareness of that
violence. What is his assessment of the contribution
of women to the MONUSCO police component in the
fight against sexual violence and in peacebuilding?
This is also an opportunity for my delegation to extend
its warmest congratulations to Major Seynabou Diouf,
who was this year named United Nations Female Police
Officer of the Year for her role in combating sexual
exploitation and abuse in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

United Nations missions are comprised of a mosaic
of contingents and personnel who, while driven by a
common quest to achieve peace and stability in countries
in conflict, come from different countries and cultures,
which necessarily influences their perception of their
obligations in the context of peacekeeping in difficult
settings. The great merit of the Police Commissioners
who have just briefed us, as well as that of their
colleagues in other United Nations missions, lies
justifiably in their daily efforts to maintain the cohesion
and unity of action of their forces so that, despite the
many challenges they face, they can continue to be the
most effective instrument of the United Nations in the
service of peace. That is the core meaning of resolution
2447 (2018), of which C6te d'Ivoire contributed to the
drafting and adoption, in close collaboration with the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.

