Mr. Guehenno: First, I will address the questions
put by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom. He asked a factual question on clashes in the
east. There have been three series of clashes. The first
took place on 19 April in the Tongo area. The Civil
Defence Forces (CDF) allegedly attacked
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) positions in
response to what was perceived as a RUF build-up in
the area. The RUF retaliated and dislodged the CDF,
which is now based in Lago.

The second series of clashes occurred in Talia, 9
kilometres east of Mano Junction, on 6 May. It was
also a CDF operation.

The third ceasefire violation is being investigated
by the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), further north in the Kono district.
According to press reports quoting the chief of staff of
the Sierra Leone Army, operations were carried out by
the Donsos - people from Guinea - against the RUF
to open up the corridor to return to Guinea. Presently
UNAMSIL is investigating those reports and this
particular ceasefire violation.

With respect to the elections, are we on the right
track? As I said in my briefing, what we have seen is
indeed a first step, as is the positive atmosphere at the
Abuja review meeting. It needs to be followed, as Sir
Jeremy said, by very concrete action on the ground,
namely ensuring freedom of movement throughout the
country; the surrender of weapons; and active
progress - real, substantive progress - in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. I will come back to that in reply to the
question posed by the Permanent Representative of
Norway. Failing that, all we will have is fine words. If
concrete progress follows on the ground, then we will
be in a position to exploit the next window of
opportunity, which will be the next dry season 4 that
is, between October and May. If at that time there is
full deployment of UNAMSIL, if the authority of the
Government of Sierra Leone has been established
throughout the country, if there is full disarmament of
the RUF as well as of the CDF, and if the electoral
preparations have been completed, then I think we
should, and could, have the elections as anticipated.

The second series of questions was put by the
Permanent Representative of Colombia, and I will
answer those that were specifically addressed to me, on
coordination with ECOWAS. That coordination
happens at two levels: at the level of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Adeniji. There are actually frequent consultations at the
top political level. There is also participation by
ECOWAS in the coordination mechanism that has been
established between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone, and ECOWAS has a
representative in Freetown.

There is also coordination with ECOWAS in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations here in New
York. We have sent teams to assist ECOWAS with
technical advice at various meetings to prepare for
deployment.

Making a broader political point, I want to stress
the importance we attach to cooperation with
ECOWAS, and I take this opportunity to express the
appreciation of the Secretariat for the efforts of
ECOWAS in securing greater cooperation between the
key players in this conflict. Without cooperation
between those key players, it would indeed be quite
difficult to implement a regional strategy. The relative
success of UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone has been based
on the very close coordination in Sierra Leone and on
the possibility of implementing the Ceasefire
Agreement, as agreed on 10 November last. Lacking
such a basis, it is indeed very difficult to foresee any
real progress at the regional level.

(spoke in French)

The representative of France asked questions on
the practical measures that UNAMSIL could take to
ensure the return of the refugees to the Kambia zone
after the disarmament of the RUF in that zone. I can
say that UNAMSIL will first of all carefully monitor
the withdrawal of the RUF and the deployment of the
Sierra Leone Army. It will step up patrolling in that
zone, eventually using a set point of departure, which
could be established in Kambia itself.

Ensuring the security of refugees is the
responsibility of the Sierra Leone Army, but
UNAMSIL will monitor developments, and the
humanitarian community will, of course, see to the
hosting of those refugees. Let me also add in that
respect that we can expect that a significant number of
the returning internally displaced persons - about
13,000 - will be coming from Lungi, since a number
of people from Sierra Leone had left the Kambia zone
for the Lungi zone, which is near the capital, Freetown.

The last question was posed by the Ambassador
of Norway on the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

(spoke in English)

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
does continue, but, unfortunately, at the moment it is
down to a trickle, and the issue is really to move in a
higher gear to make it substantive, so that the ceasefire,
as agreed, is fully implemented. Both UNAMSIL and
the Government of Sierra Leone are ready to do more
in the next phase of organized disarmament. Some
funds are available, but more will be needed in future if
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process is to be more than bringing people to account
and actually reintegrating them into society, which is
the real, long-term fundamental issue if we want to
have success in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

The World Bank in that respect is likely to
convene a donors' conference in the near future.
UNAMSIL has the leading role on the ground through
the role of the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Doss.

