Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and for
the work that he and his team are doing. We welcome
the distribution of a written report (S/2019/251) in
accordance with the Council's usual practice on the
basis of note 507 (S/2017/507), and we hope that that
practice continues.

The continuing settlement policy in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem is of the greatest concern
to us. Settlement activity, accompanied by forced
displacement, eviction and demolition, also targets
particularly symbolic places, such as the ancient cities of
Hebron or Jerusalem, and areas of strategic importance
for the prospect of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State. In that regard, we remain very attentive to the
developments in Khan Al-Ahmar.

We strongly oppose the settlement policy and its
related measures. Settlement activity is illegal under
international law. It undermines the trust necessary for
the resumption of dialogue and jeopardizes any chance
of achieving a just and lasting peace based on the
coexistence of two States. The settlement policy also
leads to increased tensions and violence between Israeli
settlers and Palestinians. We condemn all recourse to
violence and call for the de-escalation of tensions and
for combating impunity for the perpetrators of such
acts of violence.

The date 30 March marks the first anniversary of
the Great March of Return. While recognizing Israel's
right to ensure its security, we recall that Israel must
respect the fundamental right to peaceful demonstration
and the principle of proportionality in the use of force.
Lethal force must be used only as a last resort. However,
it is not acceptable for demonstrations in Gaza to be
diverted by extremist elements. They must remain
strictly non-violent. We condemn in the strongest terms
the firing of rockets into Israeli territory. We once
again call for avoiding an escalation, as Mr. Mladenov
did so eloquently.

We also condemn the violence used by the Hamas
security forces against demonstrators in Gaza,
in particular journalists, staff of the Independent
Commission for Human Rights and human rights
defenders. The repression of demonstrations is
unacceptable and must stop. Hamas is required to
respect freedom of expression and the fundamental
right to peaceful demonstration.

We call on all parties to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
and to ensure free access for humanitarian actors and
unconditional access to medical care, including care
that can be provided only outside the Gaza Strip. It is
essential that the international community support the
efforts of those humanitarian actors. In that regard, we
would like to acknowledge the indispensable role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, whose mandate and work on
the ground Belgium will continue to support.

Recent months have been marked by a series of
unilateral decisions that call into question the Oslo
Accords. Israel's decision not to renew the mandate of
the Temporary International Presence in Hebron has led
to an increase in violence in Hebron. Israel's decision to
partially suspend the transfer of tax revenues owed to
the Palestinian Authority, followed by the Palestinian
Authority's decision to no longer accept any tax
revenues, is likely to have a negative economic and
security impact.

Now more than ever, all parties concerned must
refrain from unilateral acts that are contrary to the
agreements concluded and to international law.
In accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and
497 (1981), Belgium recalls that the annexation of
territories occupied by force is illegal and that it does
not recognize Israel's sovereignty over the territories
occupied by that country since June 1967, particularly
the Golan Heights.

I would like to conclude my statement by
emphasizing once again that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution, with borders based on the
lines of 4 June 1967 and the city of Jerusalem as the
future capital of the two States, in accordance with the
internationally agreed parameters. The vision must be
an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace alongside Israel.

International law and the relevant Council
resolutions must be the basis for any credible
diplomatic initiative to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace. The Security Council plays a key
role as guarantor of any comprehensive, just and lasting
solution, in line with its previous resolutions and in full
respect for international law.

Belgium will continue to work in that direction in
the Security Council and jointly with our Palestinian
and Israeli friends.

