Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): I wish to start by
commending you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Japan for having taken the important initiative to
convene this open debate on the implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council of 19 July
2006 (S/2006/507), and by stating our appreciation of
the inspiring and succinct concept paper prepared for
this occasion, contained in document S/2010/165. I
also appreciate this timely opportunity to discuss
matters of profound interest to all of the Members of
the United Nations. It is our duty not only to take stock
of the progress made on the working methods of the
Security Council, but above all to take a step towards
fostering better dynamics within the Security Council
in this area.

We strongly believe that by increasing
transparency, efficiency and interaction with non-
members, the Council and the whole Organization can
build in Member States the necessary trust and sense of
ownership of the Council's decisions and actions,
which we are all bound to implement under the Charter
of the United Nations. In this regard, the efficiency and
transparency of the Council's work, on the one hand,
and its authority stemming from the Charter, on the
other, are closely linked. Therefore, the efforts aimed
at the full and timely implementation of Security
Council decisions should take due account of the
nature of the Council's decision-making mechanisms
and its systematic interactions with non-members,
especially those directly affected, concerned and
interested by the topics on its agenda.

Slovakia proudly sees itself as part of the process
of adjusting the Security Council's working methods to
the current and future needs of the international
community. In the year 2007, when Slovakia had the
honour to chair the Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, we worked diligently
to further the excellent work so ably commenced and
carried out by the delegation of Japan in 2006.

Today, we are pleased to observe the progress
that has been made, particularly in terms of
transparency, the involvement of non-members in the
work of the Council, and the speed of its decision-
making process. It is evident that a more analytical and
forward-looking approach benefits the Security
Council and ultimately the United Nations membership
as a whole. This progress enhances the credibility of
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
as it contributes to building the confidence of the wider
international community in the Organization.

We believe that working methods are one area of
the reform process in which there have been
considerable and commendable improvements. Of
course, the time is not yet ripe for complacency, and
we need to bear in mind that the full implementation of
the note is a work in progress. Slovakia believes that
further improvements are both desirable and possible
in several areas, including strengthening the
transparency and openness of the work of the Council,
including and in particular regarding the work of its
subsidiary bodies.

Further progress can be made in enhancing
interaction between the Council and other Member
States, in particular those directly affected, concerned
and interested. This could be achieved through better
use of private Council meetings and more regular use
of Arria Formula meetings, and by the holding of
regular consultations between the Council and
non-members on relevant issues. We are very pleased
to see that it has indeed recently become much more
common for countries directly concerned to take the
floor before Council members. We believe that this
should be a standard practice in accordance with
Article 32 of the Charter. We also appreciate the fact
that representatives of regional and subregional
organizations are now more often invited to take part in
various forms of the work of the Council.

The mechanism of Security Council private
meetings with troop-contributing countries should be
prompt, flexible and substantive, in particular in cases
of important or unexpected developments while
implementing mission mandates.

The maximum relevance of the annual report of
the Security Council to the General Assembly should
be ensured, including by making it more substantive
and analytical and by holding an interactive discussion
with the General Assembly on it.

There should be provision for stronger interaction
between bodies dealing with issues connected with
peace and security, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission or the Economic and Social Council, and
the Security Council.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Slovakia
remains fully committed to the cause of increasing the
transparency, effectiveness and efficiency of the
Security Council, a process initiated by the decision of
heads of State and Government at the 2005 World
Summit and put in motion by the note S/2006/507 and
subsequent notes. We believe that adjusting the
working methods of the Council is an important part of
the overall endeavour to create and maintain effective
multilateralism, and the best way to generate the
broadest possible support for sustainable solutions in
the area of peace and security.

