The President: I shall now take the floor in my
national capacity.

I would like to start by thanking all representatives
who have expressed good wishes to our delegation as
we assume the presidency for the month of March.

Angola voted in favour of resolution 2270 (2016),
joining the international consensus on the need to
prevent nuclear proliferation because of the threat
it poses to international peace and security. Angola
views with concern the recent test and ballistic-
missile launches, despite all the efforts deployed by
the international community and incentives afforded
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
change its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programme, which endangers security and stability
in the Korean peninsula. By unanimously adopting
resolution 2270 (2016), the Security Council is sending
a clear signal of the international community's
outright rejection of nuclear proliferation, and it is an
additional deterrent to the violation of the international
non-proliferation regime.

The negotiations on the resolution tried to strike
a balance between the need to impose measures
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
for its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes while
avoiding the imposition of general punishment on the
people of North Korea and the wrecking of their basic
livelihoods. Morever, the resolution leaves open a
window of opportunity for negotiations in resolving the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear issue,
which we would like to see all parties concerned take
advantage of. Such negotiations are far more suitable,
given their constructive nature and the fact that this is
a problem that needs to be resolved through dialogue
aimed at a constructive outcome.

Finally, we call on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to negotiate a solution to this issue within the
agreed frameworks with a view to breaking its isolation
and reaping all benefits as a rightful member of the
international community.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.

