The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Slovakia.

I wish to thank Prime Minister J ose Ramos-Horta
for his candid evaluation of the situation in Timor-
Leste. His statement clearly set out both the magnitude
of the challenges and the promise of the opportunities
in Timor-Leste. We fully agree that building a State
from almost zero is a Herculean task, but we believe
that Timor-Leste is on the right path to being a lasting
success story of post-conflict peacebuilding. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Atul Khare, for his briefing, his
valuable observations and his recommendations.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit my statement to a few additional
remarks.
We are pleased that the situation in Timor-Leste
has stabilized in the past six months. At the same time,
it is obvious - as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/50) and the briefings today indicate - that
there are many challenges and problems which, if not
addressed properly, might cause a relapse into conflict
and violence. In that regard, we believe that the
international community must sustain its commitment
to peacebuilding in Timor-Leste and continue its
support and assistance to the people of Timor-Leste at
this crucial moment. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) be extended for a further period of 12
months.

There are many important tasks and challenges
ahead in Timor-Leste, and UNMIT must have an
adequate long-term perspective and proper technical
and human resources to enable it to cope with the
complex challenges on the ground. In that regard, we
would like to ask Mr. Atul Khare about the current
situation regarding the recruitment of UNMIT
personnel. As we heard from Prime Minister Ramos-
Horta, there are some problems, but we hope that, if
the mandate of UNMIT is extended for 12 months, that
might help the recruitment process.

First of all, over the next few months it will be
crucial, in our view, to prepare the proper conditions
for the holding of elections in Timor-Leste. We thank
the Prime Minister for his update on preparations for
the elections and welcome the progress made in that
respect. The forthcoming elections will be a vital step
on the path towards peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
The United Nations and the international community
are there to support the Timorese in organizing and
conducting a credible process that will guarantee that
its results will be accepted and respected by all
stakeholders.

Overall security and stability in the country are
basic preconditions for a free and fair electoral process.
In that connection, we welcome the recent signing of a
security agreement by UNMIT, the Timorese
authorities and Australia's Government to maximize
coordination in all areas of security. We also note with
great concern that there are still a lot of illegal
weapons in the hands of civilians. Increased efforts
must be made to collect them in the months before the
elections. The national police of Timor-Leste must
work very closely with the United Nations police to
that end.

Secondly, it is of the utmost importance to define
efficient ways to ensure sustainable social and
economic development. In that regard, we welcome the
Government programmes aimed at poverty reduction
and job creation. For the time being, however, the
challenges still exceed the Government's capacity. It is
essential, therefore, that the United Nations and the
international community remain actively involved in
supporting social and economic development in Timor-
Leste. In that respect it is, in our view, necessary to
intensify efforts to marshal increased donor support
and assistance.

Thirdly, it is widely recognized that military and
police forces and security and law enforcement
institutions in general play a crucial role in the long-
term success of political and economic rebuilding
efforts in post-conflict societies. The international
community has been playing an active role in meeting
the challenges of sustainable post-conflict security
sector reform in many countries around the world. We
strongly support UNMIT's continued role in assisting
the Timorese authorities in the critical areas of police
and military reform, including effective institutional
capacity-building in the local security sector.

Fourthly, the political and civil unrest in Timor-
Leste since April 2006 has led to the displacement of
an estimated 150,000 Timorese, and the majority of the
displaced have been unable to return to their homes to
this day. We are greatly concerned about the situation
of the internally displaced persons and welcome the
Timorese Government's initiatives aimed at ensuring
their return and reintegration into their home
communities.

Finally, we would also like to reiterate our
support for the process of national reconciliation and
building the system of unity and trust that the country
needs for its stabilization. That should not in any way
mean, however, impunity for perpetrators of serious
crimes and violations of human rights. To that end, we
welcome and support all relevant efforts to promote
justice and reconciliation in the country and between
Timor-Leste and neighbouring Indonesia.
In conclusion, we believe that, after long years of
suffering and grievance, the people of Timor-Leste
deserve and have the right to life in peace and dignity.
In that regard, I want to assure Prime Minister Ramos-
Horta of the continued support of my country for the
Timorese people in their efforts to achieve lasting
peace and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Australia.

