Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): I join you, Mr.
President, and other speakers in expressing our condolences
to the delegation of Tunisia on the passing away of former
President Bourguiba. I also join other speakers in
expressing our delight at seeing you, Sir, back in the chair.
I thank Mr. Renninger for his briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan and Ambassador Listre for his information
on the activities of the sanctions Committee. I further
welcome Ms. Angela King, whose expertise in gender
issues is clearly indispensable when we are dealing with a
country like Afghanistan.

My delegation condemns the latest offensives, and we
are gravely concerned at the military build-up and the
preparations for further large-scale offensives by the parties.

It remains our conviction that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. Trying to settle the
dispute by military means prolongs the conflict, carries the
risk of further regionalization and increases the suffering of
the Afghan people, and it will not contribute to a process
of reconciliation in the future. No one can win this war, but
all can destroy the country.

The warring parties are responsible for finding a
political solution that will end the suffering of the Afghan
people. We appeal to them to stop the fighting and return
to the negotiating table. It is of the utmost importance that
the neighbouring countries strictly adhere to the Tashkent
Declaration, in particular to the commitment not to provide
military support to any Afghan party and to prevent the use
of their territories for such purposes.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan remains
alarming. The offensive of the Taliban on 1 March this year
has led to another stream of displaced persons, and once
again women and children were the primary victims. The
civilian population is becoming ever more destitute and
desperate, and the future of Afghanistan as a country looks
bleaker by the day.

For many people in Afghanistan international
humanitarian assistance is a lifeline. We are therefore
deeply concerned about the forced entries by Taliban armed
groups into the United Nations premises in Kandahar,
which compelled the United Nations to withdraw its
international staff from that city and resulted in the
suspension of humanitarian assistance in southern
Afghanistan.

The rigid social code imposed by the Taliban results
in many restrictions for women and girls, for example
with regard to employment, education and health care
services. The restrictions most acutely affect educated
women in the cities, but their impact is also felt by poor,
uneducated women, their children and other family
members. Eventually this cannot fail to have a negative
influence on the prospects for development in
Afghanistan.
There are even more alarming consequences of
publicly accepted discrimination against women. My
delegation strongly condemns the way in which over the
years many Afghan women and girls have become
victims of gender-specific human rights violations, such
as rape, assault, forced marriage and prostitution.
Violence against women and girls sometimes seems to be
used as an instrument of intimidation and humiliation of
entire population groups.

The exclusion of women from services is not an
innocent, culturally determined idiosyncrasy. In a country
where on average 10 people are killed or injured by
exploding landmines every day, it is, of course, criminal
to exclude women from mine-awareness training.

Although we recognize recent signs of modest
relaxation of Taliban rules on access of women and girls
to certain services, and while we also note that there are
regional differences in the interpretation and observance
of these rules, the exclusion of girls from education
remains of grave concern to my delegation. It should be
kept in mind that it is not just the education of girls that
is affected by these restrictions, for a very large part of
the teaching corps in Afghanistan used to consist of
women. Due to employment restrictions on women,
education for boys is stagnating as well. Again, this
results in a weakening of the prospects for social and
economic development.

In other words, Afghanistan is experiencing a
humanitarian emergency, and once more women and
children are the most vulnerable group. Over the years,
the Netherlands has generously contributed to
humanitarian assistance to the country on the
understanding that it should be equally accessible to men
and women and special attention should be paid to the
position of women and girls. But international assistance
cannot undo the damage caused by the marginalization of
half the population. We therefore appeal to the Taliban to
bring their rules on access to employment, education and
health care services more into line with those of the

 

international community, including the rest of the Islamic
world.

