Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): My delegation wishes
to thank the Luxembourg presidency for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui, UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake
and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their statements this
morning.

Over the past 15 years, there has been considerable
progress in advancing the agenda of protecting
children in armed conflicts, which has resulted in the
development of a sound framework for a monitoring
and reporting mechanism.

As a country fully committed to doing away
with the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
Myanmar has voiced its full support for the campaign
"Children, not soldiers", launched yesterday by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNICEF to end and prevent the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict
by 2016. We believe that goal could be achieved if the
current momentum of our cooperation with the United
Nations is reinforced and supported by the global
community. We hope that this time-bound initiative
will be able to garner broader international support for
providing technical and financial assistance to speed
up the implementation of our action plans.

Since Myanmar embarked upon a peaceful
democratic transition, the Government has made every
possible effort to improve human rights in every aspect.

One of the bold steps taken by the Government since
then was the signing of an action plan with the United
Nations in 2012 to end underage recruitment.

In Myanmar we have a strong legal base that
prohibits forced conscription and recruitment under
18. Yet, in the past, there have been incidents of
children finding their way into the armed forces for
various reasons, such as relationship problems in their
communities, a lack of proper documents to identify
their age, a lack of employment opportunities and a
weakness in recruitment offices and their procedures.

The Government recognized this ugly problem and
has taken serious steps to tackle the issue since 2004.
Today we are pleased to say that Myanmar has made
significant progress in implementing its action plan
over the past 18 months. As I already explained in detail
yesterday at the launch of the campaign, I shall refrain
from repeating the measures taken by the Government
in responding to the issue. But I wish to stress again
that in Myanmar every complaint of violation received
was properly checked and all underage children found
were discharged and reintegrated. Since the launching
of the action plan, 272 children have been discharged
and reintegrated.

Offenders of child recruitment, be they civilian
or military personnel, have been punished according
to the law. Some of that progress has been reflected
in the most recent report of the International Labour
Organization on Myanmar, which states that

"[t]here has been a good response to the ongoing
activities of underage recruitment, including on
awareness-raising among military personnel and
the release of underage recruits."

The action plan was also incorporated in the training
curriculum for my country's military officials.

We are pleased to have facilitated the successful
visit to Myanmar of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, led by
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas of Luxembourg last year, to
assess the situation on the ground. We are looking at
the recommendations provided by the Working Group,
including becoming a party to the Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Following the visit, the Myanmar authorities agreed
once again to extend the current plan of action.

Difficulties in age-verification remain a challenge
for the identification of underage soldiers due to an
absence of national registration cards. We hope that
challenge will be resolved with the launching of a
nationwide census later this month. We are hopeful that
the tangible progress made in the implementation of the
action plan in Myanmar will lead to the delisting of the
Myanmar national armed forces in the near future.

As we have stated time and time again, the best
way to protect children from armed conflict is to end
such conflicts. The Government's peace efforts have
resulted in striking ceasefire agreements with almost
all ethnic armed groups. A nationwide ceasefire
agreement is just around the corner, auguring well for
the protection of children. The prevalence of peace
and stability is creating an environment conducive to
our efforts at rural development, poverty reduction
and job creation, which will help to deter the inclusion
of children in armed groups. National efforts to end
child recruitment should also be accompanied by well-
funded reintegration and development programmes to
provide a livelihood and vocational training for former
child soldiers to restart their lives with dignity in their
new environment.

My delegation is pleased to see that the Council
is taking a cooperative and constructive approach to
reach its goal of protecting children. However, we are
concerned about the current definition of "persistent
perpetrators", which is inaccurate and misleading.
In our View, if a party, although listed for more than
five years, is making good progress in implementing
its action plan with strong political commitment, it
should not be classified as a persistent perpetrator.
We believe that the current practice of a cooperative
approach rather than a punitive one would better serve
the purpose and will win the trust and cooperation of
the parties concerned. Inclusion and delisting from the
annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General should
not be based on a subjective political decision, but on
certain criteria or standards.

In conclusion, Myanmar reiterates its pledge to
continue to work together with the United Nations on
the action plan to achieve the goal set by the United
Nations global campaign "Children, not soldiers".

