Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and all others concerned for convening
this important meeting. I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing this morning on recent developments in the
Middle East, including Palestine.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt as the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In addition, I would like to highlight the
following points.

Bangladesh has always been committed to the
cause of Palestine. It maintains solidarity with the
Palestinian people in their just and legitimate struggle
for self-determination and statehood. Our solidarity
with the Palestinian cause and support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are
consistent and unwavering. Bangladesh reiterates its
long-standing position that the continued occupation of
Palestine is the root cause of violence, unrest and
destabilization in the region. The people of Palestine
are being denied their fundamental rights to

self-determination and to live freely in their own land.
We believe that the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital is
the only sustainable solution to this long-lasting
conflict.

Bangladesh condemns Israel's illegal settlement
in the occupied Palestinian territory, which undermines
the Palestinian territory's unity and contiguity. All
concerned parties should call for an immediate freeze
on the expansion of Jewish settlements, as well as the
dismantling of the existing ones in the occupied
territories. Such injustice cannot be allowed to
continue and must be rolled back in the interest of the
free movement of people and access of the
humanitarian agencies. It is necessary to rededicate
ourselves to the Palestinian cause of self-determination
and statehood, and to work together to bring this
aspiration to fruition.

We need to seize every opportunity and take
measures so that Israel and its patrons comply with the
relevant United Nations resolutions on Palestine. It is
regrettable to note that the key elements of resolution
1860 (2009) remain unfulfilled. The United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, must undertake
the necessary measures to ensure the full and effective
implementation of that resolution. The continuous
defiance and blatant disregard demonstrated by the
occupying Power against international law should be
addressed by all concerned, including the Security
Council and the international community. Effective
measures should be taken to oblige the occupier to
comply with international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map.

It is disturbing to note the recent attacks by Israel
against Palestinian worshippers at the Islamic holy
sites ofAl-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa mosque in
occupied East Jerusalem. These attacks are no doubt
provocative, considering the volatile situation in the
occupied city. We feel that it is necessary to draw
attention to the report (A/HRC/ 12/48) of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
known as the Goldstone report.

Furthermore, the conclusions of the Secretary-
General's Board of Enquiry also need serious
consideration. According to the report of the Fact-
Finding Mission, Israel imposed a blockade and
conducted a systematic policy of isolation and
deprivation against the people of the Gaza Strip. The
report further says that Israeli military activities were
directed at the civilian population of Gaza. As per the
recommendations of the Fact-Finding Mission, in this
situation it is necessary for the Security Council to
adopt appropriate measures to address the acute
adversity of the people of Gaza.

Bangladesh firmly believes that a comprehensive
and just peace settlement is the key to peace in the
Middle East. The relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Middle East Road
Map can be viewed as the guiding principles in this
regard. Moreover, the recommendations of the Fact-
Finding Mission need to be taken seriously into
account. Bangladesh hopes that all parties involved
will take a pragmatic approach to this issue in order to
ensure the early implementation of the Road Map for
peace in the Middle East. We would not wish to see the
global community blamed for and ashamed of not
implementing the fair, judicious and humane Road
Map for Palestine.

