Mr. Urbizo Panting (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish first to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and for the manner in which you are guiding the debate
of this very important meeting.

Honduras has always favoured the attainment of a
just and lasting peace that would guarantee security and
stability in the Middle East region. We have always
maintained that full respect for the agreements concluded
between the Palestinian people and the Government of
Israel is an essential element in the peace process.

For this reason, we view with just concern the
serious situation brought about by Israeli actions in the

 

Al-Aqsa Mosque in the occupied Palestinian territory of
East Jerusalem, and the attacks against Palestinian civilians
who protested against such actions which, unfortunately,
resulted in dozens of dead and wounded. The confrontations
this week in Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Al Birah, Hebron and
Nablus are acts which my delegation regrets because they
jeopardize the peace process in the Middle East.

While deploring the attacks against Palestinian
civilians, Honduras believes that the Israeli measures to
alter the legal status and demographic composition of
Jerusalem are null and void, and contrary to the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 1949, to the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and to the agreements
concluded by the Palestine Liberation Organization and
the Israeli Government.

The negative impact of the continuation of this
dangerous situation for the Palestinian people and for the
prospects of peace cannot be ignored. That is why we
believe that the measures taken by Israel that affect the
rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied territory
of East Jerusalem must cease immediately. The special
character that the city of Jerusalem has for the Palestinian
people must be respected.

My delegation therefore appeals to both parties -
for the sake of the peace process and out of respect for
the agreements - put an end to this dangerous situation,
so as to be able to restore peace to the region. It is
essential that this Council contribute to the early
settlement of this conflict by prescribing measures to
prevent its escalation.

