Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. Karim Khan, Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), for his valuable briefing this morning. We
also thank Mr. Kachi, the representative of civil society,
for his heart-wrenching and moving testimony.

We would also like to express our deepest
condolences to the French delegation for the death of
13 French soldiers last night in Mali during a helicopter
operation as part of their mission to fight terrorism.

In the light of the briefings and the third report of
UNITAD (S/2019/878), we welcome all the significant
progress that has been made on the investigation
strategy, the collection, preservation and storage of
evidence in Iraq, the strengthening of the modalities
for cooperation with the Government of Iraq, the
Supreme Judicial Council, survivors, victims and
affected communities, and Iraqi capacity-building.
There can be no doubt that maintaining the cooperation
and commitment of all stakeholders will help to achieve
the aim of holding the members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) accountable for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide in Iraq.

We have also noted the fact that gender balance and
geographical distribution were observed in the selection
of staff for the Investigation Team, that work is being
carried out in teams and that victims of sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by ISIL are being
involved in investigations on the ground. ISIL is one of
the main perpetrators of the violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
that have taken place in Iraq, and despite the numerous
efforts to combat it, the threat remains clear. We firmly
believe that the success of the Investigative Team will
facilitate the fight against impunity and thereby foster a
resilient society. In that context, my country encourages
and urges Mr. Khan and his team to continue working
in this direction as an independent, credible and
impartial entity. We reiterate that it is vital to ensure
that the collection, preservation and storage of evidence
is carried out in strict observance of United Nations
policies and good practices, as well as international law,
and without forgetting the importance of full respect
for the sovereignty of the Iraqi people.

In conclusion, we encourage the Iraqi authorities
and the United Nations to continue to intensify their
operational cooperation with the Investigative Team.
At the same time, we assure the Investigative Team of
our Government's support for its mandate.

