The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.

(spoke in French)

I too should like first of all to thank Mr.
Sommaruga, Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu for their
presentations to the Council. Their presence here is an
important milestone in the Council's deliberations. They
have conveyed with honesty and clarity the precarious
plight and the enormity of the problems faced by ordinary
civilians caught in the grip of armed conflict.

 

(spoke in English)

I think it is true to say that the victimization of
civilians in war is as old as time, but never more so than at
the end of this century. As so many here have commented,
what is most disturbing today and provides the global
community with a compelling reason for engagement is the
increasing "civilianization" of conflict itself. More than
ever, non-combatants - especially, as our briefers have
pointed out, the most vulnerable - are the principal
targets, the instruments and, overwhelmingly, the victims of
modern armed conflict. The number of casualties from
armed conflict has almost doubled since the 19805 to about
1 million a year; of those, 80 per cent are civilians.

(spoke in French)

Our discussion leaves no doubt about the considerable
threats faced by civilians or about their global dimension.
Consider the brutality in Sierra Leone; "ethnic cleansing"
and the slaughter of non-combatants in the Balkans;
genocide and the mass movements of refugees and
displaced persons in the Great Lakes region of Africa; and
the emergence of modern-day warlords in failed States who
take advantage of, brutalize and terrorize local residents -
aided and abetted by outside arms dealers and private
groups who benefit from the marketplace of conflict.
Indeed, there is today a marketplace of conflict.

(spoke in English)

It is a fact of our time that the threats to human
security - the risks that individuals, communities and
people face in their daily lives - outweigh the risks to
security occasioned by conflicts across borders, the more
traditional concern of the Council. The promotion of human
security is the bedrock upon which all other objectives of
the United Nations Charter must rest - from economic and
social development, to human rights and freedom, to the
free flow of commerce. The dark side of globalization is
the attack upon the basic integrity of people. No one can
prosper or progress if they fear becoming victims of
marauding child soldiers set loose by political leaders, of
the drug warlords who exploit human misery, or of
combatants who sow landmines without discrimination.

The point of this meeting is that the Security Council
has a vital role to play in confronting these threats. There
should be no mistake. Promoting the protection of civilians
in armed conflict is no sideshow to the Council's mandate
for ensuring international peace and security; it is central to
it. The ultimate aim of the Council's work is to safeguard
the security of the world's people, not just the States in
which they live. Clearly, faced with the disproportionate
toll that modern conflict takes on civilians, the protection
of individuals should be a primary consideration in the
Council's activities.

As many here have pointed out, the Council does not
have to do it all; other parts of the United Nations and the
wider international community have their responsibilities.
However, in the absence of resolute and effective Council
leadership, civilians in situations of armed conflict are left
in a security void. This vacuum will be, and in some
cases already is, filled by others combatants, including
mercenaries, who act with little restraint and scant regard
for even the most basic humanitarian standards.

Active Council engagement would reverse this
situation. It would also reinforce the legitimacy of the
States. It is the prerogative and the obligation of States to
ensure the protection of all citizens, especially in times of
armed conflict. This is the fundamental public good that
the State provides. But oftentimes Governments do not or
cannot provide it. Sometimes this is a consequence of
weakened State structures or failed States. In these cases,
Council action to defend civilians in armed conflict will
also diminish the threat to the States themselves. The
reluctance to involve the Council, justified by some by
the need to uphold State sovereignty, only serves,
ironically, to undermine this very principle itself. The
responsibility of the Council to protect civilians is
therefore compelling from a human security perspective,
in terms of fulfilling the Council's own mandate and in
the interest of enhancing State sovereignty.

Our discussion today is a welcome acknowledgement
of the Council's role. Indeed, this meeting builds upon
recent initiatives by current and previous Council
members, as well as the existing Council declarations and
actions. In its deliberations, the Council has condemned
the targeting of children in armed conflict. It has
indicated a willingness to consider how to assist with the
provision and protection of humanitarian assistance. It has
recognized a need for peacekeeping operations to take
better account of the needs of civilians and it has
considered the devastating impact of arms transfers in
areas of conflict. And last month, the Council considered
the humanitarian impact of conflict. Awareness, as
someone has said, precedes action. The Council
undoubtedly is more sensitive than ever to the many
dimensions of this contemporary problem.

 

In its practice, the Security Council decisions have
begun, and I use the word begun to reflect the reality. The
Council exhorts both State and non-State actors involved in
conflict to comply with relevant provisions of international
rights and humanitarian law that relate to protection of
civilians. Peace support operations, as appropriate, include
provisions relating to the security of United Nations
personnel, including human rights monitors, and take
special consideration for the situation of civilians. The
Council's establishment of ad hoc Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda were concrete measures against
those who violate international humanitarian law.

The Council's words and deeds to date are a
promising start. However, the march of time is relentless.
Civilians continue to be brutalized by the hundreds of
thousands. There are no signs that we, the international
community, can somehow wait this out. Our briefing today
has made this urgently clear, and I thank the briefers for the
eloquence and drama with which they have brought this to
our attention. It makes the decline in the Council's active
presence in the world's conflict areas all the more
disturbing. More, not less vigorous, comprehensive and
sustained action on the part of the Council is imperative.

In Canada's View, the challenges of the Council are
fourfold.

First, as many members have pointed out, is the
prevention of conflict. Averting the outbreak of armed
conflict is the optimal means to avoid needless destruction
and suffering, in particular the victimization of civilians.
There is nothing new in this observation. Yet the United
Nations record is not all it might be either in taking pre-
emptive steps, building strong human rights institutions,
ensuring early warning of impending crises, offering
concerted support for peace processes or having the
capacity to act quickly in the absence, for example, of the
rapidly deployable mission headquarters that we and other
nations have espoused. Frankly, the Council needs to
reassert its leadership in this area.

The second challenge is ensuring respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law. We have
developed a considerable body of law and standards
regulating the conduct of belligerents and the protection of
civilians, both local and international in scope. In this
regard, the situation of children and refugees merits our
special attention. It is also important to underline, as
briefers have indicated, that new standards are emerging to
adapt to the changing nature of conflict, for example with
regard to the treatment of internally displaced persons.
However, too frequently these standards are flagrantly
violated or ignored or simply left unanswered.

Thirdly, supporting the pursuit of those who violate
humanitarian norms and standards is imperative. The
impunity of individuals who commit gross violations of
humanitarian law against others during armed conflict is
a widely acknowledged problem. The Tribunals
established for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda were
a step forward, but backing for a more systematic
prosecution of alleged war criminals, for example through
support to the International Court, should happen sooner
rather than later because it is needed. There is a simple
demand for it now.

Taking aim at the purveyors and instruments of war
is a fourth major objective. Those who are accessories to
these crimes and violations - the merchants of conflict
who illicitly traffic in the means of war - can likewise
not be left unaccountable. Conflict areas are awash with
arms, especially military small arms and light weapons.
Their abuse compounds the misery of civilians, and the
flow and abuse of weapons that terrorize, maim and kill
requires urgent action.

These are complicated challenges. I recognize that.
There are no easy solutions. Nonetheless, we believe that
the Council has the capacity to respond, provided, as our
friend from Gabon has said, that there is political will.

The Council should ensure that the Secretary-
General highlights the situation of civilians, especially
children, in reporting to the Council. The when, why and
how of Council-mandated peace missions and good
offices might be re-examined thoroughly to enable the
Council to act rapidly when civilians are threatened and
to propose ways to give peacekeepers the authority,
guidance and resources they need to defend civilians.
Other innovative practices, such as how Council missions
could assist in minimizing the abuse of mass media to
target civilians, as suggested by Under-Secretary-General
Vieira de Mello last month, also merits further
exploration. The Council might also consider how to
better target, design and enforce sanctions regimes, as so
many members have pointed out, to maximize their
impact on belligerence, to dry up the resources to wage
war and to constrain those who profit from it while
minimizing their effect on non-combatants.

These are only a few suggestions, and if time
permitted, I would like to give a more exhaustive list. But
members have also presented many ideas and there has

 

been a good discussion today about how the Council can
respond. To help in moving forward, the Council needs a
comprehensive assessment that brings together the
numerous challenges that we face with an inventory of
possible responses. For this reason, Canada strongly
welcomes the statement the Council will adopt requesting
the Secretary-General to submit a report later this year
containing practical, concrete recommendations for further
actions to protect civilians.

If I have heard one compelling message today from
Virtually everyone around this table, it is that the plight of
civilians in armed conflict is an urgent matter, growing and
global in the threat it poses to the fundamentals of human
security. It goes to the very core of the Council's mandate
and deserves continued attention. The Council has a
responsibility to act resolutely and vigorously. To do
otherwise risks diminishing the Council's standing and
opens the way to a more disorderly and far less secure
world. We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
and to working with other Council members to address the
situation, starting now.

I now call on Mr. Sommaruga to respond to any
comments or questions or thoughts that he has heard. I
would just remind him that, as time goes on, economy is
the watchword for the next 10 minutes.

