Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country member of the European
Economic Area Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

I thank you, Mr. President, and all the other
members of the Security Council for giving us the
opportunity to express ourselves on this important
matter. The recent enactment of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is a major leap
forward in the progressive development of
international law. The Court is not only a judicial
institution designed to investigate and prosecute acts of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. It is
also a strong political statement in the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of concern to the
entire international community. It is an essential
contribution to the preservation of peace and the
strengthening of international security.

From the outset, the EU has been a strong
supporter of the ICC. A declared objective of the EU is
to support the early establishment and effective
functioning of the Court and to advance universal
support for the Court by promoting the widest possible
participation to the Statute. In our Common Position
adopted by the EU Council of Ministers, we have
pledged to share our experiences on implementing the
Statute; pledged to provide technical and financial
assistance to the best of our ability; and pledged to
participate actively in the preparatory work in order to
ensure an efficient and dynamic Court.

It is understandable that the United States is
seeking protection from politically motivated
accusations. The EU, however, believes that these
concerns have been met and sufficient safeguards
against politically motivated accusations have been
built into the Statute. Furthermore, the Statute's
principle of complementarity places primary
responsibility for investigation and prosecution with
domestic jurisdictions. The International Criminal
Court may intervene only when a State is unwilling or
unable genuinely to carry out an investigation or a
prosecution. The European Union believes that in such
cases the Court will prove to be an effective, competent
and fair legal institution.

Finally, the ICC does not impinge on the rights of
third States; it is based on the territorial and national
jurisdiction of the States parties, and such jurisdiction
is asserted by all States.

Various solutions to the concerns expressed have
been offered. One of them invokes the procedure laid
down in article 16 of the Rome Statute. That article
states that

"No investigation or prosecution may be
commenced or proceeded with under this Statute
for a period of 12 months after the Security
Council, in a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, has
requested the Court to that effect".
(A/ C ONF. 183/9)

Article 16 should be invoked only in conformity with
the Statute.

Furthermore, the European Union has carefully
examined the letter of the Secretary-General conveyed
to the United States Secretary of State and circulated to
members of the Security Council. We especially noted
the following passage:

"1 think that I can state confidently that in
the history of the United Nations, and certainly
during the period that I have worked for the
Organization, no peacekeeper or any other
mission personnel have been anywhere near the
kind of crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of
the ICC. The issue that the United States is
raising in the Council is therefore highly
improbable with respect to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the same time, the
whole system of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is being put at risk."

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
statement, and we welcome the fact that the Security
Council has agreed on a technical extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) until 15 July, thereby
allowing time to reach a solution on this extremely
important matter.

Let me stress that the European Union attaches
great importance to the continued and major
contribution of the United States to peacekeeping
missions around the world. The United States plays an
indispensable role, not least in the Balkans. We are
well aware that the United States and the European
Union share the view that the people of Bosnia do not
deserve to pay the price in this unfortunate situation.

At the same time, we commend individual
peacekeepers for the invaluable contributions that they
have made and continue to make in dangerous and
difficult situations. Our adherence to the Rome Statute
in no way diminishes our commitment and
responsibility to them and to their missions. It is an
expression not of distrust but, rather, of complete trust.
It is therefore with particular gratification that we note
the assurances by United States representatives that the
United States commitment to the people of Bosnia and
to peacekeeping missions remains undiminished.

UNMIBH, together with the Stabilization Force,
has contributed significantly to the overall progress
that has been achieved in the region since the end of
the war in 1995. Bosnia is now a more stable and
democratic country, with the prospect of integration
into the European structures.

But the risk of a setback is still real. Thus, the
Secretary-General stated, in his most recent report on
UNMIBH, that

"the systemic weakness of the rule of law in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and continued
obstruction, interference and illegal activities of
entrenched political extremists and criminal
organizations will require continued international
attention." (S/2002/6I8, para. 36)

An abrupt end to the United Nations International
Police Task Force in Bosnia would create a vacuum
that could have a negative impact on the general
elections in October. Those elections will be the first
since the war to be organized by the Bosnian
authorities themselves. It is the responsibility of the
international community to continue to support those
endeavours.

It has been the common wish of the Security
Council and the European Union to secure an orderly
transition between the United Nations International
Police Task Force and the European Union Police
Mission, which plans to take over on 1 January 2003.
Uninterrupted support of police reform in Bosnia is
crucial to the continued implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accord. The European Union has indicated that,
if necessary, it would take measures in order to avoid a
gap in the international police presence in Bosnia. It is
evident that an abrupt end to the United Nations
International Police Task Force would make those
efforts difficult.

Finally, let me express the profound concern of
the European Union about the potential consequences
for United Nations peacekeeping in general.
Peacekeeping is an indispensable element in United
Nations efforts to maintain and restore international
peace and security. Over the years, United Nations
peacekeeping has proved its worth in many conflicts
around the world. In recent years, great progress has
been achieved towards the further improvement of the
United Nations capacity for peacekeeping.

We strongly urge all members of the Security
Council to do their utmost to achieve a solution that
does not harm the integrity of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and which ensures the
uninterrupted continuation of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

