Ms. Young (Belize): Belize welcomes this
opportunity afforded by the presidency of Italy to
reaffirm our full commitment to combating trafficking
in persons and to most emphatically condemn trafficking
in persons in areas affected by armed conflict.

Notwithstanding the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016), reports on the plight of migrants - especially
the latest news of human slavery emanating from
Libya - reveal that much more needs to be done at the
highest level to address the scourge of human trafficking.

Belize concurs with the Secretary-General's
observation that at its core, our response must be based
on a common understanding of trafficking in persons
and the widely accepted legal framework for cooperation
found in the Protocol on Trafficking in Persons and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. In addition, there are a number of
other human rights treaties, as well as the Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, global
instruments focused on women and children in armed
conflict, and the broader sustainable development
agenda that together can reinforce international efforts
to treat more comprehensively and in a coordinated
manner the factors that expose the most vulnerable to
trafficking and exploitation. Importantly, it is essential
to fully integrate those instruments into national
legislation, raise public awareness and provide targeted
approaches, especially for law enforcement.

In 2003, Belize enacted the Prohibition of
Trafficking in Persons Act and amended it in 2013
to make it far stronger. Also, in 2013, we enacted
the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children
Prohibition Act. Belize has also benefitted from
regional and international support and partnerships
with civil society to provide ongoing training to build
our preventive, protection and prosecutorial capacity to
address trafficking in persons.

We endeavour to further enhance our capacity to
combat trafficking through improving our Victims'
assistance programmes; advancing training for
investigators; establishing specialized investigative
units, dedicated prosecutors and judges; and
implementing a fast-track system for human trafficking
cases. We provide for basic needs, counselling and
medical services. However, we still lack financial
and human resources to address long-term assistance
to facilitate re-integration into the work force and to
transition to self-housing from the protective system.
In our experience, we have found that language and low
levels of literacy are major barriers to victims being
retrained and accessing gainful employment.

Belize acknowledges the importance of the
analysis of financial flows and transactions relating
to trafficking in persons and the Secretary-General's
call to States to increase their efforts to collect, analyse
and share such financial data. That is an area in which
further cooperation will be required to build capacity
as needed.

Right-thinking people in Belize, who form the
majority, and the Government of Belize are dedicated
to eliminating this scourge. This scourge is not limited
to any specific ethnicity or country. Every country
must therefore do its part to stem the trafficking of
human beings. It is a matter of utmost urgency and a
moral necessity.

Today's open debate, against the backdrop of
the recent graphic pictures of human slavery, is an
opportunity to galvanize international action to
specifically address the plight of persons in armed
conflict in the context of the wider global efforts to
combat trafficking in persons. Belize co-sponsored
today's resolution 2388 (2017) and is committed to
doing its part.

