Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to support this resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). In many ways, this
Mission demonstrates the flexibility of United Nations
peace-keeping and its continued usefulness in conflicts
around the world. With a small but influential presence,
the United Nations has helped the parties to maintain an
effective cease-fire and, through that, lay the groundwork
for political reconciliation. We pay special tribute to the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ambassador Pr'riz-
Ballon.

As the Secretary-General has reported, both parties
to the conflict have recognized the instrumental role
UNMOT has played in containing the conflict. But the
limited cease-fire extensions and chronic incidents along
the Tajik-Afghan border indicate that there is still much
to be done to bring peace and prosperity to Tajikistan.

While the Security Council has, through this
resolution, extended UNMOT's mandate until December
of this year, the resolution firmly and unambiguously
links that mandate to the existence of an effective
cease-fire and other conditions. UNMOT cannot function
without a cease-fire: the parties must lay down their arms
or the Council may be forced to take a decision to
withdraw the Mission. But a cease-fire is just a
beginning; the parties must move towards national
reconciliation based on democratic principles. The parties
have taken a first step in discussing, in Almaty,
fundamental political and institutional questions.

Although progress towards national reconciliation
still has far to go, the Secretary-General's report cites a
few instances of a positive nature, which I would like to
recall. President Rakhmonov met for the first time with
the Chairman of the Islamic Revival Movement of
Tajikistan, Abdullo Nuri, in Kabul. They were able to
extend the cease-fire and agree to future meetings, raising
expectations for the Almaty talks. The negotiators in
Almaty were able to agree to implement
confidence-building mechanisms such as the exchange of
prisoners and detainees. On this point, I would like to
stress the necessity of allowing the International

 

Committee of the Red Cross and the Joint Commission full
access to places where prisoners and detainees are being
held.

In Almaty, the parties began to discuss mechanisms
for a political settlement. Unfortunately, they were unable
to reach agreement on the fundamental questions. We
encourage the parties to redouble their efforts. The time has
come for the parties to work towards the outline of a
political accord. We look forward to an announcement of
the date, place and venue of the next round of talks to build
on the momentum of Kabul and Almaty. The United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and countries of the region stand ready to support
and help implement an agreement. But the international
community cannot make peace or move towards national
reconciliation; it is the parties themselves who must take
this responsibility, and take it soon.

