Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): First of all, allow me,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Germany, for his
excellent stewardship of the Council last month.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
the members of the Security Council for having
convened this open debate. Most of all, we wish to
commend the Security Council for its commitment to
multilateral diplomacy and for continuing the role of
the Council as the ideal forum to explore all options in
addressing the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

We, the 116 member States of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which represent two-thirds of humanity,
have called for this open debate at this crucial and
challenging moment so that the views of the larger
membership of the United Nations on this important
issue can be heard in the Security Council.

At the outset, we are also pleased to inform the
Council that the XIII Conference of Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, which was
held from 24 to 25 February 2003 at Kuala Lumpur,
was a major success. The Conference served as an
extremely useful venue to exchange views covering
many subjects of importance to the Movement, which
embodies the hopes and aspirations for economic
prosperity in a world that is peaceful, secure and just.
It was also clear that the well-being of the world
would be better served by a strong multilateral system
revolving around a United Nations that is more
representative and democratic, rather than by a
unilateral system based on the dominance of one
Power, however benign that Power may be. We need to
strengthen and promote the multilateral process in the
preservation and promotion of world peace through
dialogue and diplomacy and by avoiding resorting to
war to resolve conflicts. Apart from the adoption of the
Kuala Lumpur declaration, which reaffirmed the
Movement's commitment to the pursuit of a peaceful
and prosperous world order based on the principles of
the Bandung Conference and the Charter of the United
Nations, the summit at Kuala Lumpur also adopted two
statements, namely, concerning Iraq and Palestine.

As the Council is aware, the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, in his capacity as
the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, wrote on
3 March 2003 to all the heads of State and Government
sitting on the Security Council to convey the position
and concerns of the Non-Aligned Movement on the
matter of Iraq. I wish to reiterate that position and
those concerns at today's open debate.

The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned over the precarious and rapidly deteriorating
situation arising from the looming threat of war. We
believe that war against Iraq will be a destabilizing
factor for the region and for the whole world, as it will

have far-reaching political, economic and humanitarian
consequences for all. We, the Non-Aligned Movement,
are committed to the fundamental principles of the
non-use of force and of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and security
of all Member States of the United Nations.

We welcome and support all efforts exerted to
avert war against Iraq, and call for the persistent
continuation of such efforts based on multilateral
diplomacy, as opposed to unilateral actions. We also
reaffirm the central role of the United Nations and the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security. It would be abusive to obtain the
legitimacy of unilateral purpose under the pretext of a
multilateral cause. It will be a sad day for the world
when the credibility and integrity of the Security
Council and of the United Nations are challenged, and
more so if they are threatened in any way.

We welcome the decision by Iraq to actively
cooperate with United Nations inspectors in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), which
will assure the world of a peaceful manner of
disarming Iraq of weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, we call on Iraq to continue to actively comply
with resolution 1441 (2002) and all other relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as to remain
engaged in the process. We believe that would be an
important step towards opening up the way to a
comprehensive and peaceful resolution of all pending
issues between Iraq and the United Nations that takes
into account the concerns of all affected parties,
including Iraq's neighbours.

We wish to emphasize that the current
disarmament efforts in Iraq should not be an end in
themselves, but that they should also constitute a step
towards the lifting of sanctions in accordance with
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

We believe that the peaceful resolution of the
Iraqi crisis will ensure that the Security Council is also
in a position to ensure Iraq's sovereignty and the
inviolability of its territorial integrity, political
independence and security, in compliance with
paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687
(1991), on the establishment in the Middle East of a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction that
includes Israel.

We would like to extend our utmost appreciation
to the tireless efforts exerted by the weapons
inspectors, headed by Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohammad ElBaradei. Based on the recent reports
they presented to the Council just last week, on 7
March 2003, it is gratifying to note that there has been
substantial progress in the work of the weapons
inspectors. Mr. Blix personally acknowledged that
when he said that the destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles was regarded as a "substantial measure of
disarmament". He also categorically stated that there
was no evidence to support the claim that Iraq was
hiding biological and chemical weapons in mobile
laboratories and underground shelters. In his report Mr.
ElBaradei also alluded that the allegation that Iraq had
tried to purchase uranium from Niger were based on
documents that were inauthentic. The submission of
false reports to the United Nations regarding Iraq's
alleged nuclear weapons programme is a worrisome
and an irresponsible act. It is important that
information provided by all Member States to assist
weapons inspectors in carrying out their tasks
successfully in accordance with resolution 1441 (2002)
be credible.

We believe that the problem of Iraq can be
resolved peacefully through the United Nations. That
view is held by the majority of the members of the
Security Council, permanent and non-permanent
members alike, a fact that best reflects the views of the
global community. The Council must strive to find a
peaceful solution to the current crisis. We believe that
this is possible without resorting to war. The Council
should remain aware of the untold misery that war will
inflict on the countries and the people in the region.
The Middle East, already a flashpoint of conflict -
primarily because of Israeli aggression and occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands - cannot afford any
more turmoil. History has taught us that it is easy to
start a war, but ending it is often an arduous and
complex task that, in many recent cases, has been
inconclusive.

It is our earnest hope that the Council will give
serious consideration to the views of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In the name of humanity, we appeal to the
members of the Council not to resort to military action
against Iraq. There is no dishonour in responding to the
appeals of the international community to prevent the
use of force against Iraq.

