Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation would
like to express its deep gratitude and appreciation
to Peru, Kuwait and the United Kingdom, through
their Ambassadors Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Mansour
Alotaibi and Karen Pierce, for the briefings they have
just presented and for organizing the very important
mission to visit Cox's Bazar, Dhaka, Naypyidaw and
Rakhine state. The mission enabled the members of the
Security Council to see and hear first-hand the reality
of the situation of the Rohingya refugees in the places
we visited, through direct interaction with refugees, the
political and military authorities and members of civil
society and the United Nations system in Bangladesh
and Myanmar. I would also like to place on record
our gratitude to the Government of Kuwait for the
important and helpful logistical support it provided to
the mission, which went a long way to ensuring that
it was carried out under good conditions and within
the time available. We also express our appreciation
to the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar and
the United Nations system for all their support to the
mission. I would also like to thank Mr. Filippo Grandi,
High Commissioner for Refugees, for his detailed and
informative briefings during the mission.

While I do not want to sound too melodramatic, I
have to say that what I experienced, observed and heard
during our visit to the zero line, both inside Myanmar's
territory and in Cox's Bazar, left a deep impression on
me, as I had never seen first-hand a situation of human
suffering comparable to that in both places, where
hundreds of thousands of the more than 1.2 million
refugees were crowded together like sardines in tins
and in very precarious conditions with regard to health
care, food and accommodation. Our exchanges with
refugees and members of the United Nations agencies
opened our eyes to the extent of the tragedy that these
refugees have continued to endure since their departure
from Rakhine state.

The humanitarian tragedy is not limited to the
refugee population but is also having a broad impact
on the people of Bangladesh who are hosting the
refugees. Despite the fact that their meagre means of
livelihood and their environment have been severely
damaged, they have nevertheless the burden with grace
and generosity. In that connection, I would like to pay
a well-deserved tribute to the people and Government
of Bangladesh for taking that on and for the sacrifices
they have made in spite of their own precarious
situation. I would also like to take this opportunity to
make an urgent appeal to the international community
to support the Government of Bangladesh with all
means necessary to address the critical situation that
both its own people and the Rohingya refugees are
facing, which threatens to deteriorate even further with
the upcoming rainy season.

As we already mentioned in our talks with the
political and military authorities of Myanmar, and in
line with the Council's press statement of November
2017 (S/PRST/2017/22), we would like to reiterate
our call for every effort to be made to ensure the
dignified return of all Myanmar citizens who have
been forced to flee to Bangladesh. After what we
have seen, experienced and heard, we in the Council
must find better solutions so that the hope that our
visit gave the refugees can be transformed into reality
through ongoing contact with both Governments to
facilitate the necessary agreements, memorandums
of understanding, mechanisms and procedures for
returning the refugees to the places they were forced
to leave. In that regard, we hope that the Government
of Myanmar will cooperate and resolutely support
Special Envoy Christine Schraner Burgener, and will
allow United Nations agencies access to every region
of the country, especially Rakhine state, so that they
can support the repatriation and resettlement process
for refugees.

In conclusion, I would like to sincerely thank all of
the United Nations agencies and the staff of the Security
Council Affairs Division for the effective support they
provided throughout the development of the mission.

