Mr. Logar (Slovenia): Let me start by thanking
Egypt for organizing today's timely debate and the
Deputy Secretary-General and the other two briefers
for their presentations. We also welcome the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6 this morning.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

Slovenia condemns terrorism in all its forms, since
terrorism is a direct attack on the values of democracy,
human rights, tolerance, solidarity, humanity and peace.
We must strengthen our efforts in addressing conditions
conducive to and the root causes of radicalization and
violent extremism, which lead to terrorism. In this
regard, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) is crucial. We have to make efficient use of the
upcoming General Assembly review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and build
on the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
presented by the Secretary-General (A/70/674).

The concept of human security stands for a
comprehensive approach to security that broadly
encompasses the security of people and communities
from violence, freedom from fear, freedom from want,
and their right to live in dignity, which contributes to the
elimination of violent extremism. As a people-centred
and multisectorial approach, human security could
lead to the implementation of an all-of-United Nations
approach - one of the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. Slovenia will assume the chairmanship of
the Human Security Network in June.

Slovenia supports the strong regional focus in the
Plan of Action. The Slovenian-led Western Balkan
Counter-Terrorism initiative was endorsed by the
Council of the European Union in December 2015.
The purpose of the initiative is to set up an integrative
and complementary approach of all international
partners involved in counter-terrorism activities in
the region that prevents duplication and overlapping,
creates synergies and enhances the efficiency of a
joint response. We hope that this model can contribute
to efforts in other regions as well. The early detection
and prevention of radicalization must remain the focus
of our attention. In January 2016, Slovenia launched
a project for the first-line practitioners dealing with
radicalization issues, focused on awareness-raising and
encouraging capacity-building in the Western Balkans.

The only effective way to combat extremist ideology
is with counter-ideology - namely, education and
intercultural dialogue. Recognizing this, the Slovenia-
based Euro-Mediterranean University established the
Centre for Arab, Islamic and Middle Eastern Studies in
June 2015. The Centre aims to capitalize on cooperation
on science and culture in order to build trust and
promote intercultural and interfaith understanding
among European and Arab Muslim countries.

Young people are especially susceptible to
radicalization. We need to look for positive alternatives
for the young, especially through education, jobs and
their active involvement in political processes. In this
regard, let me underline the importance of the recent
efforts of UNESCO to step up its action to prevent
violent extremism.

