I thank the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, for his briefing. We appreciate his dedication and devotion to the political process of Syria. China has been following the situation in Syria very closely. We are worried about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. The Secretary- General and his Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, have appealed for a ceasefire on many occasions. We attach great importance to those appeals, and call on all parties to enhance mutual trust to pursue de-escalation and jointly combat the pandemic. There is a window of opportunity to promote inclusive dialogue and create favourable conditions for political solutions. We have consistent maintained our position in support of a political solution of the conflict in Syria. The Syrian parties should continue to engage constructively with each other and maintain dialogue within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. The future of Syria must be decided by Syrians alone, free from foreign interference. It is fundamental importance that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria be respected and upheld. China will continue to support the good offices of the Special Envoy, in pursuit of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). At the same time, the international community should be alert to the fact that terrorists are seeking to take advantage of the current situation. Terrorist groups are still mounting assaults in Idlib and other provinces, which pose a constant threat to the security and stability of Syria and the entire region. The Security Council should pay close attention and support the Special Envoy's calls for effective, cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism efforts. We call on relevant parties to step up dialogue and negotiations to swiftly find a long-term solution with regard to counter-terrorism. Concerning COVID-19, although the number of confirmed cases in Syria is comparatively limited, containment and prevention measures are indispensable, given the quick transmission of the virus. The Syrian Government is taking effective measures in medical, transportation, education and many other sectors. We appreciate these efforts. It is the primary responsibility of the Syrian Government to cope with this public health crisis. China is ready to strengthen cooperation with the people and Government of Syria in combating the virus, and to offer assistance within our capacity. It is also high time for the international community to provide greater support for the urgent efforts of Syria, which serve the interests of the Syrian people. Unilateral sanctions undermine countries' capacity to mobilize resources and respond to the pandemic, and therefore should be lifted without delay.
