Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of the
Kenyan delegation, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of May. I commend you for
the manner in which you have conducted its affairs. I
also thank you for hosting this important debate at a
time when the United Nations is preparing to review
its Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to align it with
current realities and developments. We too welcome the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674).

Let me express our sincere condolences and
sympathies to our Arab brothers in Iraq, who today have
once again suffered an outrageous attack by terrorists.
Iraq has suffered for way too long under the terror of
events in the country.

What was impossible to imagine a generation
ago has come to pass. Nearly all the international
conflicts on the agenda of the Security Council have
violent extremist groups as main protagonists. We have
witnessed the emergence of groups such the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) (Da'esh), Boko
Haram, Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida and numerous affiliates
and other non-State actors in violent conflict hotspots
across the world. Those groups have exploited the
conflicts, the attendant State collapse, socioeconomic
grievances and geopolitical disorder, especially in the
Middle East, to survive and to thrive.

Violent extremist movements hide behind religion
to pursue political ends. In Kenya, the Somali-based
Al-Shabaab, an Al-Qaida affiliate, utilizes a Salafi-
jihadi ideology through selective reading of Islamic
religious texts and histories in order to justify its own
hideous acts. They use claims of global and local
victimization of Muslims to assemble militant recruits
willing to carry out suicide and mass casualty attacks
against civilians and infrastructure in our country and
neighbouring countries. The group retains an ambition
to establish an East African caliphate to replace the
current secular States and other religious traditions.

We believe that the international community's
counter-narratives in response to the challenge of
violent extremism are manifestly weak. It has failed
to adequately address frustrations and hopelessness,
particularly among the youth. Just this morning in a
room next door, we listened to Asha Mansour from
Tunisia, who challenged us to in that high-level
meeting by asking us why it is that today, in a country
like Tunisia, where the Arab Spring was born, so many
young people have turned to recruitment by ISIS.

Failure to address frustration and hopelessness,
mainly caused by economic injustices, endemic
conflicts, human right violations and social inequalities
seems to have left many young people throughout the
world vulnerable to extremist ideologies. Migrants and
refugees are also targets of violent extremist ideology
due to their vulnerability. Refugee camps have been
used as recruitment and staging grounds by violent
extremists. That is our experience in Kenya, which has
driven our Government, after 25 years of hosting over
500,000 refugees, to finally decide to shut down those
camps. Similarly, the use of cyberspace, particularly the
social media on the Internet, is posing new challenges
in the war against terrorism and extremism.

Kenya's strategy to counter narratives and ideologies
of violent extremism seeks to facilitate an inclusive and
total rejection of extremist ideologies hostile to the
Kenya's nationhood and way of life as a secular State.
It seeks to promote narratives that minimize sympathy
for terrorism as a means to change society or politics.
Allow me to share some of the lessons leant from our
experiences that we believe to be crucial to the success
of any strategy, be it local, national or international, in
countering extremist ideology and the terrorism that it
drives.
First, there is a need to prevent conflicts and to
expeditiously resolve the existing ones. No narrative
to counter any ideology can succeed if communities
are still engaged in open hostilities. The primacy of
politics - which we take extremely seriously - in the
resolution of conflicts is key to attaining sustainable
solutions.

Secondly, we need to improve coordination, both
nationally and regionally, through the timely sharing of
information and best practices. There is need to reach
out to and involve all sectors of society - including
through community policing, religious leaders, private
sector and civil society - because it is only through
those partnerships that we can hope to attain success.

Thirdly, investments in deradicalization,
rehabilitation and reintegration are key to winning the
war of ideas with violent extremist groups.

Fourthly, Governments should formulate inclusive
policies to address the various socioeconomic and
political drivers behind the violent extremist narratives.

Fifthly, adequate resourcing and capacity-building
are critical at all levels, as are investments in educational
programes and early warning systems to ensure timely
corrective interventions.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance
of preventing conflicts, the separation of religion
from politics, the proper coordination and sharing
of information, and the role of amnesty in fostering
counter-narratives against the ideologies of violent
extremism. The Kenyan delegation looks forward to
the continued debate during the forthcoming review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
and to receiving the Security Council in Nairobi later
this week, where we hope to take this conversation even
further.

