Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Sir, allow me to offer Morocco's
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month. Similarly, our
great appreciation goes to Ambassador Baso Sangqu
and his delegation for their presidency of the Council
last month.

I wish to express my delegation's great regret and
disappointment over the Council's failure to adopt the
draft resolution (S/2012/77) we submitted three days
ago, as well as our sincere hope that the Council's
failure will not serve as a pretext for further dangerous
backsliding in the humanitarian situation in brotherly
Syria and increased innocent civilian casualties.

It should be recalled that in their recent
presentations to the Council (see S/PV.6710), Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Chairman of the
current session of the Ministerial Council of the
League of Arab States, and Mr. Nabil Elaraby,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, made a
clear and urgent request for the Council's support of
the regional organization's bold, decisive and
comprehensive initiative based on dialogue, mutual
understanding and national reconciliation, aimed at
achieving a peaceful solution for a situation that has
only continued to worsen with time.

In assuming its responsibility as the Arab member
of the Security Council and in close cooperation with
other States members and non-members of the Council,
in particular many of the Arab countries, Morocco,
almost a year after the start of the crisis in brotherly
Syria, continues to work to achieve consensus in order
to enable the Council to speak with a single voice.

Morocco highly appreciates the initiative of all
the Council members that joined us in sponsoring the
draft resolution. I refer to the Council's unanimous
response to the proposals made by one of its members.
We duly appreciate the spirit of consensus and
12-22356
flexibility reflected in the draft resolution, of which
members are well aware.

Through our efforts, we have endeavoured to live
up to the firm principles demanding an immediate and
complete end to all hostilities and acts of violence, and
to encourage political dialogue in order to enable the
Syrian people to establish its national political
institutions, preserve Syria's territorial integrity and
social, pluralistic unity and, equally important, to
forestall any external military intervention. Now that
the Council has failed to reach a decision to support the
Arab initiative, the road map remains the only tool as
an exemplary framework for implementation by the
League of Arab States.

We are terribly pained by the horrendous events
unfolding before us. We ask God to bless all the
Victims without exception, and we call for the
bloodshed to end and for all factions of the Syrian
people to establish a democratic State and open a
single, unified society enjoying understanding and
harmony. We hope that the Security Council will not
have to address the situation yet again, although it
seems to be deteriorating. We hope that now that the
Council has been unable to reach decision, all those
who have leverage with the parties will spare no effort
to ensure that no further innocent Victims are claimed
and that the violence and counter-violence will come to
an end.

