Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate and to thank my colleagues Ambassadors Johan
Verbeke, Ricardo Alberto Arias and Peter Burian for
their informative briefings on the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), respectively.

There is no doubt that the winning fight against
terrorism is a common objective of all Member States.
We all agree on the importance of implementing the
necessary United Nations mechanisms for that purpose.
It is essential, however, to stress a matter of principle:
that the international Organization must define the term
"terrorism" so that we know, without any doubt or
room for interpretation, what we are combating. The
phenomenon should be diagnosed by examining its
root causes, particularly its relationship to foreign
occupation, the absence of the rule of law, human
rights violations, discrimination, exclusion and
marginalization.
The State of Qatar believes that terrorism must be
combated, not avenged, and that security must not be
protected at the expense of fundamental freedoms or

human rights, because these are rights that are not
bound by time or circumstances. For counter-terrorism
measures to remain credible, they must be in
conformity with the basic principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, the rules and principles of
international law, international standards of justice,
provisions of international humanitarian law and
human rights law. They must also avoid political and
ethical double standards, lest the credibility of the
Council and its efforts be jeopardized.

The three subsidiary bodies on terrorism
constitute an important part of the United Nations
counter-terrorism campaign. Their working methods
and coordination need, therefore, to be improved and
harmonized with legal rules and considerations.
Transparency, human rights and pre-emptory norms
should not be contravened in any way whatsoever and
must be taken into account in order to preserve the
credibility and effectiveness of targeted sanctions
imposed by the Council.

In the 1267 Committee, on Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, my delegation has been, since it joined the
Security Council, in the forefront of members working
to further improve the Sanctions Committee's listing,
de-listing and review procedures, for we are aware of
the legal concerns related to the current system of
targeted sanctions. In some cases, such concerns have
led individuals and entities included on the sanctions
list to press charges before national or regional courts.
We have made strenuous efforts to strengthen the
sanctions regime and to establish fair and clear listing
and de-listing procedures. For instance, we improved
the Committee guidelines, specifically paragraph 6 (i),
which now calls for a review of the names after a
certain period of time.

But those improvements were watered down and
became vague; except for one case, it has been difficult
to review the names on the list since the system
became operational. The delegation of Qatar has called
on the Secretary-General to propose fair and clear
procedures for listing and de-listing individuals and
entities, and for granting humanitarian exceptions, in
accordance with paragraph 109 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/2).

In a letter dated 15 June 2006, the Secretary-
General actually submitted recommendations regarding
de-listing procedures. The Security Council also
stressed, in its presidential statement of 22 June 2006
(S/PRST/2006/28), its commitment to ensure that fair
and clear procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them, as
well as for granting humanitarian exemptions. The
Council later adopted resolution 1730 (2006). We voted
in favour of that resolution because it constituted a first
step, despite the fact that many of our proposals were
not taken into account.

Resolution 1730 (2006) does not fully serve the
purpose; there is still need for a real system for
reviewing listing and de-listing decisions. To that end,
a monitoring and review mechanism must be
established, perhaps in the form of an independent
review panel with the authority to consider, in a neutral
and independent way, requests for de-listing,
investigate such requests and obtain additional
information from Member States in order to provide
effective redress.

By contrast, the current sanctions regime and the
procedures for listing and de-listing, reviewing the
names and granting humanitarian exemptions still lack
flexibility and the ability to adapt to the concerns and
proposals of States regarding the need to completely
overhaul the system.

The seventh report of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Committee's Monitoring Team has noted that the list's
lack of consonance with current risks undermines the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. The report states
that, while listing procedures are now clearer and are
available on the Committee's website, the names of
many prominent Al-Qaida and Taliban leaders have not
been listed and that, since the beginning of 2007, only
five names have been added: the lowest-ever annual
listing rate. This strikingly continues the downward
trend we have seen since 2001.

As noted in paragraph 26 of the Monitoring Team
report, Member States informed the Team that the
reasons for the failure to submit more names arise
either from practical motives, such as a listing's
potential publicity impact on an investigation, or from
legal motives, such as the consequences for a legal
appeal regarding the implementation of sanctions
measures. Confidence in the specific sanctions regime
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban has started to erode
for a reason known to all: the sanctions regime's
failure to abide by legal controls and standards.

Our legal interpretation of the sanctions regime
and related Security Council resolutions is consistent

with that of the International Court of Justice. As a
matter of principle, Security Council resolutions are
binding, by virtue of Article 25 of the Charter, when
the Council adopts its resolutions in accordance with
Article 25 - in other words, when the Council
performs its duties in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, as set out in Article 1
of the Charter, and specifically in accordance with the
principles of justice and international law, and more
important, the principles of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all.

Article 103 of the Charter provides that
obligations under the Charter prevail over other
obligations, but this does not mean that they prevail
over or supersede pre-emptory norms of jus cogens. In
other words, the framers of the Charter did not give the
Council a blank cheque to impose sanctions or take
actions that violate the purposes and principles of the
Charter or violate the sovereignty of States and that do
not take into account internationally recognized legal
controls and standards - especially since the political
nature of the Council's resolutions does not exclude the
possibility that the Council might take an action that is
contrary to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter.

Field visits to Member States are among the
essential activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism (CTC). We clearly note,
however, an imbalance between visits made to the
countries of the South compared to those made to the
countries of the North. That state of affairs does not
serve the objectivity and transparency that must
characterize such visits. My delegation has proposed
that visits be made to some countries of the North, but
the proposal was blocked by countries of the North in
the Committee.

The fact that the Counter-Terrorism Committee is
open-ended prompts us to wonder when the
Committee's mandate will end. Will we see the day
when we can verify that it has achieved the task for
which it was established - in other words, that
Member States have fully fulfilled their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001)? Despite the many
accomplishments, we must draw attention to the
wasted efforts and resources and the lack of full
coordination with the General Assembly and with other
organizations in implementing the purposes of the
resolution.

In the light of General Assembly resolution
60/288, adopted in September 2006, on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
appropriate common mechanism to coordinate
financial, human and technical efforts in this sphere is
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
which encompasses nearly 24 entities, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED). We should therefore think seriously about the
feasibility of the continued existence of the CTED and
its possible integration in the Task Force, in order to
ensure overall coordination and consistency in the
counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system.

I should recall that Security Council resolution
1624 (2005) stresses the need to continue international
efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding
among civilizations, in an effort to prevent the
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures, and stresses the importance of the role of the
media in enhancing dialogue, broadening
understanding, promoting tolerance and coexistence
and fostering an environment which is not conducive to
incitement of terrorism.

We take the opportunity to note the leading role
played by my country at the international level to
promote dialogue among cultures and religions. We
call again on the CTC to firmly address the issue of the
arbitrary targeting of religions and cultures and urge
Member States to criminalize the defamation of
religion.

It is regrettable that since the last joint briefing
(see S/PV.5679) only one Member State has submitted
its first report to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee should therefore continue to consider all
possible means to assist States in submitting their
reports, such as the recent distribution of a standard
matrix to assist States that have not submitted their
reports.

Finally, we stress that cooperation and
coordination among the Committees, Member States
and international organizations is a critical element that
contributes to effective performance. In the context of
such cooperation, coordination among Committee
experts is a positive thing and should be continued in
order to effectively combat terrorism.

Let me note in conclusion that the question that
presents itself first and foremost is whether we really
know what terrorism is.

