Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I congratulate China on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also wish you a happy new year, Sir.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Zimbabwe on behalf of the
Southern Africa Development Community.

We thank you, Sir, for having convened this open
debate on a matter which is central to the mandate of the
Security Council. Botswana attaches great importance
to issues of peace and security and, in this connection,
welcomes your initiative to continue the dialogue on
this subject matter.

Today is an opportunity to reflect, to celebrate
history and to look beyond as our Organization
continues to serve humanity. Seventy years ago, the
United Nations was born. Its purpose, according to
the Charter, was to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and to maintain international peace
and security. Today, these very noble objectives are as
relevant as they were prior to 1945.

My country Botswana joined the United Nations
in 1966, having just attained statehood. We have come
a long way and we have come of age. We owe our
existence to the guardianship and the tutelage of the
international community. Today, we look back with
pride while celebrating our traditions as a sovereign
and equal Member of this universal body. As we enter
the seventieth anniversary of the Organization, we
reaffirm our abiding faith in the fundamental rights,
dignity and worth of the human person. We commit to
serving the United Nations for the good of humanity.

We believe that peace and stability are prerequisites
for the attainment of sustainable development. Causes
of conflict include the absence of political tolerance,
democracy, good governance and the rule of law, but
most important is the inequitable distribution ofnational
resources. The creation of the United Nations and all
its organs, particularly the Security Council, as well
as the adoption of the Charter, provided a platform for
addressing grievances among States and strengthening
the rule of law. We cherish these ideals as we strive to
achieve a peaceful and just world.

We remain hopeful that the Security Council and
Council members will one day unite and act according
to the fundamental Charter objectives of safeguarding
humanity and defying selfish national interests. This
does not mean that the burden of responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
lies solely with the Security Council; States and their
citizens also have an important role to play. It is for this
reason that Botswana remains steadfast in its support
for strengthening institutions of accountability at the
national and international levels alike. It therefore
remains imperative that we ensure collaboration and
synergy in our efforts aimed at fighting threats to peace
and security.

As an African country proud of our continental
heritage and traditions, we commit to contributing
towards the attainment of world peace, not just from
the sidelines but also on the frontlines of this body,
the Security Council. To this end, we would like to see
Africa represented in the affairs of the Council in both
the permanent and non-permanent categories. While
we believe in the primacy of the United Nations, we
would like the Organization recognize the role played
by the African region in the maintenance of peace and
security.

This debate takes place against a backdrop of
violence and bloodshed committed by ruthless and
heartless terrorist groups across the world. The
emergence of those violent groups is a huge challenge to
national, regional and international peace and security
and requires our concerted efforts to fight them.

Even as we serve the Organization, we remain
concerned by the rising scourge of violent extremism
and atrocious acts of terrorism perpetrated by radical
extremists such as the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram. Those
terrorist groups have been sweeping across the globe
and carrying out heinous acts against humanity. We
therefore pledge to cooperate with the international
community in the fight against terror and terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. We owe it to the
millions of innocent people across the world who live in
fear and look to us to save humankind from extinction.

