Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I should
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important debate. I should
also like to thank the Secretary-General and Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra for their
valuable insights, and Mr. Doss, Ms. Loj and Mr. Von
der Schulenburg for having provided their unique
perspectives from the field.

Over the past year, the Council has devoted
considerable attention to ways to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping. Today's debate on transition and
exit strategies will enhance this effort.

In numerous debates, the Council has noted that,
with the growth in volume and complexity of
peacekeeping operations, United Nations peacekeeping
is under severe strain. We have also noted that we are
placing multiple demands on a finite supply of well-
equipped and trained troops and police. We must keep
these factors in mind before renewing peacekeeping
mandates or establishing new operations, especially
where conditions on the ground are ill-suited to
successful peacekeeping.

But we must not forget why the Security Council
establishes peacekeeping operations in the first place.
United Nations peacekeeping saves lives and delivers
real results. Many countries are far more stable today
because of past and current United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. Sierra Leone and Burundi are
both consolidating hard-won peace; Liberia is on a
promising track. But we must stay the course.

But we have also seen what can happen when we
are too swift to terminate a mission, as in Timor-Leste.
We must resist the temptation to withdraw
peacekeepers prematurely or to downsize or terminate
missions on the basis of arbitrary timelines and false
readings of progress. Hard-won progress can unravel
swiftly if peacekeepers depart precipitously without
leaving behind the foundations for a sustainable peace.

In its presidential statement of August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24), the Security Council recommitted
itself to improving the overall performance of United
Nations peacekeeping and to addressing the challenges
it faces today. The measures outlined in that statement
and those in the draft statement before us today provide
us with tools to strengthen peacekeeping in the interest
of helping countries make a swift transition to a
durable peace. I should like to comment on a few of
these measures today.

Firstly, as other speakers have noted, at the outset
we must develop credible and achievable mandates for
peacekeeping operations. Mandates and means must be
better aligned, and we must be realistic about what we
can achieve. We are improving our ability to measure
progress through the use of benchmarks that are
tailored to the circumstances of each conflict and
reviewed periodically for their viability. But we can do
better.

Secondly, it is important to work together to
breathe new life into faltering peace processes in
countries where peacekeeping operations are deployed.
Peacekeeping must be accompanied by vigorous
peacemaking efforts; it is not a substitute for them.
International leverage may at times be needed to revive
stalled negotiations, and we may wish to consider
whether informal mechanisms, such as the Core Group
for Timor-Leste, have practices that can be helpfully
applied to other situations.

Thirdly, we need to help expand the pool of
capable and willing military and police forces.
Therefore, bilateral programmes that train and equip
potential contributors are essential. The increased
communication among troop- and police-contributors,
the Council and the Secretariat has been helpful, but
we should do better if we are to make informed
decisions regarding future mandates and eventual
drawdown.

Finally, it is critical that we do more to build up
host Governments' security sectors and rule of law
institutions. The United Nations Security Sector
Reform Team can play a useful role in serving as a
focal point for technical support in this area. Other
relevant peacebuilding activities should also be an
essential element of any new mandate. Earlier and
enhanced cooperation with the Peacebuilding
Commission is also needed.

As Ms. Loj stated, one size does not fit all, and
our peacebuilding strategies, just like our overall
peacekeeping strategies, should be tailored to the needs
of the country in question. As we consider revising
mandates or downsizing some missions, we will have
to augment others, as we just did in Haiti. A few
months ago, we had hoped that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) would
soon be in the position to begin successfully
downsizing. Instead, MINUSTAH is now important
than ever, serving as a critical lifeline to millions of
Haitians in desperate need.

I should like to underscore the continued support
of the United State for United Nations peacekeeping
and express our gratitude for the contribution that
United Nations peacekeepers make around the world.

