Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti Sandra Honore
for her presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/840), as well as her assessment of the
situation in the country on the eve of the transition to
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

We agree that since the adoption of resolution 2350
(2017) in April, there have been positive developments
in the country, made possible thanks to the efforts of
the Government and the President, with the support of
the international community.

We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General's
report indicates that the withdrawal of the military
component and the reduction of United Nations police
personnel have not negatively affected the security
situation. Nevertheless, the statistics provided by the
report pertaining to crime on the island continue to be
a cause for serious concern. Despite the improvements
in certain indicators, the Haitian National Police,
supported by Blue Helmets, should continue to consider
that to be a matter of the highest priority as one of
the key components for ultimately normalizing life
in the country. We hope that the timely and coherent
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic development
plan for the national police will contribute to that.

We have carefully reviewed the information in the
report concerning the progress made in transitioning
from the Stabilization Mission to the Mission for Justice
Support, which will begin operating on 16 October. With
respect to delegating responsibilities to the Mission and
the country team, we believe that, while supporting the
Government of Haiti in the various areas of governance,
the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator should be
guided by the main provisions of the mandate that had
been given to the Stabilization Mission, as well as by
the primary principle of national ownership. That also
applies to the new Mission. Its conscientious support
is extremely important for the Government, which
should become increasingly independent every day, in
terms of both defining its priorities and implementing
peacebuilding tasks in Haiti.

In that regard, we fully agree with the conclusion of
the report that programmes in the areas of security, policy
and development must be framed by the Government
and be based on the views of the population. Moreover,
of no less importance, all national stakeholders should
have a sense of shared responsibility for sustaining
peace. The top priority of national ownership, with
the support of the international community where
absolutely necessary, is confirmed not only in the part
of the report concerning the legacy of the Stabilization
Mission but also by experience, and one of the most
striking examples ofthat is in the neighbouring country
of Colombia.

In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our support for the Government and the people of Haiti,
which is on the path to stability and prosperity while
overcoming not only internal disagreements but also
the devastating consequences of the natural disasters
of September, namely, Hurricanes Irma and Maria. The
Caribbean region has historically been vulnerable to
a complex natural environment. In order to overcome
the environmental risks more expeditiously, a strong
Government and a cohesive society are necessary,
which through joint efforts will allow for restoring,
building and strengthening Haiti's potential.

We would also like to express our gratitude to
Ms. Sandra Honore and all the previous Heads of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their
contribution to the progress achieved by the host country
with the support of the international community.

