Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate,
which is an eloquent expression of the importance that
your Government attaches to the fight against
terrorism. The statement delivered by the President of
Croatia, whose presence in the Chamber this morning
we appreciated very much, serves as a great
contribution to our joint consideration of this very
important matter. I should also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his presentation. My
delegation is grateful for his efforts to stimulate and
support multilateral cooperation against threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.

In recent days, the world has once again been
shocked by a series of deadly terrorist acts, this time in
India. Allow me to reiterate our deep condolences and
heartfelt sympathy to the Government and people of
India and to the families of the victims.

The boldness and savagery shown in Mumbai
remind us that the international community must stand
together and work harder to prevent such events from
recurring. Those responsible for the killing and
destruction must be brought to justice without delay, so
that there can be no doubt that the lives of civilians
will be protected and the rule of law will prevail
against the criminals who wish them ill.

There is no possible justification for terrorism.
Killing innocent civilians is never acceptable. That is
why Brazil strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. More than a position of successive
Governments, the repudiation of terrorism is enshrined
in the federal Constitution itself as a guiding principle
of Brazilian foreign policy.

My country is also a party to all international
conventions and protocols against terrorism, except for
the Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, which is under consideration by the
National Congress.

Acts such as those seen in Mumbai must be met
with our resolute willingness to deepen our
cooperation, as envisaged in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Strategy is
particularly relevant because it promotes responses to
terrorism that are comprehensive, coordinated and
consistent. Many of its elements make it clear that it is
an instrument of justice, peace and order and not of
vengeance, discrimination or blind attachment to the
status quo.

It is therefore crucial to combat terrorism in strict
observance of international law. Only procedures
adopted in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and other relevant treaties, in particular human rights
instruments and international humanitarian and refugee
law, can be truly successful and garner the necessary
support. Those procedures are essential to preserve the
moral standing of Governments fighting terrorism and
to win the battle where victory is most needed - in the
hearts and minds of those whom terrorists claim to
defend but in fact threaten, hurt and often kill.

Further developing international law can only
help to fight terrorism effectively. Brazil strongly
supports the adoption of a comprehensive counter-
terrorism convention. We will continue to contribute to
the negotiations and efforts to achieve our common
goal. We hope that substantial results can be achieved
shortly and that a high-level conference on the matter
can be convened.

Another essential element of our collective
struggle is enhanced judicial cooperation and exchange
of information among States, especially among
financial and police intelligence agencies. In that
regard, the counter-terrorism committees of the
Security Council have played an outstanding role.
Their working methods have been improved in recent
years so as to make them more effective while
respecting basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The committees constitute a valuable tool to
ensure a coordinated response from the international
community to the threats posed by terrorist acts.

Although indispensable, repression is not enough
to put an end to terrorism. Prevention is key if we want
to rid the planet of such a scourge. We must eliminate
or at least mitigate non-material factors that may breed
terrorist acts, including political, ethnic, racial, cultural
and religious intolerance. Education for peace and
diversity has become a necessity, and a particularly
urgent one in some quarters of the globe, East and
West. But such an urgent task is to be performed by all,
everywhere and at all times. At the international level,
initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilizations are
most welcome because they help to bridge the gap
between different cultures. They promote mutual
understanding, tolerance and the broad acceptance of
different world views.

Preventing terrorism also requires addressing the
social and economic divide among and within nations.
We all know that terrorists thrive there where
underdevelopment, poverty and hopelessness make
extremism look like the only avenue open to real
change. As President Lula has forcefully advocated
since he first came to office, the international
community must take decisive action to help
Governments combat hunger and poverty worldwide. It

is an obvious but often disregarded truth that those who
feel included and cared for have a stake in the
preservation of the social and political order that
supports them.

In light of the above, Mr. President, my
delegation cannot but join our voice to your
Excellency's call for a multidimensional approach
against terrorism that does not shy away from the use
of force whenever necessary and at the same time fully
understands the absolute need to address the powerful
causes that make many choose extremism and violence.
The right combination of strict law enforcement and
broad inclusiveness will eventually lead us to success.

