Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I thank the Secretary- General for his statement and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. It has been only 24 hours since we discussed the situation in Syria in this Chamber (see S/PV.8734). Yet new and grave developments warranted the Security Council's further attention today. Yesterday, around the time the Council was in session, a Turkish military convoy was targeted by a series of air strikes for a duration of five hours. This heinous attack took place in the vicinity of the village of Balyun, in the Idlib de-escalation area. The convoy was deployed to reinforce a Turkish observation post and some of the fortifications. As a result of a series of air strikes that took place yesterday afternoon, we lost 34 soldiers. In addition, a significant number of members of the Turkish Forces were wounded. The radar tracks show that regime and Russian aircraft were in formation flight during that time. Let me underline that the Turkish forces that were attacked were alone in that area. The logical conclusion therefrom is that they were deliberately attacked. We had prior coordination, in writing, with Russian forces about the location of our convoy. And air strikes continued despite the warnings we immediately issued, right after the very first attack. Even the ambulances that were sent for wounded soldiers were targeted. This was a belligerent act of aggression against Turkey. In self-defence, Turkish forces responded in kind. The Turkish contingent attacked yesterday had been deployed in accordance with existing de-escalation arrangements in Idlib to ensure the security of our military personnel serving at observations posts; to protect civilians against the regime's aggression; to ensure rapid and uninterrupted humanitarian access to those in need; to prevent mass displacement movements into Turkey and beyond; to preserve the de-escalation area status of Idlib; and to contribute to the establishment of a nation-wide ceasefire, as called for by resolution 2254 (2015). These were the parameters of the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. Our aim is to return to the status quo ante established then. We continue our dialogue with Russia on that basis. In fact, another Russian delegation was in Ankara yesterday, on the very day of this dastardly attack on Turkish forces. Today, President Erdogan spoke with President Putin. We have made it clear to the Russian side once again that we will not abandon our observation posts and we will continue our military reinforcement. We have a moral responsibility, at least, to protect the helpless, desperate children of Idlib. Some may interpret de-escalation of violence to mean that all forces are equally responsible for de-escalation. Following that logic would mean leaving those civilians defenceless and at the mercy of the regime. In that case, it is clear what almost 5 million people in the area would do - they would flee the country. But this is exactly what the murderous Al-Assad regime wants. There is no doubt that the regime and its backers aim at depopulating Idlib. Yesterday's events are a stark reminder that the regime is hell-bent on continuing its attacks to intimidate Syrian civilians and destroy the Syrian opposition and the prospects for a political solution. Today, the Turkish presence in Idlib represents hope for the millions of civilians stuck in that area and the only bulwark against the regime's crimes against humanity. The Turkish presence in Idlib is the only reason why millions of Syrians can remain in their homeland without fear. It needs to be clear to everyone that our soldiers sacrificed their own lives to save the lives of civilians in Idlib. The Turkish presence in Idlib is also the sole guarantee for the continuation of humanitarian assistance. These are exactly the reasons why the regime and its backers are targeting the Turkish armed forces. The regime and its backers want to drag Turkey into their dirty war because Turkish soldiers stand in the way of the regime fulfilling its dream of a military solution. But there is a miscalculation here; the regime and its backers have for years been used to killing innocent civilians and members of the opposition. They should make no mistake - this time, they have targeted the Turkish armed forces directly. Some warlords in Damascus may not know the difference. Some extremist mercenaries fighting along with the regime may not know the difference. If they want to learn the hard way, they will. Turkey does not want war, but Turkey will not hesitate to use force if and when its security is threatened. Any provocation and harassment will be retaliated against by all means. Turkey has been displaying the utmost restraint to avoid direct military confrontation. But this is a fight between right and wrong. Turkey is undertaking these efforts on behalf of the international community in order to protect millions of civilians, mostly women and children. Most members of the Council have thanked us for our tireless efforts. What we want from them is not only their gratitude; we want them to share in the responsibility. The fate of millions of civilians is our joint responsibility. It is time for the Security Council to say, "enough is enough". The Council has to stop the regime's war crimes and reckless behaviour, which pose a direct threat to international peace and security. The international community should not remain indifferent to the developments unfolding in Idlib. Otherwise, there will be repercussions on a much wider scale across Europe, in the region and beyond.As to the previous speaker's statement, I would like to emphasize that it is a disgrace that he is still sitting behind the Syrian nameplate and telling us shamelessly that millions of Syrians, including the newly uprooted 560,000 children, are terrorists. He is not a legitimate representative of the Syrian people and he is not worthy of my response.
