The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now being its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/248, which contains a
letter dated 19 May 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper for the item under
consideration.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

On behalf of the Council, I also extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Alistair Burt, Member
of Parliament, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom.

I shall now make statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of Lebanon to begin today's discussion.

There is an intimate relationship between
committing oneself to the Charter of the United
Nations and opting for dialogue as a way to achieve
world peace and security. Undoubtedly, there is a need
to consider that relationship in all its aspects, and this
has led United Nations bodies and agencies to initiate
programmes and formulate guidelines. Since the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 53/22, which
proclaimed 2001 as the Year of Dialogue Among
Civilizations, a great number of events have taken
place. Successive - and not redundant - efforts have
been undertaken to increase the opportunities for
dialogue, benefit from their assets and strengthen their
impact. Lebanon has taken part in these efforts. Its
contribution has been inspired by its specific historical
2
experience and its societal and political model, which
is often described as unique.

The position of Lebanon on the aims, value and
methodology of dialogue, as well as on the conditions
that make it credible and effective, have been clearly
stated on many occasions, notably during the General
Assembly's 2007 High-level Dialogue on Interreligious
and Intercultural Understanding and Cooperation for
Peace and in the address of the His Excellency the
President of the Lebanese Republic in 2008 in support
of the dialogue initiative of King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz A1 Saud of Saudi Arabia. Through such
occasions and endeavours, Lebanon bears witness to
the strong ties that bind our country to the United
Nations, which has consistently demonstrated its
attention and commitment to Lebanon's freedom,
sovereignty and stability. Also, they show our respect
for international resolutions and reflect Lebanon's
endeavours to promote the significance and promise of
positive encounters between religions and cultures.

Members are well aware of the difficulties that
have tested our country and people, but that have not
shaken our will to live together in one homeland,
enriched by its diversity and openness and proud of its
partnership between Christians and Muslims in
designing a common national future and destiny.

The need for dialogue between people of
different faiths and cultures is all the greater today in
View of the problems faced in relations between
peoples and communities, and the dangers of
confrontation that may be brought about by policies
based on threats, intimidation and fear. Dialogue stems
from recognition of identities and specificities and
respect for religious and cultural diversity; at the same
time, these values must not be expressed in hostility
towards others, which can lead to the drawing of
bloody religious and cultural borders.

For that reason, we believe that dialogue must
encompass an awareness of traditional, renewed and
new phenomena of sectarian and ethnic violence,
terrorism and intimidation. And the best way to address
and pre-empt these phenomena is to deal with their
root causes through preventive diplomacy. This
requires a coalition against fanaticism and extremism,
and it demands that conflicts be settled peacefully and
justly. Moreover, as a complement, patient efforts to
engage in dialogue should be made in the areas of
policy, culture and media in order to heighten
10-37690
immunity to violence, extremism and terrorism.
Dialogue may not extinguish the fire, but if carried out
seriously and resolutely, it will largely diminish the
probability of its igniting.

Efforts to launch dialogue in a long-term
perspective may open doors that would otherwise be
closed by those who look at communities that have
distinct cultural and religious identities as monolithic
entities with essential and perennial features. Not every
dissimilarity reflects a defect, and a community's
essence is not embodied in its individual members,
holding them accountable for deplorable acts
perpetrated by those who share their religion, faith or
culture.

This means that dialogue cannot be effective
unless it strives to prevent the spillover of violence, be
it real or symbolic, from one place to another under the
impact of this perception. For that is often the case
where remote conflicts intrude on neighbourly
relations and local social and political tensions and
disputes assume global dimensions, be they cultural or
religious. Many countries, including my own, have
witnessed such intrusions. That is why we need to
caution against seeing our local problems as mere
reflections of regional and international confrontations
that turn our country into a battleground rather than a
homeland for its people that deals with its own internal
problems and protects its own unity and diversity.

A dialogue of life focused on culture, society and
politics - or coexistence, as we like to call it at
home- is the path to preserving unity and being
enriched by plurality. These goals are at the heart of
our insistence on parity between Muslims and
Christians, stipulated in the Taif Accords. This parity
strengthens Lebanon's ability to contribute to global
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and its self-
understanding as a locus of encounter and exchange,
rather than an arena of conflict.

We learn from the dialogue of life, which goes
hand in hand with the dialogue of ideas, that the search
for agreement does not necessarily lead to agreement.
However, its importance - indeed, its urgency -
resides in acknowledging disagreement and differences
for what they are, without artificially understating or
exaggerating their significance and implications.

Dialogue does not ignore contradiction or deny
democratic competition; it is, rather, a mode of
managing plurality so that differences do not generate
10-37690

hostility or cause divisions. Dialogue is not a process
of negotiations conditioned by power relations, but a
contribution to changing these relations, even in
relative terms, in order to ensure equal footing among
dialogue partners. That is why the practice of dialogue
at the global level converges with diplomatic action
driven by international law and rejects the logic of
might, imposition and double standards.

Be that as it may, such an affirmation does not
dissipate the ambiguities that colour its reality. The
advocacy of dialogue among nations and the promotion
of a culture of peace raise doubts among many people
about their credibility and utility, as well as fears that
they may function as a pretext or cover for an ulterior
political motive alien to its raison d'etre. Dialogue is
not true to its meaning if unavowed objectives hide
behind its stated aims. It does not bear fruit unless its
partners agree to build equitable relations. Maintaining
hegemony, oppression and injustice without raising
fundamental ethical questions renders dialogue itself
questionable.

This is true in our country, which has been
subject to 25 years of Israeli occupation and recurrent
Israeli wars. Thousands of Lebanese citizens have been
killed, our economy and stability have been severely
affected by Israeli threats and massacres, and the
occupation of parts of our land continues. It is
legitimate to ask how dialogue can build confidence
and new relationships in the context of the ongoing
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands and
the persistent denial of the national and human rights
of the Palestinian people, and more particularly their
rights to return and to an independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital. In other words, the spirit of
justice and respect for international law and legitimacy
must prevail if an authentic dialogue is to occur. This is
all the more true since Jerusalem, the city of peace and
meeting place of the believers of the monotheistic
religions, cannot fulfil its historical vocation unless its
people are freed from injustice, changes in its
demography and character cease, and an end is put to
its occupation.

I am sure that we are all aware that establishing a
just and genuine peace in Palestine, as called for in the
Arab Peace Initiative, would have a substantial impact
on relations between cultures and religions. Moreover,
a just peace is necessary if dialogue is to succeed as an
approach to crisis-solving and achieving genuine
3
rapprochement between the Western world and the
Arab and Muslim worlds.

Finally, in opening the debate on the topic of this
meeting, I would like to reaffirm the commitment of
my country, Lebanon, to the universal ethical values of
the United Nations Charter that guide its diplomacy
and programmes, particularly in mediation and conflict
resolution. These values are the basis of intercultural
dialogue, and intercultural dialogue in turn promotes
them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I again thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his participation in this meeting and
invite him to take the floor.

