Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, would like to begin by extending condolences to
the Government and the people of Indonesia following
the tragic plane crash.

We welcome today's meeting and thank
Mr. Lowcock for his detailed briefing.

We would like to underscore the considerable
reduction in the level of violence in Idlib and
surrounding areas following the agreement reached in
September between Turkey and the Russian Federation.
At the same time, we are concerned about the fact
that millions of civilians in Idlib and other areas in
Syria remain extremely vulnerable. As mentioned, the
humanitarian situation in Idlib is far from encouraging.
The detonation of improvised explosive devices
and other reprehensible acts of violence attributed
primarily to Hay'at Tahrir Al-Sham continue to
claim lives and injure civilians. Malnutrition and the
spread of disease have increased. We believe that it is
necessary to prevent further deterioration and reverse
the humanitarian situation in Idlib and the rest of
Syria. The agreement brokered by Turkey and Russia
must be taken advantage of to more effectively and
sustainably protect civilians, in line with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

We note that the situation in Rukban also requires
special attention. The 45,000 people who remain in the
camp endure uncertain living conditions, do not receive
medical care and find it very difficult to source water
and food. We would therefore like to underscore the
importance of providing access to the area for United
Nations and other humanitarian workers and highlight
the need to support their action in the coming months.
In addition, we welcome the fact that the return to
Raqqa is now possible and underscore the need for the
international community to continue working to reduce
the high risk posed by the presence of many improvised
explosive devices. We stress that the vulnerability
of millions of internally displaced persons requires,

among other urgent measures, the immediate, safe
and unhindered access of humanitarian assistance, in
particular cross-border assistance. It is also important
to ensure the right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to voluntarily return to their homes and
businesses, in a safe and dignified manner, according
to internationally agreed guidelines.

We would like to conclude by praising the
tireless and courageous efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and its staff to
provide an effective humanitarian response in Syria, as
well as by imploring all parties concerned to commit to
finding a political solution to the conflict, starting with
the establishment of a constitutional committee by the
end of the year.

