Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths for their briefings. Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock painted a very bleak picture of the
situation in Yemen, with an appalling number of civilian
casualties in September and continuing restrictions on
humanitarian access. However, as Mr. Griffiths pointed
out, there are signs of hope. We hope that such signs
of hope will sooner or later make a difference on the
ground for the Yemeni population, which is suffering
so much.

Despite the united position of the Council that the
conflict in Yemen cannot be resolved militarily, as a
number of colleagues have already said, the violence
continues unabated throughout numerous Yemeni
governorates. Poland is deeply concerned about the
unrelenting impact of such violence on the civilian
population, which continues to bear the brunt of the
ongoing hostilities. We are appalled by the continued
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law by the parties to the
conflict, including through bombardments in densely
populated areas, attacks on civilian infrastructure, the
denial and diversion of humanitarian aid, arbitrary
detentions and the use of torture. We are particularly
concerned about the recruitment and use of children as
soldiers and the widespread gender-based violence.

We urge all the parties involved in the conflict
in Yemen to prioritize the protection of civilians,
immediately cease violence and introduce a nation-wide
ceasefire in order to prevent further displacement,
casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure.
As humanitarian aid remains critically important
to millions of Yemenis, all restrictions on the flow
of humanitarian and commercial imports, including
shipments of fuel, must be urgently lifted. Guaranteeing
free, safe and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and personnel to all parts of the country is
not a matter of choice but an obligation that the parties
must meet and respect at all times.

We take note of the positive developments that
have taken place since the Council's last meeting on
Yemen (see S/PV.8619), including the unilateral release
of detainees by Ansar Allah. We hope that the parties
will build on that development to achieve meaningful
progress on the implementation of a prisoner exchange
agreement. We are also encouraged by the disbursement
of the financial pledge made by Saudi Arabia, which
will enable the United Nations agencies to continue
providing critical humanitarian assistance in Yemen.

Nonetheless, much still remains to be done to
set Yemen on the path to peace and stability. One
means to achieve that is to guarantee the successful
implementation of the Agreement on the City of
Hudaydah and the Ports of Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras
Isa and the remaining provisions of the Stockholm
Agreement, which can contribute to building trust
between the parties. However, the only way to restore
long-standing peace and stability in Yemen is to
urgently resume an inclusive, United Nations-led and
Yemeni-owned political process, which should be
conducted in parallel with other political and security
initiatives. We urge the parties to reject preconditions
and to engage constructively with the Special Envoy in
order to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of formal consultations.

