Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate under
the French presidency on the situation in the Sahel,
a situation which is at the heart of the agenda of the
Security Council. We welcome the participation of
Secretary-General Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the President of
the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim, and Mr. Romano
Prodi, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel, as well as representatives of the African Union
and the European Union.

It was almost exactly a year ago that, in December
2012, my country devoted the main debate of the
Moroccan presidency to this same issue, the Sahel (see S/PV.6882). Since then a United Nations integrated
strategy has been drawn up and its implementation
begun. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the
efforts that they have made in developing this integrated
strategy and their plea for its diligent and coordinated
implementation.

Given our immediate proximity to the States of the
Sahel, some years before the events in northern Mali my
country had a premonition of the dangers threatening
the Sahel region and tried to draw the attention of the
international community to it and to generate some
action. Our concern stemmed from an awareness of the
connections we saw between terrorism and trafficking
in drugs, weapons and people, as well as the kidnapping
of innocent tourists, humanitarian workers and even
United Nations officials. Therefore, my country called

for concerted action by States of the Sahel and the
Magreb in order to take preventive action and to stem
the harmful effects of those activities, which were
already noticeable.

The tragic events in northern Mali and the serious
attack on its territorial integrity have shown that the
threat to stability was not a distant hypothesis but an
immediate reality, with incalculable consequences
for the entire region and beyond. In calling on the
international community to act quickly and resolutely
in Mali, Morocco has always sought to place the
settlement of the crisis in that country in its natural
regional environment. Today, we are reassured to
see Mali recovering, with the help of France, Africa
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and bilateral partners,
taking significant steps on the path towards stabilization
and national reconciliation.

Beyond Mali, we were very pleased to see the United
Nations begin a preventive approach in drawing up the
integrated strategy for the entire region. Implementing
that strategy requires requires each of the States in the
region to take ownership of it, as well as the necessary
and consistent support of the international community.
The visit by the Secretary-General and the President of
the World Bank, with the participation of regional and
international organizations, as well as international and
regional donors, reveals the willingness to fully apply
the different dimensions of the strategy.

Through the ministerial meeting of Bamako on
5 November, the States of the Sahel and the Magreb
showed their determination to change the facts on the
ground by identifying common priorities in security,
governance, resilience and sustainable development,
around which the United Nations integral strategy
should be articulated. The meeting urged countries
of the region, international, regional and subregional
organizations - including the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Sahelo-Saharan States and the Arab Maghreb
Union - as well as the financial institutions ofbilateral
partners to contribute to the success of the strategy
for the Sahel. In Bamako they came to important
conclusions of an institutional nature to implement the
strategy, in particular with the setting up of a platform
to be chaired by Mali for the next two years.

After that meeting, my country organized on
14 November 2013, in Rabat, a ministerial conference
designed to strenghten cooperation in matters of border
security among the countries of the Magreb and the
Sahel. That meeting led to the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration, which advocated for specific measures
to improve security along the common borders in the
region. That cooperation is a necessary step for any
strategy to fight terrorism and extremism, the major
challenges in the entire region.

The pioneering action in the Sahel inaugurated by
the United Nations and its partners, including the World
Bank and regional and subregional organizations, will
be judged according to its impact and its repercussions
for the entire people of the Sahel region. That impact of
course depends on the commitment by the international
community to fight terrorism and separatism and
to relieve the humanitarian crisis that is affecting
that region. Moreover, in acknowledging that reality,
Morocco took the initiative on 20 September to devote
the main debate of its chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to the challenge of terrorism in
the Sahel region.

We agree with Mr. Prodi when he states that

"[t]he collaborative management of borders is not
only about constraining the activities of criminals
and terrorists, but also about giving opportunities
for legitimate economic activity".

History has amply demonstrated that the creation of
common economic projects and the complementary
infrastructure along the common borders has made it
possible not only to overcome conflicts and disputes
but also to set up good-neighbourly, stable and fruitful
relations and to promote development projects that
create jobs and offer prospects to young people.

The serious humanitarian situation that affects
hundreds of thousands of human beings in the Sahel
forces them to risk their lives and those of their children
in order to escape the advance of the desert and its
cortege of famine and epidemics. The 150 million
inhabitants of the Sahel have reached the limits of their
capacity to resist the harmful effects of climate change
and the decline in agricultural and pastoral products.
They cannot resist the temptation to emigrate if they
are not given any tangible opportunity to improve their
socioeconomic conditions in place. That improvement
cannot happen without international assistance in
proportion to the pressing needs of that vulnerable
population.

In that context, we welcome the setting up of an
action fund for the Sahel to finance the projects agreed
to by Governments of the region, the launch of pilot
projects toprovide drinkingwaterto hundreds offamilies
and electricity from solar power, the construction
of shared infrastructure and the establishment of a
regional food reserve under ECOWAS and the World
Food Programme. While limited, those actions reflect
the many dimensions of the United Nations integrated
strategy. We hope to find in the Secretary-General's
next report, to be issued in June 2014, an indication of
more substantial progress in its implementation. We
are, of course, just beginning, but the strategy's success
will be measured by the relevance, scope and impact of
the initial actions.

For its part, Morocco is linked to the Sahel through
age-old multifaceted relations and is determined to
contribute, with the Council, to the success of the
integrated strategy for the Sahel. That commitment was
confirmed by His Majesty the King on 19 September
on his trip to Mali for the inauguration of the Malian
President, and renewed recently in the royal message
addressed to the Elysee Summit for Peace and Security
in Africa. It is a commitment that brings together
human development, the preservation of cultural and
religious identity, and safeguarding the territorial
integrity of the States of the Sahel through inclusive,
open and sustained cooperation on security.

The presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/20) that
we have just adopted reflects our common commitment
to the people of the Sahel region. My delegation would
like to express its gratitude for the spirit of cooperation
shown by all Council members, which has facilitated
the preparation and adoption of the statement.

