Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lowcock for his
briefing. We particularly appreciate the valuable
impressions that he shared with us following his recent
field visit. We listened very carefully to his remarks
on the cross-border humanitarian operation, which
provides assistance to approximately 4 million people
in the north of the Syrian Arab Republic.

In that regard, we express our strong commitment
to the renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) for another
year, which has saved the lives of millions of affected
people through the cross-border mechanism since 2014.
We believe that this has been a fundamental instrument
used by the Security Council to illustrate that, when
efforts and willingness are united towards a single
goal, it is possible to make decisions that impact the
lives and health of real people who would otherwise not
be able to survive.

We know that with each military escalation the
humanitarian needs of the population deepen and
increase. We therefore View with much regret a new
surge in hostilities in Idlib, where we are already seeing
camps for displaced persons reach maximum capacity
and where the imminent arrival of winter presents the
moral obligation to urgently satisfy those necessities.
With another winter, what will happen to the thousands
of people who, after the wave of hostilities that began
in April, are still without shelter? I wonder what would
happen if from January onwards it were not possible to
facilitate humanitarian access in order to provide them
with the provisions they need to shield themselves from
the cold.

Asking such questions would not be necessary if
the parties to the conflict fulfilled their responsibility
under international humanitarian law to protect the
civilian population and make their livelihoods viable.
The obstruction of and attacks on civilian health, water
and electricity infrastructure are a flagrant violation of
those principles and have an immediate negative impact
on people's lives and dignity.

I take this opportunity to express our support for the
recently established board of inquiry into the incidents
in north-west Syria, and we hope that at least part of its
conclusions and recommendations will be made public.

The situation in the north-east of Syria has
become a matter of deep concern for the Dominican
Republic, in particular because of the consequences of
insecurity and uncertainty among the population, as
well as the hundreds of thousands who have had to flee
as a result of the recent hostilities. The humanitarian
needs of these people on the move go far beyond the
physical. There is also a psychological component that
will be incredibly difficult to overcome. And we must
focus attention on the millions of refugees currently
in Turkey. While recognizing Turkey's immense
generosity and humanitarian vocation, we would like
to emphasize the importance of the arrangements for
repatriating millions of these refugees to the so-called
safe zone. These arrangements must not only be made
in close coordination with the relevant international
refugee entities, but also with a view to maintaining
these people's security and dignity by ensuring their
meaningful participation in decisions about their future.

Finally, we commend the holding of the first
meeting of the Constitutional Committee in October.
We reiterate our commitment to the broad political
process and the inclusive and renewed spirit fostered
by the Special Envoy. We insist that this element
of the process must be supported by even greater
confidence-building measures that can have a tangible
impact for the Syrian population. Achieving a national
ceasefire and releasing detainees and information on
missing persons are only a few examples of these kinds
of urgent measures.

