Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to
convey to you our deep appreciation for your
immediate response to the call by the Arab Group to
convene this public meeting. I am pleased also to
express our thanks to Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
and to all members of his Mission on the successful
work they did during Russia's presidency of the
Security Council last month.

My delegation is pleased to associate itself with
the statement made by the representative of the Sudan
on behalf of the Arab Group.

The Council is convened today to consider once
again the challenges that it has been facing since the
latest Israeli acts of aggression against the Palestinians,
since the Israeli forces began destroying the Palestinian
infrastructure, and since the barbaric incursions of the
Israeli forces into Palestinian towns, villages and
camps, as well as their atrocities perpetrated against
innocent civilians, the elderly, and women and children
alike.

Representatives of international humanitarian
organizations and of non-governmental organizations
have spoken of what they witnessed in the Jenin
refugee camp. They described it as an unspeakable and
horrifying tragedy and as a flagrant violation of every
norm of international law and of the Geneva
Conventions on human rights.

We must also note that the deliberate massacre
perpetrated by Israel in the Jenin refugee camp took
place following the adoption by the Council of
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Could there
be greater defiance of Security Council resolutions
than this rejection?

Today is Good Friday for Eastern Orthodox
Christians. This is the last day of the week of the
passion of Jesus Christ, before Easter, which falls on
Sunday. The Church of the Nativity is suffering its own
passion. For weeks now, as is well known, that
church - which belongs to the Catholics, the
Orthodox and the Armenians - has been besieged and
surrounded by Israeli tanks. Israeli soldiers have killed
numerous innocent civilians who had taken refuge in
that church.

It is high time for the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and to end the pain and agony of the
Palestinian people as well as put an end to the siege.
Will Israel give peace a chance in the church of peace?

What happened in the Jenin refugee camp was
truly an unspeakable and terrible human tragedy. Mr.
Farouk Al-Shara, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic, in the
statement he made to the ministerial meeting of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement in
Durban, said the following about the events that took
place in the Jenin refugee camp:

"A high-ranking European official of the
International Committee of the Red Cross has
affirmed that Israel has committed a crime against
humanity twice in Jenin - once when it stormed
the camp and bombed and bulldozed houses,
burying their owners underneath the rubble, and a
second time when it prevented any form of relief
from reaching the wounded and suffering for 13
days."

The Foreign Minister was speaking 13 days after
the events, but now, of course, the period is much
longer.

He continued:

"We deem it our duty to remind the world
again that the inhabitants of the Jenin refugee
camp are essentially Palestinian refugees who
were uprooted by Israel from their homes and
from their land in 1948. It is the only tragedy that
has moved from the twentieth century to the
twenty-first century unresolved, despite the fact
that dozens of resolutions have been adopted
concerning it."
It is important to recall the deliberations of the
Security Council before our adoption of resolution
1405 (2002), taking into account the need to benefit
from the lessons learned and the need to prevent any
party from manipulating the Council's resolutions and
undermining its authority.

In this context, everyone is aware that the Arab
Group has displayed great flexibility, with a view to
enabling the Council to adopt a resolution that would
maintain its unity and the unity of its position and
actions. My country was among the first to welcome
the initiative of the Secretary-General of our
Organization to dispatch a fact-finding team to
determine what took place in the Jenin refugee camp.

Before the adoption by the Council of resolution
1405 (2002), we heard a number of statements by
Israeli officials in which they said that they had
nothing to hide with respect to the Jenin refugee camp
and that they were not afraid or ashamed of what took
place there. However, when the fact subsequently
started to become clear, it became evident that the
opposite of what the Israeli officials alleged was true.

Contrary to what has been said in their
statements, it has become obvious that they have a
great deal to hide and a lot to be afraid and ashamed of.
When the Secretary-General formed a fact-finding
team of distinguished personalities, well known on the
international level for their wisdom, experience,
knowledge and independence, Israel showed its true
face. It started, as a first step, to raise doubts about the
task and mandate of the team. In order to undermine
the content of resolution 1405 (2002), the Israeli
Government began to follow its well-known methods
of circumventing the resolutions of international
legality; this is a tactic it has used consistently for
scores of years. It began its game by sending an Israeli
delegation with questions about the composition of the
team, as if the accused has the right to appoint the
judges who will render a verdict on it. Questions about
the mandate of the team were discussed with the
Secretariat.

In four successive meetings of the Council to
follow up the implementation of resolution 1405
(2002), my delegation declared that the Council must
not be taken in by such tactics, which are part of a
carefully crafted Israeli scheme to flout the resolution.
For 10 days following the adoption of the resolution,
we called upon the Council to do its utmost to support
the Secretary-General in his decision on the
composition of the team and its dispatch to the field.
Without delving into details that we need not refer to
now, we say that the Council should have made a
greater effort to support the Secretary-General and to
stand by him in facing all the cruel pressures brought
to bear on him.

From another angle, many parties in Israel,
including a number of ministers and high-ranking
military officers, started to cast doubts on the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his desire to dispatch the
team. Moreover, they questioned the integrity and
impartiality of the members of the team, including the
former President of Finland, Mrs. Ogata and
Mr. Sommaruga. They besmirched their reputation and
attempted to distort their task. This is unbelievable.
What is worse, doubts were cast in advance on the
report that was to have been presented by that team
after its investigation into the events in the Jenin
refugee camp. It was as if all that remained for the
Security Council to do was to ask the Israeli
Government to investigate what happened in Jenin and
to send its report to us to consider.

My delegation has carefully read the letter from
the Secretary-General to the Security Council of 1
May, through which it is clear that the Israeli
Government has categorically refused to receive the
team or to cooperate with the Secretary-General. Once
again, we expected the Council to defend its
resolutions and its authority. We also expected the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities to defend the
position of the Secretary-General and his efforts in an
impartial and objective manner.

The Arab Group submitted a draft resolution that
included all these ideas. In fact, we expected those
ideas to deter Israel from its constant flouting of
Council resolutions, international legality and human
rights. Regrettably, the Council has not been able to
adopt the Arab draft resolution, for reasons that are
well known to all.

The gravest crisis facing the Council now is that
regarding its authority as the highest international body
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. With the legal and moral responsibility
we all bear, we must not allow Israel to go unpunished
for its crimes against innocent Palestinian civilians in
the Jenin refugee camp and in the cities of Nablus,
Gaza and Hebron. Israel must bear the full
responsibility for rebuilding the Palestinian
infrastructure it destroyed.

The gravest threat is that the Council will find
itself today in the position of abrogating the decision it
adopted yesterday. We refuse to accept that. Neither
legally nor politically can Israel deny the fact-finding
team access to Jenin or to any other Palestinian town in
which the Israeli army practised its policies of
destruction and killing. Israel is an occupying Power.
The United Nations Charter, in Chapters VI and VII,
provides for the adoption of coercive measures to
compel rogue States to comply with the law. It is
unacceptable for the Council to renounce its
prerogatives or to succumb to the whim and will of the
subjects its resolutions.

