Ms. Garcia Guerra (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Danilo Tiirk, for the
information he has just given us.

I should also like to reiterate Mexico's gratitude
to the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Noel Sinclair of Guyana, for his work and
leadership of UNPOB, as well as to his staff and to all
those that have participated in the work of the Peace
Monitoring Group: the Governments of Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand and Vanuatu.

The report of the Secretary-General contains
information that leads us to hope that the situation in
Bougainville will evolve positively, despite the
complications that have arisen and that must be
addressed. It is therefore encouraging that - bearing
in mind the commitment to complete stage II of the
weapons disposal plan by 24 December 2002, as
previously planned - the Action Plan for the
Completion of Weapons Collection was adopted at the
Buka meeting on 17 February. The delegation of
Mexico hopes that this renewed commitment will
enable the completion of the collection of the 20 per
cent of arms still pending in order to fully enter stage
III.

Also encouraging is the news that the
Bougainville Resistance Force and the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army plan to hold meetings in coming
days. We are confident that very positive results will be
achieved.

That type of initiative, without doubt, will compel
the Me'ekamui Defence Force and, in particular, its
leader Francis Ona to accept the new reality of a
Bougainville that is prepared to cooperate and to work
in order to leave the past behind, and of an
international community that is not prepared to let the
situation stagnate. The Security Council must therefore
appeal to political leaders and all ex-combatants to
complete the arms collection and to move on to the
next stage. In that context, we are concerned at the
announcement of the departure of the Peace
Monitoring Group in June 2003. My delegation wishes
to know the consequences that decision will have for
the peace process.

The completion as soon as possible of stage II of
the arms collection plan is imperative. The progress
demonstrated by the preparation of a new constitution
and the broad participation of citizens in the process
are unequivocal signs of the will of the people of
Bougainville. Mexico is therefore fully confident that,
with the support of UNPOB, the aspiration of the
people of Bougainville to hold elections for an
autonomous government before the end of 2003 can be
realized. We encourage the Constitutional Commission
to continue the good work it is carrying out in order to
conclude its task as soon as possible.

In this process, the collaboration of the
authorities of Papua New Guinea is indispensable. We
therefore commend initiatives such as the visit on 18
and 19 February of several ministers and other
members of the Government of the country, and in
particular the signing of the memorandum of
understanding that took place on that occasion, which
established a mechanism of consultations concerning
all aspects of the implementation of arrangements for
autonomy, including the transfer of authority,
functions, resources and the settling of controversies.

The initiative, commitment and resolve of the
leaders and former combatants of Bougainville in
consolidating the Peace Agreement are indispensable,
as are the reconciliation and reintegration of the former
combatants and their preparation for reintegration into
the life of their communities, which will require the
reconstruction of public institutions and the preparation
of successful strategies for reconciliation and
reintegration.

We are reassured by the Secretary-General's
statement in his report that as the end of the United
Nations political mandate in Bougainville approaches,
UNPOB is trying to involve the United Nations
Development Programme and other agencies of the
United Nations in re-establishing community services
and infrastructure. Assisting the island's development
is the best way to prevent conflict from breaking out
again.

In that context, I wish to reaffirm the statement of
my delegation last 26 November on the importance of
an appeal by the Security Council to donor countries to
support the creation of the economic, social and
infrastructure conditions enabling a peaceful transition
towards the political future of Bougainville.

Once again, I thank Mr. Tiirk for the information
he has given us.

