Mr. de Riviere (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the Council's adoption of resolution 2494
(2019). At the outset, I would like to reiterate France's
full support for the work of Special Representative
Colin Stewart and his entire team. I commend their
efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO), as well as the protection of its personnel,
and to increase the number of women in its ranks in
keeping with the women and peace and security agenda.
MINURSO plays an essential role in ensuring respect
for the ceasefire agreement and preventing flare-ups
through exchanges with the parties. It is therefore a key
component of stability in the region and contributes to
establishing the conditions necessary for a resumption
of the political process. We particularly welcome the
return to a one-year mandate, which should continue
to be the norm with regard to peacekeeping, since
this kind of timetable enables continuity and greater
predictability in the Mission's management.

Lastly, we welcome the relative calm in the situation
on the ground and want to emphasize the importance
of ensuring that all the parties abide fully by the
ceasefire agreement, particularly in the Guerguerat
buffer strip, where the situation remains volatile, and
that they maintain a continuing dialogue with the
Special Representative.
Secondly, I want to pay tribute to the work carried
out by President Kohler. His personal commitment
and tireless efforts breathed new life into the
political process with the holding of two round tables
bringing together Morocco, the Frente Popular para la
Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y Rio de Oro, Algeria
and Mauritania for the first time since 2012. The
appointment of a new Personal Envoy will be important
to maintaining that positive momentum, as expressed
in the direction oftoday's resolution, which encourages
the resumption of the political process by building on
the progress already made.

We reiterate France's full support for the Secretary-
General's efforts to achieve a fair, lasting and mutually
acceptable solution in Western Sahara in accordance
the resolutions of the Security Council. In that context,
France believes that the Morocco's 2007 autonomy
plan represents a serious and credible foundation for
discussions reviving a dialogue.

