Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we wish to welcome the presence of Prime
Minister Gusmao and thank him for his valuable
contribution to this debate. Also, we wish to thank the
Special Representative, Ms. Haq, for her briefing today
and for her commitment in fulfilling the mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to commend
the Timorese people, Government and political parties
for their cooperation and responsibility, which largely
contributed to the overall progress achieved in all areas
during the reporting period. We also welcome the
important role that the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) continues to play in
support of the efforts of Timor-Leste to advance peace,
stability and development. With this in mind, Bosnia
and Herzegovina supports UNMIT's mandate extension
for another 12 months.

We are pleased to learn that significant progress
has been made in many important areas, particularly in
strengthening the rule of law and the development of
democratic institutions.

We would like to recall that the Council had the
opportunity to learn about the institution-building
experience of Timor-Leste during its open debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding: institution-building,
organized by Bosnia and Herzegovina last month (see S/PV.6472 and Resumption 1).

Strengthening security sector reform is crucial for
sustainable peace and security in Timor-Leste. We
welcome the resumption by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) of primary responsibilities for
police operations in two additional districts in
September 2010. We strongly encourage the early
finalization of this process in all districts and units. To
that end, the joint activities of UNMIT and the PNTL
in further institutional capacity-building - including
improving administrative skills, investigating gender-
based violence, countering human trafficking and
community policing - are of particular importance.
They represent a part of the PNTL strategic
development plan for 2011-2012 that should result in
its full resumption of primary policing activities.

We firmly believe that only truth and justice can
lead Timor-Leste towards full reconciliation and
prosperity. We therefore welcome the outcome of the
concluding conference of the national consensus
dialogue on truth, justice and reconciliation, which will
certainly further facilitate continued dialogue within
Timorese society.

Regarding the general elections to be held in
2012, we welcome the expected approval of proposed
amendments to the laws on presidential and
parliamentary elections and the electoral management
bodies. That will consolidate institutional capacities to
conduct the upcoming elections with limited
international support. In that context, we also support
the role envisaged for the United Nations in providing
technical and logistical support as requested. The
successful organization and conduct of the 2012
elections will be a major test of democratic progress in
Timor-Leste.

As the Secretary-General stated in his report
(S/2011/32), the economy of Timor-Leste has
recovered remarkably since the 2006 crisis. However,
additional efforts are needed to sustain the envisaged
growth by promoting rural development and
infrastructure development and the role of the private
sector, which should provide more employment
opportunities, especially for young people.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the people and Government of Timor-
Leste to achieve sustainable peace, stability and
prosperity in their community.

