Mr. Henze (Germany): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I am sure that the experience
you bring to this task will be of great help in our work

 

and I can only pledge that we will cooperate with you. At
the same time, I would like to thank Ambassador Lavrov
and his delegation for the excellent work they did in the
presidency of the Council last month. Since my knowledge
of English is limited, and German, I regret to say, is not an
official language of the Council, I will refrain from poetical
efforts and simply say how much we admired Ambassador
Lavrov's efforts to speed up the work of the Council, and
I am glad to see that you are trying very efficiently to
follow his example.

Let me briefly comment at the outset on a
development which, until now, has been discussed only in
our informal consultations and say that my Government is
deeply disturbed about the recent fighting in Liberia. We
understand that Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), while
deploying its forces throughout the country, was attacked
by one of the warring factions in the Tubmanburg area. In
these attacks, ECOMOG suffered a considerable number of
casualties. We strongly condemn any attacks on
peace-keeping forces such as ECOMOG. We would
furthermore like to extend our deep condolences to the
Governments involved in ECOMOG and the families of the
victims.

The excellent and comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, has provided us with a clear picture and a solid
basis for our decision on the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) for another six months. The draft resolution
before us incorporates numerous and valuable contributions
by many Council members. It is, I am convinced, well
balanced and comprehensive. It is clear and unambiguous
in pointing at those responsible for the deadlock in the
political negotiation process and specific in what we expect
from the Abkhaz side.

This is why Germany will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. It is understood that the resolution will
eventually have to be reviewed in the light of the results of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) summit
meeting scheduled for 19 January.

My Government believes that it is imperative to
quickly put an end to the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia.
Peace can be achieved only by a mutually satisfactory
compromise on the basis of full respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity and in the framework of the newly
adopted Constitution of the Republic of Georgia. The new
Georgian Constitution gives ample room for a federative
arrangement for Abkhazia, and I am convinced that this
is the direction the Head of State and the Government of
the Republic of Georgia are willing to go. It is the
Abkhaz side that is clearly responsible for the virtual
standstill in the negotiating process.

I hope and believe that the draft resolution on which
we shall take action today will convince the Abkhaz side
that all Council members are unambiguous in their
commitment to the full territorial integrity of Georgia.
Nobody in Abkhazia should expect that the international
community will change this fundamental position or come
to support the refusal to conduct meaningful negotiations.
A fundamental rethinking on the Abkhaz side is
imperative, and the impatience of the Council is growing.
Ethnic killings and the creation of an atmosphere of
violence and insecurity in order to discourage the return
of refugees and displaced persons are totally unacceptable
to the international community. The results of so-called
ethnic cleansing will not be accepted or recognized. This
is the message we want to get across to the Abkhaz side.

My Government is equally concerned about the
humanitarian situation in the territories under Abkhaz
control, as well as among the 250,000 refugees and
displaced persons who have been forced out of their
homes. There has been little real progress in this area, due
mainly to the unchanged political situation and the
uncooperative stance of the Abkhaz authorities. We
welcome the fact that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has been
able to resume its presence in the Gali region.

Let me stress that Germany fully and wholeheartedly
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General aimed at a
comprehensive political settlement, with the assistance of
the Russian Federation as facilitator. Both the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Ambassador Brunner, and his
resident Deputy, Ambassador Bota, are to be commended
for their dedicated work in a difficult situation. We will
be very interested to hear their proposals on possible
ways to bring the conflict closer to a peaceful solution in
spite of the discouraging situation we are facing right
now. The Russian Federation's efforts as facilitator are
equally indispensable; Russia seems best equipped to
make the Abkhaz side actually listen. I would like to use
this opportunity to thank also the members of UNOMIG
for the important work they have carried out in the field,
in close and good cooperation with the peace-keeping
units of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
to which we also pay tribute.

 

While we fully support what UNOMIG is doing on the
ground, we are uneasy about the possible prospect of
renewing UNOMIG's mandate time and again without any
tangible political progress. We do not wish to contribute to
the perpetuation of the present situation in Abkhazia; rather,
we see UNOMIG as a valuable instrument to generate a
meaningful and effective peace process. It is with this
understanding that Germany supports the extension of the
UNOMIG mandate for another six months.

