Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Secretary-General for his strong statement today.

New Zealand welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2321 (2016), which strengthens and expands
the sanctions in place against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. This year has seen the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's defiance of the international
community and its flouting of international norms reach
new heights. As the Secretary-General reminded us, the
Council has met many times this year to discuss North
Korea's succession of nuclear and ballistic missile tests.
These events and the overall trajectory of the situation
on the Korean peninsula are sources of great concern
and frustration for New Zealand. Given the seriousness
of those developments, it is entirely appropriate that the
resolution provides for some of the strongest sanctions
ever imposed by the Security Council.

New Zealand has co-sponsored the resolution for a
number of reasons. Not least of those is our concern at
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's dangerous
and provocative behaviour and its ongoing defiance of
the Council and of its own international obligations.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's continued
provocations pose arguably the most significant threat
to the security of New Zealand's region, the Asia-
Pacific. New Zealand's support also reflects our
commitment to the nuclear non-proliferation regime, to
which the actions of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea - the only country to have tested nuclear
weapons this century - pose a grave challenge.

We commend the United States and China for their
leadership and cooperation in preparing the measures
set out in today's resolution. It is now the responsibility
of the international community to ensure that the
measures in the resolution are fully implemented and
effectively enforced. Coordinated and comprehensive
implementation by Member States is one of the
strongest signals the international community can send
to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that its
continued proliferation activities and disregard for
international obligations will not be tolerated, and that
a change of course is urgently needed.

Ultimately, sanctions are a means, not an end, for
effecting change on the Koreanpeninsula. The resolution
sends a further signal to North Korea's leadership
that their current path of isolation and defiance of
international norms is wrong-headed and that a return in
good faith to negotiations on denuclearization provides
the best prospects for the security and prosperity of
their country and their people. We hope that today's
resolution and the strengthened measures that it puts in
place can help set us back on the path towards a return
to negotiations and ultimately the resolution of this
long-standing security challenge.

