Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The
Security Council is sending a clear message to North
Korea today - stop firing ballistic missiles or face the
consequences. The members ofthe Council - including
three of North Korea's closest neighbours - agree that
North Korea's missiles are a threat to international
peace and security and that the international community
must respond to the threat. It is long past time for North
Korea to see the writing on the wall. The international
community is coming together to take action, and the
pressure will not cease until North Korea complies
fully with the Council's resolutions.

North Korea's provocative and illegal missile
launches are a direct threat to the security of numerous
countries, including my own. Missiles have already
fallen perilously close to South Korea, Japan and,
most recently, Russia. Each North Korean rocket
has the potential to hit an airplane or ship, which
threatens civilian lives. Each test ratchets up tensions
in the region.

But despite all the risks and the sanctions that the
Council has imposed so far, North Korea still chooses
to keep escalating. The reason that North Korea keeps
launching these missiles is obvious. It openly says
that it wants the ability to deliver its weapons of mass
destruction over long distances to United States, South
Korean, and Japanese cities. That is why the regime's
ballistic missile tests are increasing. With each launch,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea gains
valuable technical data to make even more progress,
but, bit by bit, it wants to extend its reach. The Security
Council has rightfully and repeatedly condemned
the launches and required the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to suspend all activities related to
its ballistic-missile programme. Foreign Ministers
gathered here one month ago (see S/PV.7932) to demand
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea stop.
Resolution 2356 (2017) shows that those were not
just words.

The United States will work tirelessly to make
sure that the international community never gets used
to violations by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea or looks the other way. And the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea must understand that the
international community will never accept the regime's
development and testing of nuclear weapons. Until the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea reconsiders, all
States Members of the United Nations must do their
part to increase pressure. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is a global threat that requires a
global response. There is still a lot of room to improve
the implementation of the Security Council's sanctions
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That is
why the United States renews its call on responsible
States to sever diplomatic ties and cease illegal trade
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Countries must also do more to break up the smuggling
rings of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
cut off the sources of funding that it uses to pay for the
development of weapons of mass destruction and the
means to deliver them.

The United States will continue to seek a peaceful,
diplomatic resolution to the situation. We want a
negotiated solution, but the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea must fulfil its basic obligations by
first stopping all ballistic missile launches and nuclear
weapons testing and taking concrete steps towards
getting rid of its nuclear-weapons programme. Our
goal is not regime change. The United States has no
wish to threaten the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea or destabilize the Asia-Pacific
region. And we have never closed the door to dialogue
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. But
as we have said before, all options for responding to
future provocations must remain on the table. Beyond
diplomatic and financial consequences, the United
States remains prepared to counteract the aggression
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea through
other means, if necessary.

The United States is fully committed to defending
itself and its allies against aggression by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Once again, it is up to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to decide
whether to stay on this dangerous path. As the Security
Council showed today, future missile launches and
nuclear tests are absolutely unacceptable. We hope that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea sees that
response and chooses a more constructive path towards
stability, security and peace.

