Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Somalia, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller
and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), for their briefings.

The situation in Somalia continues to be
problematic. We are concerned about the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab's increasing activity. It still
controls broad areas of the country, and its fighters
are infiltrating cities. According to expert reports, the
group has managed to set up an independent production
facility for explosives. Al-Shabaab represents a threat
at the regional level as well, and the terrorist attack in
Nairobi in January was a frightening reminder of that.
Suppressing the threat of terrorism is a top priority.
Effective cooperation in the work of building a national
security architecture between the central and federal
authorities, with the support of the United Nations and
the African Union Mission in Somalia, is especially
Vital. Here the most important task is ensuring the
gradual transfer of responsibility for the country's
security to the Somalis themselves. We hope that the
process will be carried out in accordance with the
existing plans and will also take into account concrete
developments on the ground.

AMISOM. continues to play a key role in dealing
with security challenges. Its reconfiguration should go
hand in hand with the formation of Somalia's military
and law-enforcement bodies. The plan is to have
AMISOM. participating actively in the preparation and
holding of the general elections planned for 2020 and
2021. In the run-up to the elections, so decisive for the
country's future, it would not make sense to sharply
reduce the number ofAfrican peacekeepers in Somalia.

In spite of all the difficulties, we would like
to point to some encouraging trends in Somalia's
institution-building, including Mogadishu's efforts to
build bridges, figuratively speaking, with the federal
States. There is progress in the area of constitutional
reform, the positive momentum in the plan for creating
a legislative basis for the upcoming election cycle
continues, and reform of the financial and economic
sectors is proceeding fairly effectively.

The Horn of Africa is experiencing major changes.
We believe firmly that the steps being taken by all the
countries involved, including Somalia, to re-establish
good-neighbourly relations will ultimately bring the
stability and prosperity they desire. However, we should
caution that achieving that goal will be possible only
by ensuring strict respect for Somalia's sovereignty
and non-interference by external players in its internal
affairs. We hope that those principles will guide the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Somalia in his work. And in that connection, we
welcome the determination of the country's authorities
to continue to cooperate productively with the United
Nations presence.

