Mr. Alatas (Indonesia): Let me begin, Sir, by
extending to you my warm congratulations and those of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency at a
time when the Council is considering an issue of critical
importance to all of us. Your proven diplomatic skills
assure us that our deliberations will be brought to a
successful conclusion.

I should also like to extend to your predecessor,
Ambassador Tono Eitel of Germany, our deep
appreciation for the exemplary manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.

This meeting has been called to address a highly
volatile - indeed, explosive - situation in the occupied
territories, which threatens to engulf the Middle East in
the all too familiar violence and bloodshed that we had
hoped had become part of the past. For quite some time
now, Indonesia has observed with deepening concern the
progressive deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories. The ominous manifestations of this
deterioration - Israel's confiscation of Arab land and
establishment of new settlements; its failure to lift the
closure of Palestinian territories; its refusal to withdraw
its forces from Hebron; its attempts to change the
geographic and demographic conditions; and its failure to
implement the provisions of the 1993 Declaration of
Principles and subsequent agreements - have again
turned the region into a flash point of crisis fraught with
far-reaching consequences. We are clearly confronted by
a case of bad faith on the part of Israel and by Israel's
manifest lack of commitment to the peace process. Israel
is gravely endangering the peace process by taking
measures contrary to it both in letter and in spirit.
Moreover, it has spurned the resumption of negotiations
based on the interim accords and the principle of land for
peace.

It cannot be denied that the most dangerous
development that precipitated the current cycle of
violence was Israel's provocative action of opening a new
entrance to the tunnel which runs along the western wall

 

of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, triggering an open confrontation
resulting in death and injuries to scores of civilians. This
flare-up of violence is reminiscent of the era of the intifada
and reflects the deep frustration and anger of the
Palestinians at obstructions to the peace process by the
Government of Israel. My delegation strongly condemns the
indiscriminate use of force in Jerusalem, Ramallah, Nablus
and Gaza against the Palestinian population. Further
aggravating the situation is the unprecedented and direct
confrontation between the Israeli army and the Palestinian
police force.

The unilateral action of the Israeli Government to
change the facts on the ground regarding the status of
Jerusalem is in utter disregard of the timetable set by the
1993 Declaration of Principles scheduling this critical issue
for the final phase of negotiations, in May 1997. It is
therefore imperative that the Security Council, in
unambiguous terms, call upon Israel to close the tunnel and
return it to its initial state before the crisis. We further call
for the cessation of all acts detrimental to the safety and
well-being of the Palestinian people.

The traumatic events that are currently unfolding need
to be urgently addressed by both parties. We urge the
Government of Israel to resume negotiations with the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to resolve this
crisis in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration
of Principles and subsequent agreements. Negotiations in
good faith must be relaunched in order to arrive at a just
and comprehensive settlement. Reneging on earlier
commitments and ignoring the issues at stake, and
especially the inalienable rights of the Palestinians, will not
resolve the core issue of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The peace process must move forward and become
irreversible. For this to materialize, the Government of
Israel must honour its obligations under the relevant
agreements. Peace is a challenging task, but it must be
pursued relentlessly lest more blood be spilled.

