Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would like to thank the delegation
of the United States for its efforts, which led the
Council to adopt today's resolution 2465 (2019) on the
extension for six months of the support provided to the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
by United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). I also thank all the members of the Council
for their cooperation and spirit of compromise, which
led to the adoption of the resolution.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
reaffirm my country's commitment to cooperating
with UNISFA so that it may successfully implement
its mandate pursuant to resolution 1990 (2011) and
subsequent resolutions, including that of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
in order to successfully conclude its mission and
strengthen the security and stability of the border
between the two countries.

We stress that the conditions set out in the resolution
for the continued support ofUNISFA for the Mechanism
are in line with the agreements reached between the
Sudan and South Sudan during the meeting on the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, which
we fully support.

I would like to reiterate my most sincere thanks
and appreciation to all partners whose efforts have
facilitated the work of UNISFA, especially Ethiopia,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the AU
Commission, the AU High-level Implementation Panel
for Sudan, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Horn of Africa, the Secretariat and all UNISFA
personnel. We reiterate our commitment to cooperating
with UNISFA until it is able to fully implement its
mandate as provided for by resolution 1990 (2011).

Allow me to provide to the Council some
clarifications on the developments in my country since
11 April. Before proceeding, I would like to pay tribute
to the memory of the martyrs who fell during those
events and wish the injured a quick recovery. The events
that took place prompted the decisions taken by the
Transitional Military Council to remove the President,
suspend the Constitution and dissolve the National
Council and the state councils, as well as the central
Government and the state governments, in addition
to declaring a state of emergency for three months.
Those measures are in response to the demands of the
Sudanese people, who have expressed their aspirations
and demands in line with their history and struggle.

In that regard, I would like to note that the
Transitional Military Council has underscored its
commitment to all the international and regional
agreements and conventions. It is committed to fully
cooperating with the international community to ensure
stability, peace and a peaceful transition in the Sudan
based on a political legacy of peaceful transitions
following the glorious revolutions of October 1964 and
April 1985. At the same time, the Minister of Defence
assumed the presidency of the Transitional Military
Council in order to lead the peaceful transition through
a civilian Government.

The Transitional Military Council stressed that it
is responding to the Sudanese people's aspirations for
change and working to protect the lives of the citizens,
as well as their property, and the country's resources. It
is not going to govern but will guarantee that a civilian
Government be formed in collaboration with the
political powers and stakeholders. No party, including
armed groups, will be excluded from the political
process. Moreover, the Transitional Military Council
emphasized that the suspension of the Constitution
could be lifted and the transitional period could be
shortened depending on developments on the ground
and agreements reached between stakeholders.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm that what is
happening in the Sudan is a domestic matter by the
will of the Sudanese people. The delicate situation in
the Sudan now that seriously threatens its immediate
and future stability should be taken into consideration.
However, any democratic process requires time and
should not be threatened. We do not wish to see the
emerging democratic process collapse in the name
of democracy. We therefore call on our partners in
the international community to support the peaceful
transition in the country in a way that would help to
enhance the gains achieved by the Sudanese people and
pave the way for stability, development and prosperity,
while saving the country from violence. That would
positively impact regional peace and security.

