Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Mali is gratified to see the Council being
guided by you, Mr. Minister, as it considers the
situation in Africa. My delegation highly appreciates
the many initiatives of the delegation of Singapore,
under the leadership of Ambassador Mahbubani, to
rationalize the work of the Security Council and bring
it into line with its prime responsibility: the
maintenance ofinternational peace and security.

Today's debate is part of that dynamic. It is my
pleasure to thank Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul,
Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, for having
reported on the work of the Group with his usual
thoroughness.

Speaking at this point in the debate, I would like
to concentrate on two points which, in the opinion of
my delegation, deserve particular attention.

First, I would like to emphasize that for the
delegation of Mali conflict prevention and resolution in
Africa require a comprehensive, integrated approach
that takes into account the complexity of the
underlying causes of conflicts in Africa and their
devastating consequences. In that connection, my
delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's analysis
in his report of 7 June 2001 on the prevention of armed
conflict (S/2001/574), as well as the adoption of
resolution 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 and the
presidential statement of 31 January 2002
(S/PRST/2002/2).

In that connection, we believe that the ad hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
could derive benefit from the capacities of the entire
United Nations system in devising and carrying out
studies on remedying the underlying causes of conflict.
That is why my delegation advocates strengthening the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. We say this because,
despite their distinct roles, the two bodies are
complementary when it comes to action in the areas of
peace, security and economic and social development.
Furthermore, it is important to give concrete form to
the Secretary-General's intention periodically to report
to the Council on regional and subregional threats to
international peace and security, in particular border
problems, illicit trafficking in small arms, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, refugee issues,
mercenaries, child soldiers, paramilitary forces and the
consequences of the interaction of these factors with
security.

The second point that I would like to emphasize
relates to the need to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, non-governmental organizations, civil
society and business circles. In that connection, we
should recall that the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), as well as subregional organizations such as
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), have recently been endowed with
institutional capacity for early warning activities and
conflict prevention, in particular through their own
mechanisms for conflict prevention, management and
resolution. It is indispensable that we support those
mechanisms, and the ad hoc Group could usefully work
in this domain.

This morning, Ambassador Kebe and Mr. Fall
presented some ideas on this matter, which my
delegation fully supports. I would like to recall that
during our term on the Security Council, Mali engaged
in this exercise with some success. The relations
between ECOWAS and the Council have been
developing since then in a genuine spirit of partnership
which should be further reinforced and expanded. The
forthcoming inauguration of a United Nations Office in
West Africa is also part of this movement, and Mali
will contribute all the required support.

In conclusion, I would like to associate the
Malian delegation with the well-deserved tribute that
has been paid throughout the meeting to my mentor
and friend, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, who is about to take up
his duties as Assistant Secretary-General, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Office in West Africa. Our best
wishes for success go with him, and we hope he will
make a real success story of the United Nations Office
in West Africa. He owes no less to our subregion, to
the United Nations and to himself.

