Mr. Martin: On Sunday, I had the great privilege
of representing the Secretary-General at Libya's
declaration of liberation in Benghazi, the city where
the popular movement had begun on February 17. A
peaceful movement, sparked on that day by the demand
of families to know the fate of their loved ones who
had disappeared in a notorious prison massacre, was
met with lethal repression, and civilians across Libya
took up arms in a revolution to end decades of denial
of political freedoms, human rights violations,
corruption and social inequality.

The declaration brings to a close a long and
painful chapter in the history of Libya. Four decades of
brutal dictatorship and autocratic government have
tragically wasted the potential of an entire generation
as well as immense opportunities and resources that
could have been invested in creating a prosperous,
modern nation-State.

The declaration thus marks a new beginning for
the people of Libya. While expectations must be
managed, the aspirations of its youth and the sacrifices
they have made must guide the next phase of Libya's
transformation.

We should remind ourselves that achieving
liberation has come at a huge cost, both in terms of
those who have died or been maimed and in terms of
the damage to cities and towns that bore the worst of
the fighting, in particular Misrata, Zawiya, Bani Walid
and Sirte. Nor should we forget the still volatile
security situation in parts of the south of Libya, with
2
tensions related to a complex mix of ethnic and
political loyalties in previously marginalized areas with
limited presence of the State.

The path to national reconciliation and healing
must begin by recognizing the suffering of all Libyan
people during the course of the eight-month conflict
and by addressing their needs to allow them to rebuild
their lives.

Several weeks ago, amid the widespread
international recognition of the National Transitional
Council (NTC) and the clear indications that it had the
support of the overwhelming majority of Libyans, the
Secretary-General called on the remaining supporters
of the former regime to cease fighting. Regrettably, in
Sirte, Bani Walid and Sabha, they did not do so, and
the final weeks of conflict added to the toll of deaths,
serious injuries, civilian suffering, displacement and
destruction.

We called on all sides to respect human rights as
the battles neared their end and issued appeals in
support of those of the NTC itself that there should be
no revenge, even against those responsible for war
crimes and other grave violations. We hoped that
Muammar Al-Qadhafi and others with the heaviest
responsibility for such crimes would be captured and
brought to justice.

However, Muammar and Motassim Al-Qadhafi
were mistreated and killed in circumstances that
require investigation, and there are other disturbing
reports that killings amounting to war crimes were
committed on both sides in the final battle for Sirte.
Such killings were contrary to the orders of the
National Transitional Council, and we welcome the
Council's announcement of an investigation.

These killings are also within the scope of the
international commission of inquiry mandated by the
Human Rights Council. The period covered by the
commission's mandate begins only in February this
year and so does not extend to the myriad human rights
violations in the period since Muammar Al-Qadhafi
took power in 1969. Nonetheless, the commission will
have a heavy task. The evidence has mounted of
deliberate killings of prisoners by the Al-Qadhafi
regime during the conflict, including in its last days in
Tripoli, as well as some abuses by the revolutionary
fighters.
11-56442

Meanwhile, the whereabouts of the other two
persons indicted by the International Criminal Court,
Saif al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah al-Senussi,
remain uncertain. It is the responsibility of the NTC to
ensure that, if captured inside Libya, they are treated in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and it
is the responsibility of all signatories to the Rome
Statute to ensure that they are arrested and brought
before the International Criminal Court.

I have previously informed the Council of the
preparations by United Nations humanitarian agencies
for the end of hostilities by pre-positioning relief
supplies near to the final areas of conflict. The Deputy
Special Representative and Humanitarian Coordinator
was in Sirte on Monday, opening the way for missions
to that city and to Bani Walid, which have just taken
place. They report that current levels of stockpiling are
considered adequate to provide immediate response,
including food, non-food items and potable water.
Priorities are the restoration of electricity and water
services, rapid clean-up of explosive remnants of war
and the rehabilitation of accommodation for returning
residents. Destruction of buildings is severe, and
housing will be a serious issue and a factor
constraining return. The NTC has highlighted its
concern on this issue and is looking at various
solutions in coordination with international partners.

The Libyan people have demonstrated
exceptional resilience and a strong capacity for
meeting most humanitarian needs of the population in
areas affected by the conflict. To support them, the
Humanitarian Coordinator has taken steps to ensure
that residual needs of vulnerable groups will still be
met while the overall humanitarian effort in Libya is
winding down.

From Sirte, the Humanitarian Coordinator again
expressed our concern for the safe return of civilians to
their towns of origin. Monitoring and advocacy with
central and local authorities to ensure the protection of
groups perceived by Libyans to have supported the
previous regime during the conflict will continue, in
support of national reconciliation efforts.

With the end of the Al-Qadhafi era, the new
Libya can move forward to build a modern nation-State
based on the principles embraced by the revolution -
democracy, human rights, the rule of law,
accountability, respect for minority rights, the
empowerment of women and the promotion of civil
11-56442

society - while addressing the past through proper
judicial and truth-seeking processes. Despite violations
committed in the heat of battle, I believe that the
leadership of the NTC is indeed committed, as the
declaration of liberation re-emphasized, to avoiding
revenge, achieving reconciliation and overcoming the
manipulation of tribalism and regionalism - which the
former dictator promoted to entrench his own power -
thereby ensuring that the past will not be repeated.

With Sunday's declaration of liberation, the clock
has started running on commitments the National
Transitional Council made in its constitutional
declaration. First, an interim Government must be
established within 30 days, and the challenge is to form
an administration that is inclusive and also possesses
the expertise to be able to lead and deliver on key
sectors, including public security, basic services, the
economy and financial management. Then, within the
first 90 days, it will be necessary to adopt electoral
legislation and establish an electoral management
body, and within 240 days elections for a national
congress must be held to give democratic legitimacy to
a new Government and the body that will draft a
constitution.

Here, the task is not solely or even primarily
technical, despite the challenge of mounting Libya's
first election in over 45 years. First and foremost, what
is needed is to engage in a broad consultation,
including with civil society, that will build consensus
regarding the electoral system for this first election and
on other key issues to be determined in electoral
legislation, and to establish an electoral management
body whose independence and integrity cannot be
disputed from any quarter.

Since the very beginning of its mandate, the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
supported by two visits from the Director of the
Electoral Assistance Division of the Secretariat's
Department of Political Affairs, has been engaging
closely with members of the NTC and with its legal
and political subcommittees on the electoral process, in
particular with respect to the electoral law and the
future electoral management body. Our meetings with
civil society have made clear their determination to be
engaged closely in the ongoing discussions on the
electoral law and in efforts to promote civic education.
Work has also started on defining the framework for
developing the voter register.
3

Our engagement will intensify as the NTC
clarifies the designation of responsibilities for electoral
matters. We are encountering high expectations of the
United Nations, which is overwhelmingly seen as the
key guarantor of the integrity of the electoral process,
although it is the Libyans who must reach agreement
with respect to the electoral system and other essential
elements of electoral legislation.

In Benghazi and Tripoli, the liberation
ceremonies included public commitments and the first
handovers of weapons by the armed groups. While
symbolic and limited in nature, these handovers have
sent a public message that the issue is at the top of the
agenda for the NTC and the forthcoming Government.
There is broad consensus on the need to remove
immediately all heavy weaponry from city centres, to
be followed later with moves to collect light arms.
Equally important is the need for a gradual
redeployment of brigades away from population
centres, in parallel with putting in place agreed
mechanisms to provide security in major cities and
towns.

There have been some positive developments in
Tripoli under the authority of the Supreme Security
Committee established by the NTC in coordination
with the Ministries of Interior and Defence. We expect
that ministers in the new Government will build upon
those developments. Their challenge will be to rapidly
develop opportunities for the future of combatants,
making available to them support for returning to
normal civilian life, or integrating them into a
professional police force and national army.

In my last briefing, I highlighted the terrible
legacy of the extraordinary quantity of weaponry and
munitions on which the Al-Qadhafi regime squandered
the wealth of Libya, to the benefit only of diverse arms
suppliers and now to the menace of Libya and its
region. UNSMIL continues to facilitate coordination
among the Libyan authorities, relevant international
organizations - including the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) - and
Member States offering assistance regarding chemical
weapons and nuclear materials, as well as other non-
conventional weapons.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other
Government focal points, together with UNSMIL, are
providing assistance for Visits in the near future of

OPCW inspectors and the IAEA. While NTC forces
appear to be controlling all relevant chemical and
nuclear material sites, centralized command and
control remains a concern. It has become clearer that
there are additional sites with previously undeclared
chemical weapons or materials, which the Government
is about to declare formally to the OPCW.

Under the Al-Qadhafi regime, Libya accumulated
the largest known stockpile of shoulder-fired
anti-aircraft missiles, known as man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADS), of any non-MANPADS-producing
country. Thousands were destroyed during NATO
operations. However, I must report to the Council that
we have increasing concerns over the looting and
likely proliferation of MANPADS, as well as large
numbers of munitions and all sorts of mines, which
have the most serious potential local and regional
implications. International partners have been working
with the Ministry of Defence on identifying
MANPADS sites and storage areas, primarily in the
eastern part of Libya. Hundreds of suspected sites still
need to be Visited.

Moreover, the prevalence of newly laid mines, in
particular around Zintan, Brega and Ajdabiya, but also
in parts of the Nafusa mountains, remains a great
concern. Mine action, and its immediate funding, is a
key priority for the United Nations. Large quantities of
unexploded ordnance and ammunition stockpiles in
Sirte and Bani Walid need immediate attention. In
Tripoli, many stockpiles are suspected in residential
areas, including in schools and hospitals, where they
seem to be have been moved by Al-Qadhafi forces to
conceal them from airstrikes, and most of them remain
unsecured.

The flow of weapons across borders is naturally a
major anxiety for Libya's neighbours and beyond, but
the implications of events in Libya for the region also

include the outflow of people - not only migrant
workers, but also armed elements from the former
regime - and concerns for those third-country

nationals who remain. Together with the African
Union, the United Nations will work with Libya's
neighbours to support them in addressing those issues.

Inside Libya, the NTC has taken steps towards
transferring responsibility for detainees from the
brigades to proper State authorities, but much remains
to be done to regularize detention, prevent abuse and
review cases to bring about the early release of those
whose detention should not be prolonged. This week,
UNSMIL's first human rights advisers will begin to
add their efforts to those of humanitarian agencies by
recommending and advising on actions to address this
urgent priority. We will be following up on the visit of
senior officials of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights by offering
comments on draft transitional justice legislation,
recommending broad consultations with civil society
and trying to mobilize assistance for the hard-pressed
National Commission on Missing Persons.

Once the new interim Government has been
formed and has put in place its mechanisms to
coordinate international assistance, we will discuss
with it how to go forward with a coordinated, Libyan-
led needs assessment process. Many international
actors stand ready to assist, but the authorities rightly
insist that it is for Libyans to set the framework and to
lead, and they continue to tell us that they wish the
United Nations to be their key partner in coordinating
international assistance.

Less than six weeks into the mandate of
UNSMIL, our 36 international staff in Libya include
experts in the priority areas in which we have been
asked to assist. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has
formally handed over to us a compound of offices that
is very suitable for our Mission headquarters, and
mission support staff are working hard to make it ready
for use as soon as possible. We expect that preliminary
discussions will enable a status-of-mission agreement
to be formalized soon after the interim Government
takes office. That will also be the time when we will be
able to begin detailed discussions on the longer-term
role and requirements for UNSMIL. We will report to
the Council on the next steps as the situation becomes
clearer, but given the delays to date, it seems likely that
we will have to request an extension of the initial
three-month UNSMIL mandate for a further few
months so as to have time for that assessment.

With liberation now completed, the challenges
facing the Libyan people and the new incoming
Government will nonetheless be extraordinary. It will
be critical, therefore, for the international community
to remain focused and measured in our engagement
with the Libyan authorities during this transition
period, while closely following their sense of
immediate priorities and not attempting to impose
over-ambitious expectations or longer-term
programmes.

When I and my colleagues listen to NTC
members, Government officials and civil society, the
priorities identified are the same. In addition to
security and elections, which have already been
mentioned, they include public financial management,
including the urgent preparation of a budget for 2012,
new rules to ensure fiscal transparency and the
clarification of liquidity requirements.

Also a key priority is the beginning of a national
reconciliation process and a coherent approach, led by
the NTC, to all human rights and transitional justice
issues that have surfaced in recent weeks and that will
be challenges in the months to come.

Above all, we must support the NTC in handling
the difficult political processes involved in
implementing the road map contained in the
constitutional declaration and in managing the
inevitably increasing socio-economic expectations of
the Libyan people.

When a country that has been denied the
development of so many of the institutions of an
effective democratic State faces challenges of such
enormity, it would be easy to make a case for
pessimism. Indeed, it would be foolish to expect the
path ahead to be smooth and easy.

However, Libyans justly point to what extent they
have already surprised us, and perhaps themselves, in
what they have achieved. They have done so with an
extraordinary display of civic responsibility and
initiative by women and men, and especially by their
youth. They may seek from us lessons in the details of
democracy, but they can offer lessons in its spirit. They
express repeated gratitude to the United Nations for the
action this Council took in its resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011) and to NATO and the non-NATO
countries that acted under that mandate, but they are
proud that they made their revolution and are
determined to maintain their sovereignty in building
their future. They trust the United Nations to support
the process that they intend to lead, and it is for us to
fulfil their expectations.

