Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his informative
briefing. I also thank Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia
for his presence in the Council today. Let me also
extend my gratitude to the Government of Colombia,
the personnel of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, the Secretariat and the leads of
the Security Council visiting mission, in particular
Peru and the United Kingdom, for all the efforts they
undertook to prepare a very successful and important
visit to Colombia. Briefings by Government officials
and sincere dialogue with former members of guerrilla
groups, social leaders and inhabitants of territorial
areas for training and reintegration, vastly improved our
knowledge about the struggles with the reconciliation
process and obstacles to a full implementation of the
peace agreement.

Despite the numerous challenges, the signing of the
peace agreement between Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the implementation process
that followed is rightly being considered a success
story and a great example for others to follow. That puts
additional pressure on the signatories of the agreement
and the Security Council so as to ensure that the
progress achieved does not vanish. We have to recall
the message of President Duque Marquez - to focus on
what unites rather than divides Colombians.

We are pleased to see that the statutory law of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the last missing piece of
the legal framework for Colombia's restorative model
of transitional justice, is finally in place. It gives the
tribunal a solid legal framework to work autonomously
and independently. We hope that all components of this
comprehensive legal system will have the necessary
resources to carry out its critical functions.

Despite the efforts of the Government, there is still
need for greater guarantees of protection for human
rights defenders and social leaders. The National
Commission on Security Guarantees has a clear role
to play to safeguard the focus of its action plans. This
is particularly important in the run-up to October's
local and regional elections, where acts of aggression
and intimidation of the candidates could occur even
more frequently.

It is deeply concerning that during the reporting
period, 14 additional former members of FARC-
EP were killed. Taking into consideration that this
correlates with the growing presence of criminal armed
groups in areas vacated by the FARC-EP, the State
must urgently act to establish an effective presence and
control in those areas.

Full political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former FARC-EP members is necessary to create
trust and confidence in the peace process. In this
context, I would also like to emphasize the role of
women, whose participation is crucial. We are satisfied
to recall the mission's observation that the Government
and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun
are strongly committed to this issue. Their respective
leaders are now responsible for providing sustainable
economic opportunities for their people.

We welcome the approval of the Government's
national development plan with its road map for
stabilization aimed at expanding public investments in
conflict-affected regions of the country. Furthermore,
we note that the 16 development programmes with a
territorial focus have finally begun. These plans can
give much needed hope to people in the neglected areas.

We understand the complicated situation of the
legal status of the 24 territorial areas for training and
reintegration that are authorized until 15 August and
hope that the necessary arrangements agreed with
the FARC will soon be in place. The views of local
communities should also be taken into account, as they
express fear that the departure of the territorial areas
for training and reintegration will negatively impact
their security, social and economic conditions.

According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/530), roughly 1 in 10 former combatants
have disabilities stemming from the armed conflict.
This is an area in which we have not done enough.
Ground-breaking resolution 2475 (2019), which was
adopted unanimously in June, is a significant first
step towards mainstreaming the rights of persons with
disabilities across the United Nations, including in the
peace and security context.

In conclusion, let me underline Poland's support for
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and the United Nations country team.

