Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to welcome Mr. Leonard She
Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to express
appreciation for the informative presentations of
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
as well as for the presence of Mr. Annabi.

The broad consensus in the Security Council on
the goals and purposes that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) must achieve in implementing
the Lusaka Agreement makes it unnecessary for me to
speak at length at this meeting.

The Council members who have preceded me
have highlighted various aspects of the important
commitment to peace that we have with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbouring countries. I had the opportunity to
express that commitment personally to various
interlocutors during our recent visit to the Great Lakes
region. Therefore, allow me to make just a few
comments on three points.

First, my delegation shares the view put forward
by the Secretariat in its report that the insufficient
information from the parties to the Lusaka Agreement
prevents, at this time, the formulation of a broad
strategy for the next phase of MONUC operations. In
this regard, non-compliance with the deadlines for the
presentation of timetables for the withdrawal of foreign
troops and the total demobilization of armed groups, as
well as certain delays in separating forces, is naturally
somewhat disconcerting to us. However, this does not
mean a loss of confidence in the process, because we
also see positive signs. We urge the members of the
Political Committee to deliver the information
necessary to move to the next phase of MONUC
operations.

Peace is an asset for which we must continue to
strive, even in the face of strong resistance. Therefore,
through this Council we will persist in peace activities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but our
commitment will inevitably depend on the degree of
fulfilment of obligations shown by our partners.

We attach great importance to bilateral meetings
between the authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, with a view
to ending the support provided to the armed groups that
operate on Congolese territory. We are concerned about
recent reports on cross-border moves of contingents of
the so-called negative forces; these movements
constitute a kind of repatriation without disarmament
and with serious consequences. In this regard, we
underscore the upcoming meeting to be held between
President Joseph Kabila and President Paul Kagame in
the capital of Tanzania.

The second point is that my delegation wishes to
express its deep concern about the humanitarian
situation that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
experiencing, particularly caused by the massive
displacement of people who are fleeing violence, the
interruption of traditional sources of food supplies, the
systematic plundering of the country's natural
resources and the impact of the war on children's lives,
as was eloquently presented by Mr. Olara Otunnu.

We find totally unacceptable the figure of 16
million people who have acute food needs and
difficulty in gaining access to humanitarian
organizations. We must promote an agreement between
authorities and rebel groups to establish a human
corridor for food delivery, as proposed by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

The question of the protection of the civilian
population in areas that have been or will be evacuated
by rebel groups causes us concern. If protection is the
fundamental responsibility of the de facto occupiers of
each region, the reports that are reaching us on respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law
are cause for anxiety. We support the prompt
deployment of human rights monitors in sufficient
numbers to accomplish this monitoring task.

We also note that the situation of the population
has worsened as a result of the illegal exploitation of
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the widespread sale of arms to violent
countries and groups involved in the conflict,
particularly small arms, which cause the majority of
deaths and injuries among the population. We urge
arms suppliers to exercise greater control over arms
sales to this region of Africa.

With regard to the situation of children in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we support the
five-point plan presented by the Special
Representative, Mr. Otunnu, and we will contribute so
that its recommendations will be reflected in the draft
resolution to be adopted at the end of this week.

Thirdly and lastly, my delegation wishes to pay
an admiring tribute and to express its appreciation to
the personnel of MONUC and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the excellent
work they are doing. We are prepared to authorize the
extension of the Mission mandate, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, with a view to a subsequent third
phase. Therefore, we will support the text of the draft
resolution, to be submitted by the French delegation,
which is now in the negotiating phase and which will
seek the progressive strengthening of the Mission
through the expansion of its civilian staff component.

