Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too thank the briefers for their interventions, and I welcome the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1011), which contains very comprehensive recommendations. The proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons pose a serious threat to international peace and security. These weapons cause by far the most casualties, averaging more than half a million victims a year worldwide. The concerns and challenges caused by such weapons are widely shared by all regions of the world. They cut across all issues, as the Secretary-General points out by listing the opportunities for the Council to address them. Their trafficking continues to foment conflicts and exacerbate armed violence, while fuelling organized crime and terrorism. Those weapons and their ammunition are easily accessible and able to be hidden and moved through cross-border trafficking. France had the painful experience of that during the attacks in 2015. In that context, our common mobilization is necessary now more than ever. The need for the universalization and implementation at the national level of jointly agreed measures to combat the proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms and light weapons is self-evident. I am thinking particularly of international instruments such as the Arms Trade Treaty, the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, as well as, above all, the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms and the International Tracing Instrument. Furthermore, the commitments made by States at the third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action, which France had the honour of chairing in June 2018, should make it possible to specifically strengthen the prevention of and fight against the illicit trafficking in such weapons. We also have high expectations for the discussions on preventing and combating the diversion of small arms and light weapons, which should be the main focus of the next biennial meeting, to be held next June. It is also more necessary than ever for Member States to respect arms embargoes imposed by the Council and work together to strengthen their effectiveness, in particular in Libya, South Sudan and the Central African Republic. Our operational activities must also be strengthened and based on two pillars: on the one hand, prevention by improving national control capacities, marking and securing weapons stockpiles and, on the other, combating trafficking, particularly by strengthening cooperation among States. With regard to prevention, France conducts many training and capacity-building activities for States, including Benin, Mali and the Niger. My country also contributes to combating the supply of weapons to armed terrorist groups in the Sahelo-Saharan region. That is also the purpose of the benchmarks that the Security Council established at our initiative for the arms embargo on the Central African Republic so as to strengthen the capacities of the Central African authorities in the areas of security sector reform and arms and ammunition management and prevent the risk of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. However, our efforts would be incomplete if they were not implemented, coordinated and aligned at the regional level. The Secretary-General's report cites many examples in support of that. I would like to come back to the specific case of the Western Balkans, where France, together with Germany, has been particularly involved. The efforts made against the diversion of such weapons have been significant and provide a frame of reference on which we can draw. Weare also fully committed to supporting initiatives in other regions, particularly West Africa and the Sahel region. I would also like to commend the other regional initiatives cited in the report, including the African Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. We must continue to build on those experiences and promote the mutual learning of lessons in order to better align our action at the international and regional levels.In conclusion, the many links with other issues at the forefront of the Council's activities call for strengthening the effectiveness of our work and avoiding the silo approach. We must continue to strive to take into account the existing synergies in all our areas of work. France especially welcomes the Secretary- General's call to develop a comprehensive approach, particularly within the United Nations system with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and in cooperation with INTERPOL and the World Customs Organization, around the interlinkage of combating illicit trafficking, organized crime and terrorism. Also in that context, I wish to note the usefulness of the tools already developed by the Council, including the aides-memoires and the dedicated Saving Lives Entity fund. They are vital resources that we must continue to use for the benefit of our action. For its part, France, will remain fully committed to the fight against illicit trafficking and the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
