Mr. Annabi: The Ambassador of Ukraine asked
about the cooperation that the Special Representative,
Mr. Jacques Klein, is extending to other organizations
that may be in a position to take over responsibility for
the follow-on mission that is foreseen to be put in place
after December next year. Mr. Klein has received very
clear instructions from the Secretary-General to
cooperate in all these efforts to ensure a smooth and
seamless transition. To that end, he participates in all
meetings that are held to look into these issues. He
participates in all meetings organized by the High
Representative on the streamlining of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including, of
course, the meeting being held today and tomorrow of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.

Mr. Klein and UNMIBH have also met with all
delegations that have visited Sarajevo to plan for a
possible follow-on mission, and there have been such
delegations from both the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). This cooperation with possible successor
organizations takes place at all levels, whether it is
Mr. Klein himself or the Police Commissioner or the
Civil Affairs Unit of UNMIBH or even the regional
commanders of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) in the various regions.

I think the second question by the Ambassador of
Ukraine related to the possible format of the follow-on
mission. The decisions that will be taken in due course
in this regard will be made by whatever organization
emerges as the successor to UNMIBH. But we have
suggested, on the basis of our experience and
knowledge of the situation, as you will have seen in the
Secretary-General's report, that any follow-on mission
would be in a better position to do its work if it
combined the responsibilities of the police, the judicial
system and the penal system. This is, as I indicated,
one of the lessons we have learned from previous
operations. We also feel that the follow-on mission
could perform its functions as they are now foreseen
with about 25 per cent of the current strength of
UNMIBH - in other words, about 450 police officers
plus whatever personnel would be necessary to cover
the other areas of activity. Altogether, we feel that it
can be a much smaller mission than is the case for
UNMIBH, and UNMIBH will in due course begin to
downsize so that we can move from one operation to
the other in a seamless manner.

Finally, the Ambassador of Ukraine had asked
about the activities undertaken to protect the human
rights of minorities. UNMIBH, of course, contributes
to these activities within its mandate. In other words, it
tries to ensure as much as possible that the police
adhere to internationally acceptable human rights
standards and principles of democratic policing. The
broader human rights issues fall within the purview of
the High Representative, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the OSCE. As
you know, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights provides expertise, guidance and
coordination on all relevant human rights issues with
the other organizations involved in Bosnia.

Again, as regards the follow-on mission, I would
like to assure Ambassador Eldon that UNMIBH will
indeed cooperate actively with the successor
organization. We are eager to begin this planning
process as soon as there is clarity in this regard. The
Secretary-General has provided some 13 months
advance notice, so there is time to prepare, and we will
be ready to cooperate very actively. It should not
actually be that difficult, because whatever
organization takes over, a lot of existing personnel can
wear the same hats. So, from my perspective, the issue
is not really whether we will cooperate actively - that
is a given - but whether the necessary preparations
will be made in time for a smooth and seamless
takeover.

Finally, the Ambassador of Bangladesh asked
when the State Border Service would be able to deploy
fully, and what the time frame for that was. As we
know, the State Border Service is now responsible for
and covers 75 per cent of the borders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, including Sarajevo airport. We estimate
that they should be able to cover all the borders - 100
per cent of the borders - of the country by some time
in the second half of next year, and that they will then
be fully deployed. But that, of course, is not entirely in
our hands and depends, in particular, on the provision
of funding and equipment for the State Border Service.
As the report indicates, there is currently a shortfall of
some $2.5 million regarding the equipment required by
the Border Service and a shortfall, which is even more
important, regarding the payment of salaries to these
people, which is in the vicinity of $16 million. Just to
give an example, in the Breko area, the State Border
Service has to cover a border that runs along a river,
but it has not yet been able to acquire a motorboat to
patrol that river. So there are serious funding and
equipment issues that, of course, depend on the
provision, in a timely manner, of the necessary
voluntary contributions.

