Mr. Strammen (Norway): Allow me to avail
myself of this opportunity to congratulate and
compliment the United Nations and the East Timorese
people on the accomplishment of a very successful
election for a Constituent Assembly in East Timor on
30 August.

We are particularly pleased with the fact that the
first democratic election was conducted in a fair and
peaceful manner, free of incidents. This historic
moment will be remembered as a demonstration of the
eagerness of the East Timorese to confront their
differences and to actively take part in the formation of
their nation's future.

Moreover, the massive voter turnout is a clear
indication of the capacity of the East Timorese people
to exercise their democratic rights without fail. Norway
was one of the first countries to send an official
delegation to the territory following the 1999 turmoil.
Bearing in mind what we were confronted with as we
arrived in Dili in November 1999, it was indeed
encouraging and touching to witness the commitment
and eagerness of the East Timorese in front of the
polling centres on August 30 this year.

I would like to take this opportunity to urge the
political parties to live up to their obligations as
manifested in the Pact of National Unity. Respect for
the outcome of the election will be one of the first
milestones in the foundation of an independent,
democratic nation and an important part of securing a
political atmosphere conducive to optimizing the
framework for a peaceful and democratic environment.

East Timor is again entering a challenging phase.
The declaration of independence is approaching, and
the people have chosen a Constituent Assembly that
will be a crucial asset in the process of transforming
East Timor into an independent nation. For a successful
drafting of the constitution, the Assembly will need the
full support of the political leaders and the
constituencies, as well as of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the international community.

The months to come will also bring new
challenges for UNTAET. It is now of vital importance
that the process of Timorization continues. The election
of the Constituent Assembly also implies that
UNTAET has to adjust its routines, as from now on the
mission has to respond to a democratically elected
body. This adjustment is crucial with regard to
UNTAET's responsible and smooth withdrawal, and it
is a very important step on East Timor's path towards
independence.

The East Timorese experience has in many ways
been unique and overwhelmingly positive. Seldom has
a United Nations mission been given such a complex
and wide-ranging mandate. It is now of vital
importance that UNTAET and its partners are given
sufficient resources so that they can complete the task
given to them by this Council. We therefore urge the
members of the Security Council and other donor
countries to continue their support for East Timor
during the transition and throughout the post-
independence period.

Finally, let me reiterate that in order to ensure a
sustainable peace and the establishment of vital
institutions, it is of crucial importance that the United
Nations remains in East Timor until such institutions
have been put on a solid footing. In this regard we look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General's October
report with comprehensive recommendations as to the
size, composition and mandate of an integrated civilian
and military United Nations mission to follow
UNTAET.

