Mr. Kobler: At the outset of this meeting, please
allow me to wish everyone a blessed month of Ramadan.

I am honoured to present to the Council today
the third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2061 (2012), on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I shall also brief Council members on the
most recent developments in Iraq.

Ten years after the fall of the former regime and
less than two years after the withdrawal of United
States forces, Iraq's transition toward democracy and
prosperity is in a crucial phase. The country can continue
to make important strides in deepening the roots of
democracy, pursuing reform, embracing diversity and
improving its stature in the international community;
or Iraq can go down a dangerous path, potholed with
political impasse and sectarian violence at each turn,
leading to increased instability. The Iraqi people and
their leaders now face a set of critical decisions, the
outcome of which will leave a lasting impact on their
future.

I am deeply concerned by the recent events in Iraq.
I regret to report that the past four months have been
among Iraq's bloodiest in the past five years. Nearly
3,000 men, women and children have been killed,
and over 7,000 more injured. The perpetrators of that
violence are taking advantage of two leading factors
of instability in the country. Those include the ongoing
political stalemate and the Syrian crisis.

Almost seven months after the first protests broke
out in Ramadi, demonstrators are still holding sit-ins on
international highways and public squares throughout
Iraq's western governorates. They claim that the
Government has yet to fulfil their demands. In turn, the
Government indicates that it has persisted in its efforts
to meet those demands. For instance, the Government
announced that it had released approximately 8,000
detainees. Similarly, the Government has reported that,
as ofl July, the committee chaired by Mr. Al-Shahristani
had reinstated pensions and lifted property seizures,
among other measures, that affect 300,000 citizens in a
positive manner.

On the legislative side, senior government and
political leaders have endeavoured to produce mutually
acceptable draft laws that address the demonstrators'
demands. I am pleased to report that this process has
borne some fruit. In April, the Council of Ministers
approved three key amendments to controversial laws,
which have now been introduced for consideration in
Parliament. Unfortunately, the enactment of those
amendments in Parliament, along with other important
legislation, is still pending.

I have continued to pursue UNAMI's mandate
to promote national reconciliation. I have done so by
consulting repeatedly and consistently with senior
leaders, religious authorities and representatives of key
parties. I have also offered my good offices. Our aim
was to facilitate contacts among national actors. In that
context, the Government of Iraq agreed to a UNAMI-
led verification mechanism on the release of female
detainees.

The United Nations has remained the only
international actor to reach out to the demonstrators
and their leaders in a public way. We have continued
to visit them in places such as Mosul and Ramadi, and
even in cities outside Iraq.

To promote a negotiated solution, UNAMI has
established a set of principles that should guide any
dialogue initiative. The principles affirm, first, the
the unity and integrity of Iraqi territory; secondly, the
rejection of all forms of violence; thirdly, the eradication
of all forms of sectarian incitement; fourthly, respect
for the Constitution as the supreme law; and, fifthly,
upholding all fundamental freedoms and human rights,
as enshrined in the Constitution.

I therefore appeal to all leaders and representatives to
end the stalemate by enacting the proposed amendments
and laws. I also call upon the demonstrators to maintain
the peacefulness of their protests and to engage in a
sincere and constructive dialogue without further delay.

The need to resolve the demonstrator crisis is more
pressing than ever. Iraqis were reminded of the risks
during the early morning hours of Tuesday, 23 April.
Iraqi security forces clashed with demonstrators in
Kirkuk's southern town of Hawija. According to our
investigations the Iraqi security forces used excessive
force in the face of largely unarmed demonstrators,
leading to the death of 45 people and injuring another
110, almost all of them were civilians.

Hawija unleashed a wave of deadly standoffs and
attacks across Iraq. I have condemned the violence
and called on the Government to launch a public,
independent and transparent investigation and to bring
to justice those responsible to justice.

In the aftermath of Hawija, a number of armed
groups are once again active. Some are affiliated with
terrorist groups such as Al-Qaieda. Others are well-
known militias that are allegedly kidnapping and
killing based solely on the sect of their victims.

Recent provincial council elections point to Iraq's
ability to take another path towards peace and stability.
On 20 April, more than 6 million Iraqi voters, of which
3 million were women, went to cast their votes in 12 of
Iraq's 18 provinces. I am pleased to report that the day
was marked by an acceptable turnout rate, averaging
more than 50 per cent on a national basis.

I am reassured by the fact that the elections that
were postponed in Anbar and Ninewa were finally held
on 20 June. I was heartened to see voters head to the
polls despite the existence of threats of violence and
attack.

As the newly elected representatives form their
local Governments, I hope that this process will soon
translate to tangible improvements in the lives of
citizens.

Taken together, the elections on 20 April and
20 June were the first elections that Iraqis managed
completely by themselves. I would like to therefore
congratulate the Chairman, Commissioner and staff
of the Independent High Electoral Commission for
the professional manner in which they supervised,
organized and conducted the elections.

I am also pleased to report that Arab-Kurdish
relations, which had reached their own crossroads, are
now once again on the path towards improvement. That
is best characterized by the bold decisions that both
leaderships have taken. Reciprocating a visit by the
Kurdistan region's Prime Minister Barzani on 29 April,
Prime Minister Nuri Al-Maliki went to Erbil on 9 June
and held a session ofthe council ofministers. A few days
ago, President Massoud Barzani travelled to Baghdad
to meet with Prime Minister Al-Maliki, Speaker
Usama Al-Nujaifi and other political leaders. Those
mutual visits are an encouraging sign of leadership and
statesmanship on both sides.

Seven joint Baghdad-Erbil committees are now
negotiating unresolved and crucial matters, including
the federal budget, the oil and gas law, disputed
boundaries and security arrangements. I would like to
reiterate our strong support for those efforts, as they
are proof that differences can be bridged only through
direct dialogue. I therefore wish to renew UNAMI's
offer to assist at any stage. In particular, UNAMI's
role in resolving the situation in the disputed internal
boundaries is at the core of our mandate. I am afraid not
much could be achieved during my tenure.

Similarly, I am encouraged by the intentions of
all components in Kirkuk to hold elections there. I
sponsored a number ofmeetings in Baghdad and Kirkuk
in order to bridge differences among the components.
We continue to offer our good offices in that regard.

I welcome the decision to hold the parliamentary
and provincial elections in the Kurdistan region on
21 September. I urge Kurdistan region authorities to
complete all preparations for conducting the elections
Without further delay. On 30 June, however, the
Kurdistan regional Parliament decided to postpone
presidential elections for two years. That is a matter
of concern. Elections are the backbone of democracy.
UNAMI supports regular and timely elections at all
levels.

The improvement in Iraq's regional relations is best
highlighted by the great strides the country has made
towards restoring the international standing it had
before 1990. I would like to commend the Governments
of Iraq and Kuwait on their determination to complete
the boundary maintenance project in a timely manner
and to form a successor bilateral technical arrangement,
bringing closure to resolution 833 (1993).

By receiving the funds set aside with the United
Nations for the compensation of Iraqi private citizens
whose assets remained on Kuwaiti territory after the
demarcation, the Government of Iraq was able to bring
closure to resolution 899 (1994). UNAMI is looking
forward to implementing resolution 2107 (2013), which
transferred the obligations on missing Kuwaitis, third-
country nationals and Kuwaiti property, including
national archives, to the Mission. I similarly commend
the visit of His Highness Prime Minister A1 Sabah on
12 June to Baghdad, which resulted in the signing of a
number of bilateral agreements in various areas. I am
confident that both Governments have now ushered in
a new era of cooperation.

The violence in Iraq cannot be separated from the
civil war in Syria. The battlefields are merging. Iraqi
armed groups have an increasingly active presence in
Syria. As such, the Syrian conflict is no longer only
spilling over into Iraq. Instead, it has spread to Iraq,
since Iraqis are reportedly taking up arms against each
other in Syria and in Iraq. That violence could easily
spiral out of control ifit is not speedily addressed. The
Syrian conflict is having an impact on Iraq through the
continued influx of refugees. As of 7 July, more than
160,000 Syrian refugees had been registered in Iraq, the
majority in the Kurdistan region. A particularly urgent
situation is arising at the Domiz camp in the Kurdistan
region. The growing number of refugees entering the
region has led to overcrowding at the camp. Domiz has
a capacity of 28,000, but it is now housing some 42,000
people.

In order to respond to the Syrian crisis, Iraq's
United Nations humanitarian agencies have issued
the fifth Syria Regional Response Plan, amounting to
$310 million, which will cover humanitarian operations
until the end of this year. I call on Member States
to contribute to this financial appeal and meet the
humanitarian needs of the refugees. I would like to
commend the Governments of Iraq and the Kurdistan
region for what they have done so far for the Syrian
refugees. I call on the central and Kurdish authorities
to extend their generosity and hospitality by providing
more resources and additional land needed for Domiz.

I would also like to draw the Council's attention
to the issue of border closure with Syria, which has
increasingly limited protection space for those in
need. Since March 2013, however, the crossing points
have been completely closed, preventing Syrians from
seeking refuge in Iraq. I appeal to the Government of
Iraq to reopen the border as quickly as possible.
The factors of instability I have mentioned are
having a direct impact on the lives of Iraqis, especially
in the area of human rights, one of grave concern for
us. The worsening security situation is preventing
many Iraqis from living a secure life, as anyone should.
As the people of Kirkuk observed the holy month of
Ramadan, dozens have been killed in cold blood as
they celebrated Ramadan in crowded cafe's. I strongly
condemn the brutal terrorist attacks that have killed
hundreds of people in the past two weeks. The legacy
of that conflict is prevalent throughout society. For
children, it has left one in three deprived of many basic
services and fundamental rights. It is an area where
grave violations continue.

Minorities have also fallen victim to targeted
acts of violence, including murder and kidnapping for
ransom. In the last few weeks and months there have
been specific atttacks on Yezidi, Christian and black
Iraqi communities. No element has been spared. On
25 June, two suicide bombers in Tuz Khormato caused
casualties among members of the Turkmen minority.
Among those killed were two Turkmen leaders.

At the same time, UNAMI continues to learn about
abuse, mistreatment and torture in prisons, especially
in facilities under the Ministry of Interior - an area
that has come into greater focus because it is covered
under the demonstrators' demands. On 16 April, Iraq
executed 21 persons convicted under its anti-terrorism
law. I am encouraged that no further executions have
taken place since last April. Once again, I appeal to
the Government to declare a formal moratorium on
implementation of the death penalty.

I would now like to turn to the issue of Camp
Ashraf and Camp Hurriya temporary transit locations.
Looking back at the end of my tenure, we have come
a long way. A major crisis was defused in December
2011. Since then, almost all residents of Camp Ashraf
have been relocated to Camp Hurriya. Of the residents,
1,600 have been recognized by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as
persons in need ofinternational protection, and 135 have
been relocated to safe countries. Together, we have left
no stone unturned in our quest to find a humanitarian
solution, made possible through persistent negotiations
among all concerned.

I thank the Government of Iraq for its constructive
approach and understanding. I know it is not yet satisfied
with the overall success so far, but major bloodshed may
be averted. I am also grateful to the residents of Camp
Ashraf and Camp Hurriya and their leaders. I have
always understood their feelings. It is hard for them
to leave a place where they have spent most of their
adult life - Camp Ashraf. I recall my many meetings
with the Mojahedin-e Khalq leadership in Paris, and
the more than 60 hours of negotiations needed to bring
about the voluntary and peaceful relocation of all but
100 residents. Throughout the process, the world of
propaganda was one side of the coin. The other was
consistent, confidential and constructive talks behind
the scenes. My thanks also go to the United States and
the European Union for their support.

Allow me to add four brief remarks on the topic.
First, our main concern is the security of Camp
Hurriya residents. On 9 February and 15 June, the
camp was attacked by rockets. I strongly condemn
the attacks. Ten residents were tragically killed and
71 others wounded as a result. The Government is still
investigating the incidents. Under the memorandum of
understanding, the Government of Iraq is exclusively
responsible for the security and safety of the residents.
I have repeatedly reminded the Iraqi authorities at
the highest levels, both in writing and orally, to fulfil
the camp residents' requests for additional protective
measures. Unfortunately the Government has not yet
fully responded to them.

Secondly, the situation in Camp Ashraf remains
tense. The remaining 100 residents are not willing
to leave the camp without resolution of the property
question. In the meantime, the Government has taken
legal steps to evict the remaining residents and address
the property question, and has requested the residents
to nominate lawyers to represent them in the legal
proceedings. The residents, however, have failed to do
so.

Thirdly, the Governments of Albania and Germany
have offered to relocate 210 and about 100 residents,
respectively, to their countries. The relocation to
both countries has started, and I would like to thank
both Governments for their generosity in offering
relocation opportunities. We are, however, still looking
to relocate 90 per cent of the residents. There is no
peaceful solution other than relocation to countries
outside Iraq, and I appeal to all Member States to
consider taking in the remaining residents. However,
relocation to third countries requires the cooperation
of Camp Hurriya residents with UNHCR. Since the
terror attack of 9 February, Camp Hurriya residents
have been boycotting interviews with UNHCR. As
a result, UNHCR is readjusting its presence and will
keep a reduced workforce in case the residents decide
to restart the process and start cooperating, but also to
allow for the possibility that additional countries will
come forward with relocation offers.

Of increasing concern are the human rights
abuses in Camp Hurriya itself by the camp leadership.
Hundreds of daily monitoring reports suggest that the
lives of Camp Hurriya residents are tightly controlled. A
significant number of residents have reported to United
Nations monitors that they are not free to leave the
Camp, to participate in the resettlement process offered
by UNHCR, to contact family members outside Iraq,
or to have contact with other relatives even within the
Camp itself. Some residents reported that they had been
denied access to medical treatment by the residents'
leaders. Others reported having been subjected to
verbal and other forms of abuse for disagreeing with
the resident leaders or for expressing the wish to leave
the Camp.

I urge the Camp leadership to fully respect the
rights of the residents, to let those residents to leave the
Camp if they wish to do so, to allow their freedom of
movement within the Camp without supervision, and
to permit residents to have free and unimpeded access
to unsupervised telephone calls, email communications
and internet access. Also, the Camp leadership does not
allow unsupervised conversation with United Nations
monitors. Some residents have reported to United
Nations monitors that they face severe consequences
for attempting to contact United Nations monitors
without the permission of the resident leadership. I
am also disappointed that United Nations monitors are
often abused. Our colleagues do not deserve to be spat
at. Our commitment is a humanitarian one. I call upon
Camp Hurriya residents to accept our extended hand to
help them pursue a new life. I would like to renew my
call for all parties to continue to be patient and to find a
peaceful resolution to outstanding issues.

At the end of my tenure in Iraq, I would like to
conclude with some personal observations. A striking
feature about Iraq and its people is that Iraqis are
enjoying new-found freedoms despite all of the
violence. I have intentionally chosen the memorial in
Halabja as the destination of my first and one of my last
visits outside ofBaghdad as a symbol and reminder that
the atrocities of dictatorship must never come back; as
a symbol and reminder that the future of Iraq lies in
peaceful coexistence; and as a symbol and reminder
that choosing the right path now can ensure peaceful
conditions for tomorrow.

Shiites, Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans, Assyrians,
Christians, Shabak, Sabean Mandaens, Yezidis and
others have all experienced suffering that will not and
cannot be forgotten and must never be repeated. I know
most Iraqis look to the future, and away from the past.
They should embrace all of their communities as part
of a peaceful coexistence. To ehlp them do so, I would
like to highlight four principles I deem important at the
end of my tenure.

First, the Constitution should be upheld and
implemented in full. The first articles of the Iraqi
Constitution emphasize the need to protect the country's
diversity and federalism. This is why Iraqis must return
to the Constitution as the political framework for
resolving all prevailing conflicts.

Secondly, Iraq's resources should be utilized
efficiently and distributed equitably. Iraq is now the
third largest oil exporter and the second largest oil
producer of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries. The country's vast natural resources are like
a trust fundamental - gold literally lying underfoot.
However, Iraq needs to efficiently manage and share
the revenues of its hydrocarbon resources. This is
critical to Iraq's economic growth, social development
and political stability. To ensure that all Iraqis benefit,
I call on the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to agree on the oil and gas and
revenue-sharing laws without further delay.

Thirdly, the environment should be protected.
Iraq lies at the centre of the sand and dust storms that
are damaging the well-being of its population and its
economy. Its neighbours suffer equally. As such, I
welcome the launch of the United Nations Environment
Programme's new regional programme to combat sand
and dust storms. I would also like to welcome Prime
Minister Al-Maliki's high-level initiative to set up a
national commission to combat sand and dust storms
in Iraq and to facilitate regional cooperation on this
matter. It is imperative to reverse the environmental
degradation in Iraq and the region now.

My last point is that women represent more than half
of the Iraqi population, but insecurity, discrimination
and other factors still reduce the opportunities Iraqi
women have to rebuild their country. I call on the
Government to scale up and implement a national
policy on women. Peace and progress will be achieved
in Iraq only if both men and women can live without the
fear of violence. Deeds have to follow words.

The depth of my concern for Iraq's young people
is now a familiar topic to the Council. I would like to
raise the issue of their plight with more urgency than
ever. I have spoken of the devastating death toll that
Iraq has seen in past months. Terror and violence have
a deep and troubling impact on young people. Iraq has
now seen decades of conflict and fear. Yet another
generation is confronted with trauma and bloodshed.

The traumatized children and young people of today
are the traumatized adults of tomorrow. Insecurity
is just one of the reasons they feel powerless. Young
Iraqis want education and opportunities, but cannot
find jobs. Young Iraqis are dynamic and political, but
have no representation and no platform to raise their
voices. Fear, frustration, helplessness - these feelings
plague the youth of Iraq and run contrary to the spirit
of hope, optimism and ambition that fuels their deep
belief in their country. Young Iraqis seek a better life
abroad because hope and optimism are fading. I believe
that they would stay if they could just have a chance
to shape their own futures in the land where they were
born. Leaders need to act now to keep the promising
young population in Iraq. The national youth strategy
should not remain a piece of paper, but must be filled
with life.

I would like to conclude with a final appeal to the
Council and the international community. As upheaval
and uncertainty sweep through the Middle East, it is
high time that the international community and regional
actors develop a vision for the whole region. The
direness of the situation requires that the international
community dedicate far more attention to the region as
a whole, as developments are interrelated.

I wish to thank the Government of Iraq for its
cooperation during 2013, as in the years before. I also
wish to place on record my deep thanks to the Security
Council for its continued support. But at the end of
my tenure, my special thanks go to our team of the
United Nations family, UNAMI and the country team,
the hundreds of dedicated men and women who work
in Iraq under extremely difficult circumstances, in a
violent environment. My admiration goes to each and
every single one of them for their dedicated work - the
support staff, air operators and engineers, cooks and
cleaners, computer specialists and security personnel,
without whom we cannot fulfil our political, human
rights and development mandate.

I leave with a feeling of professional and human
satisfaction. A great deal of ground has been covered
during the past years, but a great deal still needs to
be done. UNAMI's role is more important than ever. I
count on my colleagues to pursue the Mission's mandate
with the same level of professionalism and dedication. I
wish my successor the best of luck.

I have tried to take the mandate the Council
entrusted to me seriously - to advise, support and
assist the people and the Government of Iraq. My last
words go to the people of Iraq, to whom I wish a future
of peace, prosperity and well-being.

