Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing today's meeting to speak to the
recent developments in eastern Ukraine. join others
in thanking our briefers, Under Secretary-General
Feltman and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Deputy Chief Monitor Hug, for
providing the Council and the international community
with the facts underlining the escalation in violence,
which are critical in a conflict where some continue to
try to obscure the truth.

On 3 June, combined Russian-separatist forces
launched multiple, coordinated attacks west of
the Minsk line of contact in Donetsk. The attacks
were concentrated on the towns of Marinka and
Krasnohorivka. The Russian Federation and its
separatist allies have offered multiple, often conflicting
explanations for those attacks. In some instances,
Russia and the separatists have blamed Ukraine for
inciting the attacks. For example, a Russian presidential
spokesman attributed the violations of the ceasefire to
the "provocative actions of the Ukrainian armed forces",
claiming that "the Ukrainian side has repeatedly made
similar efforts to escalate tensions against the backdrop
of international operations".

Similarly, the so-called Defence Minister of the
self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic blamed
Ukraine for provocations and what he called a breach
of the Minsk agreements that led to the fighting.
Exactly what the so-called provocations are was never
explained. This set of arguments has been undermined
by some of the separatists themselves, who seem to
have forgotten to run their tweets and their blog posts
by Moscow. During the attacks, one tweeted: "Marinka
is ours", posting a photograph of armed soldiers atop a
tank flying the separatist flag. A post on a separatist
website said: "As a result of a massive attack by armed
forces of the Donetsk People's Republic, Marinka has
been liberated".

In other instances, Russia has argued that the
attacks were justified because the areas that are
actually part of the separatist-controlled territory under
the Minsk agreements are these areas. They are not.
That was the case that Russia made about Marinka and
Krasnohorivka yesterday at a meeting of the OSCE. We
have seen this tactic before when combined Russian-
separatist forces encircled and attacked Debaltseve
immediately after signing the package of measures
at Minsk on 12 February. As separatist commander
Eduard Basurin told Reuters on 15 February:

"Of course we can open fire on Debaltseve. The
territory is internal - ours. And internal is
internal. But along the line of confrontation there
is no shooting".

The problem with this line of argument is quite
simply that it is false. At no point did the Minsk
agreements recognize Marinka and Krasnohorivka as
separatist-controlled territory, nor did they grant the
separatists control over Debaltseve or other areas that
combined Russian-separatist forces have seized or tried
to seize. Yet, for Russia and the separatists, it seems
the contact line can shift to include the territories that
they feel they deserve. The Kyiv-born surrealist master
Mikhail Bulgakov put this problem a different way:
"The tongue can conceal the truth, but the eyes never."

In this case, the objective eyes in eastern Ukraine
belong to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, and
what it tells us is that on the evening of 2 June and in
the early morning of 3 June, the Mission

"observed the movement of a large amount of heavy
weapons in areas controlled by the Donetsk People's
Republic, generally in a westerly direction towards
the contact line, close to Marinka, preceding and
during the fighting".

To repeat, according to the Special Monitoring
Mission, heavy weapons from the Russian-backed
separatist side moved westward preceding as well as
during the fighting. The Mission tried to contact high-
ranking Donetsk People's Republic personnel over an
hour-and-a-half period on the morning of 3 June but
reported: "Either they were unavailable or did not wish
to speak to the SMM".

The eyes do not conceal the truth, and the truth here
is that the recent violence was rooted in a combined
Russian-separatist assault. Those and otherjoint attacks
by Russian-separatist forces have deadly consequences.
At least five Ukrainian soldiers were killed and 38
wounded in the assault on the towns. The number of
casualties is surely higher, but we do not, unfortunately,
have reliable reports from the separatist side. That is
because, as the United Nations human rights monitoring
unit noted in its report of 15 May, independent media
have been prosecuted, threatened and otherwise
muzzled in separatist-controlled territory.

We also do not know how many Russian soldiers
were killed in recent attacks, or in any of their
operations in eastern Ukraine for that matter. Russia
continues, despite incidents such as the recent capture
of two special operations Russian soldiers in Shchastya
last month, to deny any military involvement in eastern
Ukraine. And just last week President Putin signed
a decree classifying any death of Russian soldiers in
"special operations" in peacetime a State secret - a
policy which previously was limited to wartime only.
Not content with denying their military service in life,
Russia now denies their loved ones respect and closure,
not to mention social services, for their service in death.
It denies the Russian people knowledge to which they
are entitled of a conflict their Government has been
fuelling with weapons, training and soldiers. No matter
what is one's opinion of the open secret that is Russia's
military involvement in eastern Ukraine and occupied
Crimea, the dignified recognition of one's dead should
have primacy.

Of course, suffering is hardly limited to those
involved in the fighting. Civilians living near and along
the front lines continue to endure profound hardship.
Approximately 1.3 million Ukrainians have been
displaced by the fighting. Small children on the front
lines have become used to going to school and sleeping
in basements. Families live underground for months at
a time. The elderly and disabled are trapped, with little
access to vital medicines and other forms of assistance.
A health professional working in Debaltseve said,

"I have met elderly people who say that they would
just like to die. They do not have depression; they
just do not want to be 80 years old and living in a
basement."

By now, the international community is quite
familiar with Russia's playbook when it comes to efforts
to occupy the territory of its sovereign neighbours,
as it did it Crimea and before that in Transnistria,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The consensus here and
in the international community remains that Minsk's
implementation is the only viable way out of this deadly
conflict.

The Ukrainian Government has made good-faith
efforts to honour that consensus, notwithstanding
the seemingly endless violations by Russia and the
separatists, and to deliver on the commitments made
at Minsk. Ukraine is holding direct dialogue with the
separatists - a bitter pill to swallow, but one that they
have swallowed for the sake of peace and for the sake of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements.

At the same time, Ukraine has undertaken critical
efforts, with the participation of Ukrainian civil society,
to address pervasive problems that it inherited from
its predecessors, like widespread corruption, as well
as to pursue crucial reforms such as decentralization.
Ukraine cooperates with the international monitors
and bodies and has committed to addressing identified
areas of concern. The United States will continue
to raise tough issues and those areas of concern,
including some raised here today by the briefers, with
the Government of Ukraine, and we will support the
Government and the Ukrainian people as they continue
their efforts towards meaningful reform.

Yet Russia - and the separatists that it trains, arms
and fights alongside and with whom it shares command-
and-control systems in eastern Ukraine 4 continues
to ignore the consensus. Flouting the commitments it
made at Minsk, it goes right on applying its playbook
in new territories, as though the Council and the world
are too blind or too easily deceived to notice. We must
not let ourselves be deceived. The consequences of
Russia's contempt for Minsk and the rules undergirding
our international peace and security are too great both
for the integrity of the international system and for the
rights and welfare of the Ukrainian people.

We cannot fail to see and fail to act. We must not
stop applying pressure until Ukrainians get the stable
democracy, territorial integrity and sovereignty they
yearn for and deserve.

