Mr. Talagi: In our discussion with respect to
security threats to the Pacific islands, I shall focus my
attention and comments on climate change. As we have
heard today from all speakers, security in the Pacific is
not confined to climate change alone, but I see climate
change as the being the most challenging and the most
critical to the people of the Pacific and the world.

I believe that we should set a visionary target of
1.5 per cent carbon dioxide levels for 2100, and that we
should then also set targets on a decade basis to ensure
that we can achieve that visionary target. Currently,
each country decides its own target. It is a unilateral
target based on its own assessment of roughly what
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change has set.

There is also a vast difference in the perception
that we have and the responses to the disasters that
occur. The larger countries respond regionally, within
the country itself. The impacts are considered localized
and may or may not impact the whole country a great
deal at all. For the small island countries, however, a
disaster is not isolated in a region; the whole country is
affected. Consequently, national disasters often occur
with respect to droughts, cyclones, tsunamis, flooding
and other phenomena that are becoming regional
disasters.

I will now talk about some of the issues that have
been raised by members of the Council today, the
economic impacts that these will have on our countries.
But the way in which we perceive climate change and
disasters, or true national disaster, are different. Why
is that? Why do we perceive climate change and the
disasters that occur differently from how the larger
developed countries perceive them? For the larger
economies, for the large countries, it is a blip; for small
economies, small islands, it is a major disaster. That is
why responses to climate change are so vastly different
and why we cannot reach agreement on what we should
be doing.

One of the things that I wanted to raise in this
Chamber is that we come here with the information
given to us by climate scientists. We are politicians.
That is not our role. Our role is to figure out the politics
of climate change and determine and make decisions
on that basis, using climate science to underpin the
information, the decisions and the policies we make in
that respect. We all know that there is a commonality
in the disasters that occur. Psychological trauma,
debilitating illnesses, lack of hope from loss of lives
and livelihoods are the social and human impacts of
natural disasters. The funny thing is that it is true
not only for small island countries, but also for large
countries. Those present here have this effect with their
own people.

The only other thing that is important with respect
to climate change, as far as I can see, at the present
time is funding. Unfortunately, we need funds to enable
us to continue to rebuild our gross domestic product
(GDP) after major disasters. And, as I have already
pointed out, they are major in the sense that they have
an impact. The President of this Council today just
said that 45 per cent of Vanuatu's GDP was affected
by a cyclone. For some of us it is almost a 100 per cent,
so we have to rebuild again. Some here have to do the
same thing within their regions.

The question that is asked is: what does this have to
do with the Security Council? So far, nothing. We talk
a great deal about climate change, but has the Security
Council responded to climate change in a manner that
it should? I like the example given by Minister Murray
McCully. The Government of New Zealand recognized
that we needed some support with our energy, to
reduce our dependence on energy, and it turned up and
installed solar plants, and away we go. Now some of
those countries have reduced their imports of oil to
virtually nothing.

I like that response, and I would like the Council
to consider that response. Some States represented here
spend lots of money hiring consultants who come and
tell us, "This is what we believe you should be doing".
Clearly, that is a slightly different approach to what
we perceive. Most of the time most of the money is
spent on consultants. In fact, I sometimes think, sitting
under my coconut tree in Niue, that 80 to 90 per cent
of the funds that are provided by countries, by their tax
payers, to help us is spent by consultants, with your
support. It cannot be right, surely.

The final thing that I want to talk about is fish and
minerals of the Pacific. We hear ourselves described as
being poor - and we are poor. We have got plenty of
fish, but we are still poor. We have minerals in the sea
now and on land, and we are still poor. Why is that?
Because countries represented here are not helping us.
Give us a fish here, off the returns from the fish that
you catch in our waters. Countries need to do that, to
help us. Countries need to do that with the minerals that
we are looking to develop at the present moment under
the sea. We are not poor. We are rich.

But Jamaica is poor, some countries are, and my
plea for all here today is to rethink that perception of
the Pacific and work with us in true partnerships to
help us. Exploit and harness sustainably the resources
that we have in fish and minerals in the sea.

I hope I have not caused too many problems today.
Obviously, Mr. President, you have given me two new
islands to work from. I thank you very much for the
time you have given me to say my little piece about how
I perceive it on my coconut in the middle of the Pacific.

