Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): First,
Mr. President, I would like to welcome your
initiative to convene a public debate on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his detailed report
(S/2012/376) on the matter and for the relevant
recommendations contained therein. I also welcome
the presence among us of Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ivan Simonovic',
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights; and
Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee for the Red
Cross. I welcome their contributions to this debate.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
throughout the world is a major concern of our time.
Deliberate or accidental Violence inflicted against
civilians is a major source of concern for the Security
Council, which has devoted many meetings and adopted
several resolutions and statements on the topic in the
past five years. The Secretary-General's report notes
at length the persistence of violence against civilians
in armed conflict. The protection of civilians in those
circumstances is not a choice but an obligation under
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
even traditional law.

Togo is pleased that the Secretary-General has
defined five core challenges that need to be met in
situations of armed conflict where civilians are caught
up, against their will, in combat zones. Sadly, given what
often continues to take place on the ground, it is still
difficult for the principles in question to be easily and
swiftly applied. The Secretary-General's report cites
many countries throughout the world where civilians
are the targeted victims of armed conflicts. The report
has the merit of noting that all parties have committed
violations of humanitarian law, although it is generally
recognized that the majority of those crimes can be
attributed to non-State armed groups.

In Africa, the situations in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan in areas where the Lord's Resistance Army
holds sway, and in Cote d'Ivoire during the post-election
crisis of 2011, have highlighted the degree of violence
and the atrocities that combatants have inflicted on
civilian populations, even as they are urged to ensure
the protection of non-combatants.

The violence is particularly cruelly reflected in
premeditated murders, attacks against schools and
hospitals, obstacles to distribution of humanitarian aid,
sexual violence, forced disappearances, torture and
other cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment, including
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts
or for other criminal purposes, as well as attacks
against journalists and human rights defenders. Those
are all reprehensible acts at variance with international
standards and should, as a result, be sanctioned and
punished, pursuant to the relevant international legal
texts. All sides and all combatants are caught up in one
or another of those aforementioned kinds of violence.
Nothing - or not enough - is being done by any of
the sides to ensure respect for human rights and prevent
violations of such rights. One result ofthis is an inability
to hold people accountable for their acts and a lack of
political will to bring them to justice.

Violence against civilians brings about, of course,
migrations towards stable areas and an exodus towards
neighbouring countries. The figures of 27 million
internally displaced persons and 15 million refugees are
a testament to this.

The situation needs to change. Mentalities need
to evolve. The law has to be enforced. The fact that
the principle of proportionality is not respected and
that heavy weaponry and explosive devices are being
used in populated areas explains the very high number
of civilians killed in armed conflict. Very often, it is
vulnerable people, such as women, children, the elderly
and the disabled, who bear the brunt of that violence.

What is happening currently in Syria, where
civilians are caught in the crossfire between heavy
artillery and aerial bombardment, is neither acceptable
norjustifiable. Such acts must simply be condemned by
everyone.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
should not be merely a concern felt by the international
community but also a commitment at both the political
and the legal levels.

The Security Council, on the basis of its previous
resolutions, should continue to pressure Governments
and the heads of non-State armed groups to respect
people's physical integrity as well as private and public
property in situations of conflict. In deciding to apply

targeted sanctions against the perpetrators of violent
acts, the Council should reaffirm its determination
to use the necessary effective means to ensure the
protection of civilians. The arrest of persons accused
of violent acts and the prosecution of others are part
of that determination to put an end to impunity.
To be successful, such an undertaking requires the
cooperation of all countries, above all those in regions
where such acts are taking place.

For his part, the Secretary-General has undertaken
commendable initiatives, particularly in terms of
peacekeeping operations. In that respect, we are pleased
that his recommendations in his report (S/2007/643)
have been implemented when it comes to systematic
respect for international humanitarian law on the part of
peacekeeping operations and other missions authorized
to use force.

As a troop-contributing country committed to
upholding the rights of vulnerable groups and gravely
concerned by violations of international humanitarian
law by combatants, Togo has established, at its training
centre in Lome, a capacity-building programme for the
protection of civilians designed for soldiers and police
officers prior to their deployment in peacekeeping
operations.

Besides all of those measures aimed at protecting
civilians, it is vital that countries apply the provisions
of the relevant international legal instruments. Under
no circumstances should the perpetrators of crimes
against civilians find sanctuary or protection in any
Member State. Members ofthe Lord's Resistance Army
and the warlords from eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo who are still at large must be arrested and
delivered to the competent tribunals.

We believe that it is important to reiterate that
respect for the law and the rules by all combatants,
the protection of civilians by peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations missions, humanitarian
access and the protection of humanitarian workers, and
accountability are the main measures that the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, should
highlight in the context of efforts to protect civilians
in armed conflict. Reinforcing those measures through
training and information sessions for the benefit of
military officials is necessary. But for those measures
to succeed, justice needs to be rendered and the
perpetrators of criminal acts need to be arrested, tried
and convicted.

