Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Polish presidency, especially
Poland's Minister for Foreign Affairs, for convening
today's open debate on a priority issue, the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We appreciate the
important briefings by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa Edwar.

As a country, Peru is committed to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law. We
are party to the fundamental international instruments
on both matters, whose provisions are duly reflected,
developed and implemented in our domestic legislation.
At the international level, we actively promote their
progressive development, and in the Security Council
we consider the responsibility to protect civilians a high
priority, in line with international humanitarian law. We
are therefore seriously concerned about the impunity
that we see for violations of international humanitarian
law today, in some cases where the Council is unable to
live up to its responsibilities.

Accordingly, we stress that it is our moral and legal
obligation to act together to put an end to the suffering
that millions of people in various conflicts and regions
around the world are experiencing, for different
reasons. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
fact that 116 States, including Peru and eight other
members of the Security Council, have signed the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, which commits us to acting
in a timely and determined manner to prevent and put
an end to heinous crimes. In that regard, we believe
that every State's sovereignty implies a primary
responsibility to protect its population, and that when
national authorities fail to protect their populations, the
international community, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, must take on that responsibility.
We emphasize that a number of peacekeeping
operations deployed in accordance with the decisions of
the Security Council have mandates to protect civilians,
including from the actions of their own Governments'
regular armies. The obligation of every State to comply
with international humanitarian law includes ensuring
the training of its armed forces for that purpose. Peru
has taken various initiatives in this regard that are
reflected in the efforts of our troops deployed in various
peacekeeping operations.

As the Secretary-General reiterated this morning,
prevention is the most effective way to protect, and we
therefore stress the importance of seeing sustainable
peace as a permanent objective, centred on the human
person and on the institutions and processes required
to prevent or resolve violent conflicts. Among other
things, that involves full respect for the rule of law
at the national and international levels. It is therefore
essential that the Security Council, whose primary
responsibility is the maintenance ofinternational peace
and security, pay attention to the root causes of conflict
and the observance of human rights. It is equally
essential to ensure accountability for the commission
of heinous crimes.

The universalization of international criminal
jurisdiction and the predictability of access to justice
should enable more effective prevention of the suffering
that conflicts too often inflict on civilians. In that
regard, we encourage all States to accede to the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. We also urge that the Council refer situations
to the Court where atrocities have been committed and
access to justice and accountability must be ensured.

We would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
various agencies and humanitarian workers, such as the
Red Cross and the Blue Helmets, who are dedicated to
protecting civilians, often at the risk of their own lives.

