Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Permit me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of October. It is regrettable
that this should be the first meeting of your presidency,
but the matter before us is a situation of which the
Council had to be seized and on which it must adopt a
position. I am sure that, under your guidance, we will
continue to have a very fruitful month of deliberations.
I would also like to seize this opportunity to extend to
Sir Emyr Jones Parry my congratulations for his very
skilful stewardship of the Council during the past
month.

I note with regret that the deplorable acts of war
that we are examining this afternoon - which
represent a very serious escalation of violence in a
situation that is already dangerously affecting world
peace - namely the direct strikes on Damascus and
also the recent attacks in Haifa, are taking place in a
context in which a relatively shaky peace already
prevails. The situation we are examining demonstrates
the real fragility of the situation and the need for a
more comprehensive peace agreement for the entire
Middle East region.

We need to see a real commitment by the parties
to this conflict to put a stop to the logic of violence.
Violence is not stopped with violence. We reiterate our
appeal to the States in the region to create a climate
conducive to progress in the implementation of the
road map, which, alone, will bring a stop to the
building of walls, or to the acts that took place over the
weekend in Haifa and in Damascus. My delegation
unequivocally condemns such acts. A clear
commitment to peace and moderation in the Middle
East is long overdue.

At the heart of this situation clearly lies the
unresolved Palestinian question. In the face of failure
to achieve a satisfactory conclusion, with
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and progress on the road map, the Council
must continue to make unceasing demands that true
advances be made.

I would like to end by saying that the resolution
that we have been presented this afternoon clearly calls
for a position to be adopted by our Council, and we
shall put ours forward following consultations with my
authorities in the capital.

