Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The United
States has a deep and enduring interest in the welfare of
Iraqi citizens living under the regime of Saddam Hussein.
We took a leading role in shaping the oil-for-food
programme from its original conception shortly after the
liberation of Kuwait in 1991. We note with satisfaction the
documented success of this important humanitarian effort.
Oil-for-food is the largest humanitarian assistance effort in
United Nations history, and it has brought about a
significant improvement in living conditions for the civilian
population throughout Iraq.

As all of us know, normal United Nations operations
are ongoing throughout Iraq. Despite the Iraqi
Government's unjustified recent decision to curtail
authorized oil production and exports, large quantities of
humanitarian supplies continue arriving in the country on a
daily basis. There has been no disruption of humanitarian
assistance under the oil-for-food programme, and it is a
matter of the utmost importance that the programme
continue without disruption.

For that reason, we applaud the action the Council has
taken today in acting to extend phase VI of the programme
for seven days, through December 11. This resolution
ensures that essential humanitarian assistance can continue
while the Security Council prepares for adoption of a
comprehensive resolution on Iraq next week. Adoption of
that resolution, which includes many important provisions
bearing on the oil-for-food programme, will clear the way
for action on a full six-month extension of the programme
a week from now. That resolution will represent the
culmination of many months of work by the Council, and
needs to be in place before we turn our attention to
authorizing a full phase VII of oil-for-food.

We also commend the leadership of the Office of the
Iraq Programme in managing the oil-for-food programme,
especially in light of the obstacles recently erected by the
Iraqi regime. We call upon the Government of Iraq to
cease the cynical posturing we have seen over the past
two weeks, to resume authorized oil production and
exports without delay and to cooperate fully with the
programme during the coming week and in the future.

In closing, I would recall that the oil-for-food
programme, as established by the Council in resolution
986 (1995), is a temporary measure. It was never intended
to usurp the primary responsibility for meeting civilian
needs in Iraq, which continues to reside with the
Government of that country. The United Nations has been
compelled to take this temporary measure because of the
blatant disregard which the Iraqi regime has demonstrated
for the well-being of the Iraqi people. The United States
will continue to support the uninterrupted continuation of
this programme as long as it remains necessary for the
international community to address urgent civilian needs
which the Iraqi Government chooses to ignore.

