Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for the information he has provided
on the state of affairs in Darfur and the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in the region. We welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
at today's briefing.

We agree with the conclusions of the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General (S/2019/816) that the
direction of events in Darfur has not significantly
changed and, most importantly, that no negative trends
have emerged on the security front. The isolated
clashes in J ebe1 Marra between Government forces and
the Sudan Liberation Movement/Abdul Wahid, which
continues to be the main spoiler of the peace process,
does not change that assessment.
We also see some normalization on the humanitarian
front, while the overall evolution of the situation in the
areas that the Blue Helmets have already left gives no
grounds for concern. We therefore believe it is essential
to stay the course for the phased drawdown and
withdrawal of UNAMID in accordance with the time
frame established in resolution 2429 (2018). We hope
that the dialogue with the Sudanese authorities will help
to create the appropriate conditions and determine the
parameters for the subsequent United Nations presence
in Darfur.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation, which was deployed 12 years ago, made it
possible to tackle an acute phase of the crisis, and an
analysis of its activities will be extremely important for
future peacekeeping operations. However, the challenges
now facing Darfur are of a peacebuilding rather than
a peacekeeping nature. The time has come to focus
on Darfur's restoration and economic development,
and that is what should be the priority now. We want
to point out that this was the unifying thread running
through the statements made during the 27 September
high-level event on Sudan held on the margins of the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy
fourth session. In addition to this, many speakers called
for lifting all the sanctions on Khartoum. That would
go a long way to simplifying the new authorities' job of
reviving the country's economy. That appeal, which we
support, is also in the special report.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
we assume that the opinion of the Government in
Khartoum, as the host party, should be decisive in
every case, in accordance with the basic principles
of peacekeeping. Moreover, given the complicated
domestic political situation in the country, we call for
understanding regarding possible delays in the Sudan's
response to issues related to agreeing on the parameters
of the mission that will succeed UNAMID.

