Mr. Ndekhedehe (Nigeria): I wish to join those
who spoke before me in congratulating you, Sir for
your presidency of the Security Council for this month.
The prevalence of acts of international terrorism in
recent years and the possibility of terrorist or non-State
actors having access to weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) have made it necessary for the United Nations
to urgently initiate efforts and effective measures to
address this serious problem. In this regard, the
Nigerian delegation appreciates the motivation behind
draft resolution on non-proliferation, which is now
before the Security Council. There is, therefore, a need
for urgent action.

However, it is important to note that the existence
of multilateral instruments on nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, which are invariably the same
weapons of mass destruction that the draft resolution is
seeking to address. The main aim of the existing
multilateral instruments is the total elimination of
WMD, which will guarantee their inaccessibility to
terrorists or non-State actors.

The Nigerian delegation shares the common view
that this objective can only be achieved through
commitment by all States parties to their obligations
under these instruments. We believe that the threat
posed by WMD is of such a serious nature that the
international community should deal with it most
decisively. In this regard, the international community
should not merely manage the existence of such weapons,
as the draft resolution seems to suggest; rather my
delegation wishes to express its concern that the draft
resolution has failed in making disarmament its goal
but instead seeks to make non-proliferation the goal.

The apparent intention of the draft resolution is to
fill any perceived gap in the existing instruments
brought about by the activities of non-State actors,
especially terrorist groups, in their use of WMDs.
Doing so will certainly require the cooperation of all
United Nations Member States, as envisaged by the
draft resolution, on whom it would eventually become
binding. For this reason, it is appropriate that the views
and concerns of Member States be taken into account
in drafting the resolution. In this regard, the aim and
spirit of the United Nations Charter concerning
international peace and security will be better
promoted if matters of WMD and proliferation are
multilaterally negotiated, rather than imposed through
Council mandates.

By invoking Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, the draft resolution appears to express the
readiness of the Security Council to apply enforcement
action against Member States that may fail to comply.
There are therefore far-reaching implications when
Chapter VII is invoked, depending on the specific
circumstances.

Finally, a draft resolution with such grave
implications as the one under consideration should be
temporary for greater legitimacy and accountability
and contain adequate safeguards. Consequently there
should be provisions for its replacement by a
multilaterally negotiated instrument on the same
subject on a more permanent basis.

