Mr. Inzko: As we stand ready to commemorate
the one hundredth anniversary of the outbreak of the
First World War and the tragic loss of life and suffering
that followed, our continued commitment to our shared
goal of irreversible peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
more important than ever. Our continued commitment
is important to the country, its people and the wider
region, but it is also important for the affirmation of the
inviolable values and principles of peace, coexistence,
mutual respect and the sanctity of sovereign States that
we hold so dear.

If ever there was a year for us to learn from the
mistakes of the past and to remind ourselves that what
happens to Bosnia and Herzegovina is important far
beyond its borders, that year is 2014. It is precisely
because ofthis that I would like to take this opportunity
to express my support for the French-led efforts to mark
the hundredth anniversary of the First World War in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which I hope will be used not
to promote division and conflict but to reflect on the
importance of peace.

(spoke in French)

I especially want to thank France and its Ambassador
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Roland Gilles, for his
positive and visionary approach to commemorating
the centenary of the Sarajevo assassination. In this
context, I welcome the initiative taken by France and
its centennial mission, which has devoted great energy
to sending a message from Sarajevo built around the
theme of reconciliation. On the initiative of France,
we shall together send a message of brotherhood and
peace to the world on 28 June. This noble message will
be reinforced by the concert for peace to be given in
Sarajevo by the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra that
same day.

(Spoke in English)

Sadly, in the six months that have elapsed since
I was last here, the actions and behaviour of some of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's elected officials and political
leaders suggest that they have learned little from the
mistakes of the past. The same old mistake - putting
the interests of a privileged political class before those
of the country and its citizens - continues to be made.
Not once, not twice but over and over again. I say this
because the status quo and the current way of doing
politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina are so very clearly
working forjust a chosen few - those who are in power
or close to power.

Conversely, it is simply not working for the
average citizen in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack
of urgency to reach the healthy compromises that are
in the interests of the overwhelming majority of the
people of the country and are clearly necessary to take
the country forward is becoming ever more difficult
to understand and impossible to defend. Entirely
predictably, the political situation has continued to
deteriorate. A snapshot of the past six months tells us
all we need to know.

First, progress on Euro-Atlantic integration has
ground to a halt despite the commendable efforts of
the European Union and NATO. What is the reason?
Yet again, Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders
were unable to reach an agreement on changes that are
required to implement the European Court of Human
Rights judgement in the Sejdic-Finci case, which is
a condition for the country to move forward towards
European Union candidacy and ensure the equality of
all citizens. Similarly, a lack of progress on military
property continues to prevent Bosnia and Herzegovina
from activating its membership action plan with NATO.

Secondly, despite notable increases in exports, the
overall economic situation remains very difficult, with
the entities relying on external budgetary support to
pay the bills. Unemployment now stands at 44 per cent.

Thirdly, the legislative output of the State
institutions continues to fall well short of the needs of
the country, with more new laws being rejected than
are adopted.

Fourthly, many verdicts of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court, which are final
and binding under the terms of the Peace Agreement,
remain unimplemented. As a result, for example, voters
in Mostar continued to be denied the right to elect their
local Government, which should have happened in
2012.

And as if all this were not enough, challenges to the
Peace Agreement became ever more frequent and direct
as the reporting period progressed. Senior politicians
from Republika Srpska have sought to exploit the
deeply worrying events in Ukraine to promote their
own separatist agendas, and have repeatedly called
for and predicted the end of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Calls for a referendum on secession have similarly been
repeated time and time again.

I have made it clear repeatedly that the Dayton
Peace Agreement does not allow for the entities to
secede. The international community must continue
to say clearly that our commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
absolute. That is exactly what the 28 Foreign Ministers
of the European Union did in April.

Regrettably, I am obliged to inform the Council that
once again the challenges to the Peace Agreement in the
reporting period included not only statements, but also
actions. In April, the Republika Srpska Government, at
entity level, adopted Government decisions to regulate
issues related to residence in response to the blockage
of amendments to the State-level law in the upper house
of the State Parliament. However, residence is regulated
by the State in all countries of the world and it must
continue to be regulated by the State, not at the entity
level. As the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board has long made clear, we cannot have the entities
taking unilateral action in this way.

Unfortunately we also saw the Federation entity
authorities acting unilaterally last year in a way that
compromised the single economic space of the country,
although thankfully that issue is now moving towards
a solution. I also regret to inform the Council that the
Republika Srpska authorities continue to refuse to
cooperate with me and my Office, as required under
annex X of the Peace Agreement, by refusing to provide
documents when they are requested to do so. The
President of the Republika Srpska has boasted publicly
that there would be no cooperation with my Office.

Sadly, positive developments have been few and
far between, but there have been some. The State
Parliament finally managed to adopt the necessary
technical amendments to enable elections to be held
as required in October. It also adopted a welcome new
law on public procurement in line with European Union
standards, and there have been important steps taken
towards the full establishment and functioning of the
Federation's Constitutional Court. There has also been
some welcome progress with the State-level electricity
transmission company TRANSCO. Furthermore, as I
mentioned earlier, the fact that exports increased last
year by 7 per cent is welcome news.

The regional situation and relations between the
country and its neighbours also continue to improve.
In this regard, Serbian Prime Minister Vucie's
groundbreaking and confidence-building visit to
Sarajevo two days ago was another significant and
indeed welcome step towards reconciliation.

Nevertheless, I am increasingly concerned that the
country is in danger of falling into a vicious downward
cycle of spiteful tit-for-tat politics that it will be difficult
to emerge from. Bosnia and Herzegovina has now been
on a downward trajectory ever since the April package
of constitutional changes was narrowly rejected in
2006. Eight years is a long time for a country to be
going the wrong way. As my Office has long warned,
the country cannot continue to go on in this way
indefinitely without serious consequences.

While nobody could predict exactly when there
would be a public backlash against the ongoing failure
of politicians to put citizens first, it was only a matter
of time before it occurred. That is what took place at
the beginning of February, when we saw large-scale
protests. Central to the demands of the protesters was
that the authorities should finally get serious about
dealing with the mounting economic and social problems
facing ordinary people and the rampant corruption
gripping the country. Regrettably, the protests turned
briefly violent on 7 February and significant damage
was done to a number of public buildings in Sarajevo,
Tuzla, Zenica and Mostar, with notable numbers of
police officers and some demonstrators being injured,
but thankfully without any loss of life. Peaceful protests
continued thereafter, including some in Republika
Srpska.

The response ofthe political class was mixed. While
some politicians understood the clear message of those
protesting, others sought to misrepresent the protests
as ethnically motivated or organized from outside the
country. That was simply not the case. Democracy is
not just a matter of holding elections every four years,
it also happens in between. In that respect, the peaceful
protests and civic gatherings known as plenums
represent a positive step forward in strengthening
Bosnia and Herzegovina's democracy. That new civic
engagement is in a sense a sapling and, as we all know,
even the tallest of oaks has to start to grow somewhere.
What is now required is for the sapling to be nurtured
and supported by us for as long as it takes. In this
election year, it is especially important that the growth
in activism continue in the form of greater participation
in all aspects of the election process, from the selection
of candidates to discussions of concrete issues to voting
on election day.

We are now less than five months from the next
general elections, which I believe will be the most hotly
contested elections since the Dayton Peace Agreement
was signed in 1995. I cannot hide my concern about
the challenges that face us before election day. I am
particularly concerned that in the coming months the
ongoing controversy over residency and voting rights
could lead to disputes on the ground, especially in
municipalities across the Republika Srpska. That is a
scenario that all involved must do everything in their
power to avoid. It is especially important that no one
be discriminated against on the basis of ethnicity or
because they are returnees. I am similarly concerned
that the election campaign will once again be dominated
by attempts to raise inter-ethnic tensions as a means
to divert attention from the real problems facing the
country.

What Bosnia and Herzegovina badly needs to
see in the forthcoming election campaign is a frank,
robust and action-oriented public debate on how
rampant corruption, exceedingly high unemployment
and, of course, the lack of progress on Euro-Atlantic
integration are going to be urgently overcome by the
incoming Government after the elections. We need to
hear more about plans to reform the economy and create
jobs, which are in the vital interests of all citizens ofthe
country regardless of ethnic group.

The demonstrations we have seen are a clear
wake-up call for the political establishment in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also for the international
community. As one of my predecessors pointed out
recently, ifwe go on doing what we are doing we will go
on getting what we are getting. After the next elections,
therefore, there is going to have to be a fundamental
change in the way politics is conducted in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to focus on the needs of all citizens,
not just on the appetites of a chosen few.

Similarly, the international community's approach
Will need to evolve, and it must do more to factor in the
specificities of Bosnia and Herzegovina's history, its
post-war settlement and the risks to its future stability.
With that in mind, let me take this opportunity to express
my very strong support for the robust policy direction
laid out by the Foreign Ministers of the European Union
in their conclusions of 14 April, which I have already
mentioned. I should also like to highlight the excellent
cooperation and coordination that exists between
European Union Representative Peter Sorensen and
me, as well as between our offices on the ground.

Clearly, our job in Bosnia and Herzegovina is not
yet complete. This is the time to reaffirm our vision
of a united and reintegrated Bosnia and Herzegovina
that is the lynchpin of a peaceful and prosperous
region. This is the time to regroup and to recalibrate
our approach. This is the time to stand together
united in support of the values and principles I spoke
about at the beginning of my statement. That means
supporting those within the country who are ready to
work together to reach the healthy compromises that
are necessary to take the country forward. It means
that we must stand firm against those who seek to sow
division and disintegration. And it also means that we
re-examine our approach while preserving the tools
that have ensured the peace, including the European
Union military mission with an executive mandate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way since
1995, but there is still some way to go. Let us make sure
that we continue to give the country the support it still
needs to complete its long journey to lasting peace and
stability.

