Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda for their reports, transmitted to the Council in
May in documents S/2004/420 and S/2004/34l
respectively, and for the useful supplementary
information they have provided today on the status of
the implementation of their completion strategies.

From the outset, France supported the idea of
completion strategies for the two Tribunals, as initially
proposed by their respective Presidents. The objective
is both legitimate and necessary: no one wants the
work of those two ad hoc courts to continue
indefinitely. That would be in the interest neither of the
Tribunals nor of the proper administration of justice.
At the same time, the completion strategies of the two
Tribunals should not and will not be interpreted as
setting cut-off dates for investigations, judgements or
appeals. Our core principle must remain that of
ensuring that the main persons responsible for the most
serious crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia and
during the genocide in Rwanda are brought to justice
and punished for their crimes. We must therefore join
the need to eliminate impunity with the need to
preserve the intended role of the Tribunals as ad hoc,
not standing, courts.

Here, France welcomes the various concrete
measures already adopted by the Tribunals, as
described in their respective reports, with a View to
implementing their completion strategies. It goes
without saying, of course, that such internal measures
must be adopted and implemented with full respect for
the competencies of the various organs of the Tribunals
and for the independence of their Prosecutors, as
stipulated in the Statutes of the Tribunals. My country
is firmly committed to that principle and recalled it at
the time of the Council's adoption of resolution 1534
(2004).

When necessary, the Council too must make a
contribution, as it did, for instance, with respect to the
appointment of ad litem judges and to the recent
expansion of their competencies.

But such praiseworthy and Vital internal measures
alone are not enough to attain the goal. Nothing would
be worse than avoiding the issue and forgetting that the
exit strategy which the Council first formulated and
endorsed in resolution 1503 (2003) can be successful
only if the whole international community is fully
mobilized and takes the relevant action. Members of
the United Nations must honour their financial
commitments to the Tribunals, which at present, as the
Secretary-General has once again reiterated, is far from
the case. In fact, we cannot ask the Tribunals to do
anything more to implement their completion strategies
without also providing the financial resources that they
have been promised and on which they have every
right to count.

Above all, all States - first and foremost
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia -
must cooperate actively and in good faith with the
Tribunals. I would recall that such cooperation is
obligatory under the Tribunal Statutes, which were
adopted through Security Council resolutions under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It is a matter of particular
concern that the Tribunals are enjoying only partially
or not at all the cooperation of all the States most
directly concerned, whether with respect to the arrest
and transfer to The Hague or Arusha of accused
persons who remain at large or with respect to access
to witnesses and the provision of documents. The lack
of cooperation brought to the Security Council's
attention, particularly with regard to Serbia and
Montenegro, the Republika Srpska and Rwanda, must
come to an end, and it is up to the Security Council to
recall and ensure respect for, if necessary, the
obligation to cooperate. That is particularly necessary
because such lack of cooperation can only impede and
delay the implementation of the completion strategies
of the two Tribunals. Can one conceive that the dates
contained in that plan - for the conclusion of
investigations by 2004, of judgements by 2008 and of
appeals by 2010 - can be reasonably maintained
without the arrest and the transfer of suspects at large,
particularly Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic, Mr. Gotovina
and Mr. Kabuga? It is clear to my delegation that the
answer to that question can only be negative.

In that context, it is important that the competent
national jurisdictions be able to judge, under conditions
respectful of international standards of justice, the
cases relating to the mid- or low-ranking suspects that
will be transferred to them by the two Tribunals. It
must be noted that that objective, which is an integral
part of the completion strategy of the work of the two
Tribunals, is far from being achieved and can be
achieved only if the States involved and the
international community become increasingly
mobilized to enable relocation of these cases as soon as
possible. The establishment of the special War Crimes
Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a positive step.

As emphasized by the statements just made by
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the two Tribunals,
the various prerequisites are far from being met at this
time. Much remains to be done in order to meet those
objectives within the context of the envisaged
timetable.

In conclusion, I should like to ask the authorities
of the two Tribunals exactly how and when they think
it will be possible to relocate, under proper conditions,
some cases to competent national jurisdictions and
what criteria will be followed. I would also like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda for the clarifications he has given
on investigations and cases directly involving former
members of the Rwanda Patriotic Army. From what he
has said, I have understood that those investigations
are not among the ones to be thrown out, which my
delegation welcomes. Rather, they are the focus of a
specific assessment that will not be subject to the
deadline to conclude investigations by the end of 2004.
It will be important that the Security Council be kept
informed of developments relating to these inquiries
and their assessment.

