I wish first to thank the briefers. The political situation in the Sudan has changed dramatically since the Council began to reflect on the future of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is not sparing the Sudan, we are reminded of the need to be a reliable partner to the Sudan in its pursuit of a successful political, economic and social transition. That very sense of partnership guides the European Union's support to the Sudan. The past few months have shown undeniable positive developments. We welcome the efforts of the transitional Government, led by Prime Minister Hamdok, to restore peace nationwide. Yet important steps remain to be taken, with the additional challenge of dealing with the human and economic impact of COVID-19. In Darfur, progress towards concluding talks justifies cautious optimism, but the serious security incidents and intercommunal violence show how fragile the progress is. As violence against internally displaced persons, women and children, in particular sexual violence, continues, the authorities' lack of capacity to fully protect civilians is laid bare. We welcome the proposals contained in the special report regarding the follow-on United Nations presence after UNAMID's departure (S/2020/202). We also thank Prime Minister Hamdok for sharing his vision. The areas for future cooperation between the transitional Government and the United Nations throughout the Sudan are many. They will include support for the transition in general as well as support for the peace process, the coordination of humanitarian aid, institutional capacity-building, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, the return of displaced persons and transitional justice. The fragile situation in several areas of Darfur will continue so long as the root causes of conflict are not fully tackled; the follow-on mission will play an important role in addressing those root causes. It is our view, however, that its mandate must also include the protection of civilians, beyond mere advisory efforts and in cooperation with the Sudanese authorities. Support for strengthening human rights and rule of law throughout the country will need to be at the core of the mission. Accountability is key to achieving and sustaining peace. In this regard, we commend the Government's commitment to transitional-justice processes and recent statements regarding cooperation with the International Criminal Court. We have an opportunity to build lasting peace in Darfur. We fully support the Sudanese authorities in their efforts to end the existing conflicts and establish peace. We call on all parties, in particular the armed movements, to continue constructive negotiations.
