The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Peru,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer ofthe Observer State ofPalestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Neville Melvin Gertze, Vice-Chairman,
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, and His Excellency Mr. Joao Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.

Ipropose also that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/305, which contains a letter dated
10 April 2017 from my delegation addressed to the
Secretary-General transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

I welcome Mr. Mladenov and give him the floor.

