The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

Before turning to Abyei and the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), I
would like to do what our South African colleague
suggested - to look at the current political environment
in Abyei. With regard to the Sudan, we are following
events very closely. We see that the Sudanese people are

standing up peacefully and with determination for their
legitimate demands. Germany echoes what the African
Union and the European Union High Representative
Mogherini have said in calling for a swift handover to
a civilian-led transitional Government. I can only echo
what Mr. Onanga-Anyanga has said with regard to the
fact that the gains achieved so far should not be lost.

Turning to South Sudan, the peace process is at a
crossroads. The date 12 May is approaching. Essential
questions regarding the security arrangements and
borders have not yet been resolved. Germany calls on
the South Sudanese leaders to do their utmost so that
in time the Transitional Government of National Unity
is established.

Turning to UNISFA, I would first like to pay tribute
to all its personnel and the troop- and police-contributors
that are active in the mission, in particular Ethiopia. I
express my condolences over the three peacekeepers
who lost their lives. UNIFSA continues to be crucial
to stabilizing Abyei as long as there is no political
settlement and no Government structures that address
the lack of socioeconomic development, criminality
and the increased availability of small arms.

With respect to its new mandate, we believe
that UNIFSA must be equipped so that it can fulfil
its mandate and address the challenges that I have
just described.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendations. UNIFSA should address the crime
rate and support community-level peace processes,
mediation and dialogue. My South Africa colleague has
just pointed to specific communities. It is an obligation
for UNIFSA to contribute in that regard. It should also
advance its support to the African Union Commission,
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
and the two parties.

I want to echo what half of the members of the
Security Council said with regard to the strengthening
of the police component. I urge the Sudan to issue
visas without delays. As my United Kingdom colleague
requested, in his statement the Sudanese representative
could perhaps address that issue and make a commitment
that the visas will finally be issued.

We must strengthen the civilian component
of the mission and support the community-level
reconciliation, as I have mentioned earlier, but of course
the mission needs the staff for that. We would also like

to highlight the need to strengthen the human rights
monitoring component, including regarding assessing
and combating sexual and gender-based violence, as
well as fighting impunity and implementing the spirit
and letter of resolution 2467 (2019).
In conclusion, the international community cannot
solve the issues for the Sudan and South Sudan. The
countries themselves must engage. We need timelines.
We call on the parties to resume regular meetings of
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. We also urge that
consultations on Abyei at the ministerial level be
resumed as soon as possible.

Finally, Germany underlines and believes it
essential to ensure the full and meaningful participation
of women at all stages of the political process and
peacebuilding in Abyei, as well as other conflicts. They
can count on Germany's support for such efforts.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

