Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I have circulated my
statement and will therefore not read it out in its entirety.

There can be no military solution to the conflict
in Syria. Pouring more weapons into the conflict will
only prolong the human suffering. For this reason,
Norway welcomes the Secretary-General's convening
ofthe second Geneva Conference on Syria, and we look
forward to attending. We also reiterate the Secretary-
General's call to the Syrian parties to ensure the full
and effective participation of women. The logic of
peace must replace the logic of war.

We urge both sides of the conflict to accept the
invitation to the negotiating table and to embark on
the challenging process of reaching agreement on an
inclusive, Syrian-led transition and solution to the
conflict. Going to the negotiating table is the first step.
Remaining at the table is even more important.

It is vital that the conference yield concrete results.
Violence must end. Ceasefires must be declared.
Immediate, full and unimpeded humanitarian access
must be ensured and humanitarian principles respected.
Syrian women and civil-society actors must be actively
involved in the negotiations. That will increase the
legitimacy ofthe process. The international community
must come together in demanding an end to the
conflict, as it did on the issue of the destruction of
Syria's chemical weapons. In our view, taking steps of
this kind could facilitate an agreement on a transitional
governing body, as outlined in the Geneva communique
of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

The humanitarian challenge is still enormous, and
it will remain with us for years. We need to do even
more. Assistance to Syria's neighbouring countries
must be stepped up. Norway pledged $65 million in
humanitarian assistance and $10 million for assisting
Syria's neighbouring countries at the second Kuwait
pledging conference.

The destruction of Syria's chemical weapons is well
under way under the supervision of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations. Norway is proud to be a part of that joint effort
to eliminate those deadly weapons. We urge all parties
involved to fulfil their international commitments to
ensure that the chemical weapons are removed from
Syria and destroyed within the agreed time frames.

The Middle East peace process is at a decisive
phase. We commend President Obama and Secretary
Kerry's leadership and dedication. Norway believes
that given the broader situation in the region, this is
the time for Palestinians and Israelis to agree on ending
the conflict. A two-State solution whereby Israel and
Palestine can live side by side in peace and security is
indeed within reach. The process shows how difficult
the outstanding questions are: security, borders, the
status of Jerusalem and refugees. Reaching agreement
involves painful concessions and tough decisions,
for both sides. Therefore, we urge the leaders on
both sides to show courage and determination at this
critical moment. This historic opportunity must not
be squandered. Norway believes that such a historic
compromise will be possible only if the core needs of
both parties are duly addressed, and met, in a fair and
balanced way.

Norway aligns itself with the position of the
European Union (EU), as set out in the December 2009
EU Council conclusions, regarding the parameters for
a solution to the outstanding questions. The solution
must be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Oslo Accords and subsequent
agreements. We cannot allow the negotiations to be
derailed. Norway condemns all use of violence. Norway
calls for the parties to refrain from unilateral acts that
could undermine the talks, change the situation on
the ground or prejudge the outcome of the final-status
negotiations. Settlement activities must stop.

Norway is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
call for the lifting of the restrictions in compliance
with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) in all its
elements, including the need for security for all civilian
populations.

The institutional basis for an independent Palestine

is already in place. However, the Palestinian Authority
will continue to need generous financial support from
donors in 2014 to support the efforts to achieve peace.
Assistance to the Palestinian Authority amounted to
$1.25 billion last year, a big improvement over the year
before. That still leaves a budget deficit, which will
add to Palestine's public debt. Norway urges donors to
remain generous in their contributions to the Authority
while the Palestinians strive to reach a negotiated
settlement with Israel. We plan to hold a new meeting
of the donors group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, in late spring this year, in Brussels. There,
we will review assistance for 2014.

