Mr. Mayr-Harting: As this is the first occasion that
I have had the chance to speak under your presidency of
the Council, Sir, I would like to congratulate you and
China on assuming the presidency this month and to
thank Azerbaijan and its Permanent Representative for
their work last month.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate country Montenegro; the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.

I join other speakers in welcoming my friend High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina Valentin
Inzko back to the Council. I thank him for his work and
would like to reassure him of our continued support.

While Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to enjoy a
clear European perspective, which has been repeatedly
reaffirmed by the European Union, its institutions
have thus far failed to achieve the necessary progress
in meeting key European Union requirements. The
European Union will continue its efforts to facilitate
the necessary domestic political agreements, but it is
up to the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
make the necessary progress.

The lack of political will among local political
forces to work out compromises in the interest of the
common good continue to have a negative impact on
the overall reform process. Regrettably, the country
remains unable to consolidate itself as a viable
democracy and make progress on its EU path. Indeed,
the persistent domestic political stalemate is cause of
disappointment for all who wish to see Bosnia and
Herzegovina succeed.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has come far since
the end of a tragic war almost two decades ago. The
security environment is now calm and stable, and the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have thus far
proven capable of dealing with threats to the country's
safe and secure environment. Nevertheless, in spite of a
stable security environment, the political environment
remains complex. Inter-ethnic reconciliation in general
is slow, and the country's politics remain driven by
ethnic rather than civic principles. It seems difficult for
the political leadership of the three constituent peoples
to reach out across ethnic lines and attempt to build
a broader political consensus. In addition, the fragile
socioeconomic situation of large parts of the population
has the potential to further increase political instability.

A transformation of the country's politics is long
overdue, as political parties remain entrenched in local
political perspectives and unwilling to see that, as a
result, Bosnia and Herzegovina is increasingly lagging
behind its neighbours in the region.

In accordance with the objectives set out by the
Security Council, the European Union continued
to further strengthen its engagement with Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to facilitate stability and
progress, using a broad range of political and technical
instruments. The strengthening the European Union's
field presence in the Brcko district, Mostar and Banja
Luka has also facilitated communication and exchanges
on EU priorities with citizens throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea - the
European Union's military operation - continues to
support the competent Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities in maintaining a safe and secure
environment in the country. EUFOR Althea focuses on
capacity-building and training, but also maintains the
means to contribute to Bosnia and Herzegovina's own
deterrence capacity. The European Union will keep the
Operation under regular review, including on the basis
of the situation on the ground, with a view to making
progress on the conditions conducive to the delivery of
its mandate.

The successful holding last month of the first phase
of the public census, which is the first in the post-
war period, needs to be recognized. The census will,
among other results, provide important statistical data,
including as regards the future needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU accession process.

While that progress is welcome, the key
requirements for progress on the EU path remain
unchanged and have not yet been met. As the Council
has also pointed out, the European Court of Human
Rights ruling in the Sejdic-Finci case still needs to
be implemented. That ruling embodies the principle
of ethnic non-discrimination, a core value of the EU
and the United Nations. Despite the strong facilitation
efforts ofboth Commissioner Fiile and European Union
Special Representative Sorensen, political parties have
thus far been unable to come to an agreement on the
relevant constitutional changes. Personal, party and
ethnic agendas continue to block progress on achieving
a compromise on that important question.

The implementation of the ruling and the subsequent
entry into force of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement would allow the European Union to
consider as credible a possible application by Bosnia
and Herzegovina for European Union membership.
Furthermore, it would also generate positive momentum
in the overall process of political, economic, social and
cultural modernization.

The continued non-compliance with the ruling
of the European Court of Human Rights, along with
a persistent failure to establish effective internal
coordination on European Union affairs, is putting a
strain on Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards
the European Union, and in this context the EU is
currently reviewing its pre-accession assistance.

Through Croatia's accession, as the Permanent
Representative of Croatia just pointed out, the
European Union now has a 1,000 kilometre-long land
border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. This represents
an opportunity to strengthen mutual cooperation and
further promote European Union values. We call on
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to resolve
outstanding adaptation issues as a matter of priority.
The European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country. We
remain ready to provide the necessary assistance in all
required areas in order to take the country forward on
its reform agenda towards the European Union. At the
same time, we call on all political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to acknowledge their responsibilities and
to show greater leadership in taking the country forward
on the European path, in line with the expectation of its
citizens.

