Mr. Bogaert (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
Venezuela for organizing this open debate.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. We wish to add some
remarks based on, inter alia, our participation in the
Burundi and Central African Republic configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Since the establishment of the peacebuilding
architecture, the peacebuilding paradigm has changed
substantially. At the policy level, the challenges
linked to involvement in conflict-affected countries
have been the subject of special attention, notably
within the framework of international networks such
as the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States
and the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
State-building.
The review of the peacebuilding architecture comes
several months after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), which entails a series of interrelated
Goals, including those on ensuring sustainable
peace, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
providing access to justice for all and strengthening
accountable and effective institutions. However, fragile
countries and those affected by conflict are precisely
those that have made the least progress towards the
achievement of the previous Millennium Development
Goals. Special attention to those countries and to the
challenges that they face in terms of peacebuilding
will be all the more necessary in order to ensure their
inclusive development through sustainable peace.
Belgium has therefore decided to allocate 50 per cent of
its official development assistance to fragile and least
developed countries.

That brings me to several thoughts on the work of
the Security Council and its follow-up to the situations
brought to its attention. These thoughts have also
been inspired by our contribution to the review of
peacekeeping operations. It will also be important
to take into account the review process regarding
resolution 1325 (2000) and the results of the upcoming
World Humanitarian Summit.

Ensuring lasting peace requires better and increased
investment in conflict prevention in order to prevent
countries from sliding into, or back into, conflict. While
progress has certainly been made, the situations that
have the attention of the Security Council - including
several protracted crises, the incredibly severe
humanitarian consequences of which have had a
devastating impact on civilians - demonstrate that
such efforts are not enough. Belgium therefore calls for
greater attention to be paid to the root causes, as well
as to the factors and early signs of conflict, based on
factual analysis.

Transition and exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations should also be better organized around
political processes, which should include disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security-sector
reform, transitional justice, the strengthening of
institutions and capacity-building. Those processes
exceed the lifetime of the missions and illustrate the
need to better reflect the dimensions of peacebuilding
and development in an integrated approach to
sustainable peace. They also imply a political
commitment on the part of the host country to the
goals of the actions taken to achieve lasting peace, as
well as an inclusive dialogue with stakeholders on the
national plan. The role of civil society and women in
that inclusive dialogue will be crucial.

That leads me to mention the notion of coherence
and coordination in the activities of those involved
in peacebuilding. Given the scale and nature of the
conflicts that we encounter, a more coherent and
integrated approach and better coordination is needed,
both at Headquarters and in the field.

Based on those considerations, Belgium calls for a
far-reaching review ofthe United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. As an advisory body of the Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission can certainly add value in
terms of early warning, conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and transition in harmony, acting in close
coordination with stakeholders at Headquarters and
in the field. In any event, we must strengthen the
interaction between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

