Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari for the
information he has provided with regard to his recent
visits to Myanmar and to some concerned Asian
countries. We are happy to hear that some progress has
been made in the agenda agreed by the parties in order
to seek true national reconciliation, ensure respect for
human rights, and prepare for a transition to
democracy.

We also welcome the invitation extended to the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in
Myanmar, Mr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro, who is visiting
the country from 11 to 15 of this month. We regret,
however, the request made by the Government that the
United Nations Resident Coordinator be withdrawn
from that country.

Since the most recent crisis in October, and
despite the fact that the authorities have reduced their
military presence on the street and restored some
fundamental freedoms, we continue to hear reports of
violations of human rights and acts of repression
against the political opposition and ethnic minorities.
Although the Government's appointment of Minister
Aung Kyi to coordinate dialogue between the
authorities and the opposition is a useful decision, it is
not sustainable for leaders of the opposition, such as
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, to remain under house arrest.

Peru stresses that it is urgent for the Government
to free all political prisoners, including those arrested
during the recent demonstrations, and to take the
necessary action to launch a genuine national dialogue.
We also feel it important for the Government of
Myanmar to take all necessary measures to address
economic and humanitarian issues of concern to the
population.

The increasing number of displaced and refugees
is leading to a situation of instability that could
threaten stability within the country and the region. In
that context, Peru wishes to highlight the urgency of
providing inclusive cooperation and dialogue as the
only way to launch political changes that will lead to
national reconciliation and economic changes
conducive to stability and progress in the country. In
the context of that task, it is very important that
Myanmar's neighbours, the countries of South Asia,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
international community continue to participate and
cooperate.

Finally, now that we apparently have an
opportunity to begin a process of positive change in
Myanmar, the United Nations good offices are more
necessary than ever before. We therefore support
Mr. Gambari most firmly. His task is an especially
delicate one, given the complexity of the situation in
the country. We continue to await the future steps that
may be taken by the Government of Myanmar to
demonstrate its commitment to genuine national
reconciliation.

