Mr. Fatemi (Pakistan): 1 am delighted to be here,
Mr. President, and commend your initiative to convene
this debate on United Nations peacekeeping, with a focus
on regional partnerships. As a leading troop contributor
and a key stakeholder in United Nations peacekeeping,
Pakistan is deeply committed to collective efforts to
strengthen peacekeeping and the global and regional
partnerships that underpin it.

Regional cooperation is an important dimension
of the work of the United Nations in various fields,
ranging from peace and security to development and
human rights. The Charter of the United Nations, under
Chapter VIII, provides for a direct relationship between
the Security Council and regional arrangements and
entities. That relationship also extends to peacekeeping.

The Security Council has accorded high priority
to enhancing regional cooperation, as manifested in
its growing partnerships with Africa, including the
African Union Peace and Security Council, and with
subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the South African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The European Union has
also been an important partner for peace in various
theatres.

The Non-Aligned Movement is a key player because
its members provide more than 85 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers. Latin America has contributed
to the Council's peace efforts, particularly in that
region. Cooperation with the League of Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is
crucial to reinforcing United Nations peacekeeping and
mediation efforts in Africa and the Middle East.

It is necessary to diversify and deepen those
partnerships to give swift responses to conflicts,
promote durable solutions, ensure long-term prevention
and prevent relapse into conflicts. In that context, I
would like to highlight the following points.

First, in exercise of its mandate, the Security
Council deals with hard-core issues of peace and
security, as well the closely related issues of stability,
peacebuilding, transitionaljustice and economic revival
in post-conflict situations. If we are to ensure tangible
results in those areas, we need comprehensive strategies,
to which regional and subregional organizations
bring important complementary resources, expertise
and insight. We welcome the Secretary-General's
initiatives, built around regional partnerships that seek
to tap their full potential, such as in the case of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, and
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
We must continue to strengthen that trend.

Secondly, regional partnerships become more
significant as regions assume ownership of their peace
and security issues. Africa is a prime example. The
African Union and its subregional organizations are
increasingly in the lead in responding to conflicts, at
times acting independently and at others in support of
the United Nations. Often, African interventions have
initially restored stability and paved the way for United
Nations deployment. In some cases, most notably in
Somalia, Africa continues to shoulder the primary
responsibility for maintaining and keeping peace,
awaiting an eventual United Nations peacekeeping
operation. From those experiences, the importance of
realizing the full potential of regional partnerships,
based on complementarities and comparative
advantages, is evident. Partnerships must be anchored
in a clear strategic vision if they are to attain the
political and operational coherence needed for success.
They are also important to preventing fragmentation.

Thirdly, adequate capacity and resources are
essential for the effective planning and management of
any peacekeeping operation, whether regional, hybrid
or United Nations. Therefore, when authorized by
the Security Council, African peacekeeping missions
should be fully supported in various aspects, from
planning and funding to equipment, logistics and
training. Streamlined processes and a capability-driven
approach should guide the provision of such support for
enhanced efficiencies and effectiveness.

Fourthly, it is logical that the focus of this debate
is on Africa. The bulk of peacekeeping is currently
concentrated on that continent. Partnership with Africa
has also enabled the United Nations to intervene and
provide support in a variety of ways. There is a need
to take these partnerships to a higher plane. Strategic
cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council should be further enhanced on the basis of
mutual trust and confidence.

Pakistan has contributed to United Nations
peacekeeping for over five decades, having participated
in 41 United Nations missions in 23 countries from
Africa to South-East Asia to the Balkans and Central
America. Pakistan has always demonstrated a strong
commitment to peace and security in Africa. The bulk
of our troops is presently deployed there. Through our
experience from Liberia and Sierra Leone to Burundi,
the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we have come to appreciate the value of regional
partnerships and cooperation. Pakistan is deploying
additional troops in Darfur, and we are contributing
to the mission in the Central African Republic, despite
the daunting conditions there. In the coming years, the
Security Council would benefit by associating the OIC
and the League of Arab States with its work.

Peacekeeping is a collective responsibility of
the entire United Nations membership. It is indeed a
partnership. Individual troop-contributing countries
are the building blocks of that partnership. Regional
cooperation has the potential not only to address the
resource and capacity gaps on the security side, but also
to help formulate better and integrated strategies on the
political, humanitarian and development sides. We hope
that this debate will assist the Council in consolidating
those partnerships, in the best interests of regional and
international peace and security.

Today, the United Nations is once again under the
spotlight and close scrutiny. This body, the Security
Council, has to live up to the promises of its founding
fathers and to prove to the world that it is succeeding
in its declared objectives - namely, in maintaining
international peace and security - and that the United
Nations as a whole has the political will and the
capability to prevent and resolve conflicts. The global
citizenry is demanding that this body be more assertive
and effective in addressing the issues, whether they be
in the Middle East or in Ukraine. The importance of
peacekeeping and regional cooperation will increase
manifoldly in the coming years as new and more sinister
fault lines emerge in conflict areas.

Let us work together to avert wars and conflicts,
to fight the scourge of terrorism and to steer our planet
towards peace, harmony and sustainable development.
The Security Council has to play its rightful and pivotal
role in achieving those objectives. Pakistan stands
committed to the enhancement of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.

