The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

Undoubtedly, today in this debate what we are
talking about are the whys and hows of the working
methods that, on a daily basis, guide the work of
the Council - how it considers and and agrees on
mechanisms for action and its decision-making
processes. These are the answers we seek so as to ensure
greater consistency and coherence and to develop more
effective and transparent tools, modes and practices
that allow us to fulfil our duties.

What should we do? We know, for it is clearly
established in the Charter of the United Nations - it is
imperative. How can we and how must we work within
this body to ensure that our daily action does not
contradict our momentous duty? That is the challenge
before us. As we turn to answering those questions,
we envision a tool box. While we might believe that it
contains all of the tools, one day we may realize that
new tools are needed. Some are useful and others must
be discarded. But we must keep the necessary ones. It
is not for nothing that we say that, as non-permanent
member of the Security Council. It is not about
remaining a slave to rigidity, which ties our hands; but
it also not about destroying everything accomplished in
the past, or becoming victims of feverish innovations
with hands folded in order to work prudently and to act
lucidly.

In the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions the discussion is
focused on dialogue, as it is here. It is a matter ofkeeping
what is effective and efficient and creating what is
lacking. It involves harmonizing and reducing unclear
elements and arbitrariness. It is akin to mathematics,
in that it involves acknowledging the validity of the
working methods as confirmed by results. It involves
sowing capabilities between sand and rock. It involves
basing our practices and procedures on legitimate
norms, including practical validity, ethical legitimacy
and political necessity.

I would like to thank colleagues for their kind
words directed to the Argentine delegation. In fact,
what I would like to do in this time, at the end of our
mandate, as a member I would like to express my
gratitude and that of the Argentine delegation, because
during the past two years we have enjoyed the support
and participation of all of the members of the Council
in adopting, to date, the six presidential notes that many
colleagues have mentioned.

The dialogues with troop- and police-contributing
countries were in fact introduced by Argentina, as
was the practice of handing over the chairmanship
of the subsidiary bodies. However the dialogue with
non-member States and other bodies was - and still
is - an initiative of Australia. The intra-Council
dialogue is a Pakistani initiative.

We also turned to addressing issues that had
been dealt with over a long period of time without
achieving consensus. For example, the recently adopted
presidential note S/2014/739, concerning the list of
speakers, was an initiative of the Russian Federation.
There was also the presidential note on penholders
(S/2014/268), which is, as mentioned earlier, the
Council's first pronouncement on that item. I believe
that all of the notes have been important and necessary.
Ofcourse, they are not the only ones we need or deserve,
or even ones we can consider sufficient.

I wish to again thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, and
Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. For, while it is good
to speak about our achievements, it is also honest to state
that which Argentina was unable to achieve as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions - perhaps because it was
not yet time, or maybe because there was a need to
consider and reconsider those initiatives.

The two items we proposed involved the Council's
institutional responsibility. On the one hand, we have
maintained that the relationship between the Council
and the International Criminal Court cannot be limited
to receiving the Prosecutor's reports in a public meeting,
without providing any follow-up on the issues raised. It
is true that the Court is independent; the Council firmly
maintains that principle. But that does not mean it is an
isolated body or that we must disregard the situations
we refer. I support the words of the Prosecutor on due
process and the sanctions list.

When we began to Chair the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, we introduced a proposal to consider
extending - not in the same format, but with more
flexibility - a principle through the Ombudsperson.
The principle is due process. It is unfortunate that
the proposal has not thus far garnered the necessary
support. However, in whatever body, we will continue to
support due process in all of the Sanctions Committees.
I also support the words of the Ombudsperson.

Lastly, I would like to thank all of the members
of the Council, including those whose mandates ended
at the end of 2013, for their support in the Informal
Working Group. I thank all the States Members of the
United Nations that are taking part today in this open
debate. I also thank the non-governmental organizations
and universities that have supported us through their
requests and initiatives during our tenure.

We remain convinced that fostering genuine
openness in the methods to build information and
knowledge and an understanding of various situations
and all ofthe dimensions ofpotential and actual conflict,
implementing inclusive decision-making processes,
developing realistic and strategic programmes of action,
establishing consistent accountability mechanisms
that are accessible and transparent for the broader
membership and the international community as a
whole - all of those elements are substantive aspects
of the Informal Working Group.

We also acknowledge with equal fervour that
greater participation and more debate are needed.
Presidential note 507 suggests setting a five-minute
limit for statements and trying to respect it. In my case,
I have rarely been able to comply with that. In fact, I
understand that the use of time must be democratic
and efficient; however, I also understand that there is
much to be discussed among us. We need a great deal
of sincerity among each other. We need a policy that
I would call "making a place for victims" - a place
of dignity to ensure that there will be fewer victims.
Knowing that it is as inevitable as water being wet, we
also know that the working methods can also be and
must be improved.
Having expressed that conviction, I should like
to acknowledge that not all things are bad in the
Security Council. Those States that are going to join
as non-permanent members will be able do things,
change things, have an impact. As long as we can steel
ourselves with courage, we will have our debate in
the General Assembly on the necessary reform of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.

