Mr. Ka (spoke in French): Mr. President, allow
me at the outset to welcome you to New York and to
congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I am confident that under your able leadership,
the work of the Council will be carried out in a
constructive manner.

I should like also to take advantage of this
opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Said Ben Mustapha, Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations, on the
exemplary manner in which he guided the work of the
Council during the month of February.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, as well as to
the other members of the Council, for giving me the
opportunity, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in this important
debate on the current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.

The last time that the Council had a discussion on
this theme was at the beginning of October 2000. Even
a cursory glance at developments in recent months in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, reveals that a crisis of major proportions has
developed. In my statement to the Council on 4
October last, I said that 63 Palestinians had been killed
and more than 1,500 injured. Today, more than 360
Palestinian civilians have been killed and some 15,000
wounded. Tragically, the sad toll of Palestinian victims
includes many children, women and elderly people.
Despite the worldwide expressions of concern about
the policies of the Government of Israel, the toll
continues to rise. At the beginning of this month, the
Committee that I represent outlined its position with
respect to the dangerous security situation on the
ground, the worrying standstill in the peace
negotiations and the terrible deterioration of the
Palestinian economy.

In the course of recent months, our Committee
has noted with extreme concern the continuing cycle of
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, and the excessive reliance on
force by the Israeli Defence Forces. According to the
information available, Israel is systematically
responding with disproportionate force to every
outbreak of protest throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory. Furthermore, groups of armed settlers
regularly harass and physically assault Palestinian
civilians, destroying their property and committing
criminal acts for which they go unpunished. The Israeli
Defence Forces, the Israeli security forces and the
police often close their eyes to acts of violence and
provocation by settlers, thereby causing resentment and
anger to breed within the Palestinian population.

Paradoxically, on the one hand, a state of affairs
has been created which is fuelled by confrontation and
a cycle of violence; on the other hand, unarmed
populations are being asked to end the violence that is
triggered by provocation and punitive expeditions on
the part of the occupier.

Our Committee has also joined the international
community in condemning the practice of extra-judicial
killings of Palestinian offlcials by the Israeli security
forces. These practices are contrary to the accepted
norms of international law; such behaviour creates a
crisis of confidence among the parties, thereby pushing
back the prospect of resuming the peace negotiations.

We welcome the position of principle taken in
this regard by the European Union. The Committee
believes that the international community should not
stand idly by as the situation escalates. Indeed, it
should urgently consider ways of protecting the
Palestinian people by taking the necessary measures,
including establishing international mechanisms to
protect the Palestinian civilians. We firmly believe that
the current status quo is completely unacceptable and
untenable and that decisive action is needed to put an
end to the violence and bloodshed. Our Committee
calls upon the new Government of Israel to respect and
live up to the agreements that it has already signed and
to respect the principles of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, as well as the provisions of
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

The upheavals that we have been witnessing since
September have had a devastating effect on the
Palestinian economy, and our Committee is particularly
concerned about the dangers posed by the rapid
disintegration of the Palestinian economy as a result of
restrictive policies pursued by the Government of
Israel. The continuing closures of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, restrictions
on the movement of people and goods, the withholding
of customs and tax income and other measures of
collective punishment have had a disastrous,
cumulative effect on the Palestinian economy as a
whole. It is now impossible to work or gain access to
the labour market in Israel, the climate of violence is
keeping tourists away, food crops have been destroyed
and infrastructure has been deliberately damaged. The
Palestinians are now under siege and are forced to
struggle for survival on a daily basis, and can no longer
plan for their long-term development.

The recent reports by the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator paint a bleak and
disturbing picture of this situation, of the imminent
fiscal crisis of the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions, which are in danger of no longer being
able to function. We fully share the view that the
budgetary situation of the Palestinian Authority should
be a top priority of the international community, as
should assistance to the Palestinian people for dealing
with an overwhelming humanitarian crisis. Our
Committee welcomes the willingness of the donors to
come to the aid of the Palestinians. For its part, the
United Nations should continue to mobilize its
resources so as to provide substantial assistance to
provide for the most urgent needs.

I should now like to say a few words about the
state of the peace process. All of us here are greatly
concerned about the freeze in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations. Encouraged by the noticeable
progress achieved at Camp David, Sharm el-Sheikh
and Taba, we had reason to believe that the parties
were moving towards a real breakthrough - even,
perhaps, an agreement. These hopes have not yet been
fulfilled because some statements attributed to certain
members of the new Israeli Government show that the
Israeli side does not seem to be prepared to resume the
negotiations from the point where they were left off.

The year 2001 will mark the tenth anniversary of
the Middle East peace conference held in Madrid. The
hopes and the progress made in the past decade cannot
be allowed to wane. We should do everything in our
power to help the parties to return to the negotiating
table and complete the historic journey that they
embarked on, with courage and foresight, in 1991, and
finally achieve the peace of the brave and a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Within the
framework of this historic voyage, we should never
forget that the goal of the journey is, specifically, to
bring an end, in peace and security and through
negotiation, to the illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
position of our Committee that the United Nations,
through its various efforts and activities, should
continue to assume its permanent responsibility
towards all aspects of the question of Palestine until it
is resolved in a satisfactory manner, in conformity with
the relevant United Nations resolutions and in
accordance with international legitimacy, until the
Palestinian people fully enjoy their inalienable and
immutable rights - so that the dramatic events taking
place on the ground that have once again brought us
together in this Chamber finally become a distant
memory.

