Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to express its deep
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We concur with what you said about
how much we will regret the departure of Ambassador
Traore, who has made earnest and unstinting efforts
here at the Security Council and elsewhere in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Our
missions have enjoyed a special bond, which reflects
the relations between our two fraternal countries. We
wish Ambassador Traore every success in his future
endeavours.

My delegation would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Oshima for the important
comprehensive report that he has presented to us.

The importance of the issue stems from the fact
that the overwhelming majority of the victims of armed
conflict are civilians, millions of whom have been
killed during the past decade. Armed conflicts have
also displaced tens of millions of civilians, including
countless women and children, who have been
deprived of a dignified life that is free from fear.

It is regrettable that Africa continues to
experience situations of armed conflict, which have
devastating effects on innocent civilians. By way of
example, we cite the recent suffering of innocent
civilians in the Ituri region in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is still fresh on our minds. We
hope, in this regard, that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the transitional multinational force led
by France will continue to prevent attacks against
innocent civilians.

The United Nations has made significant progress
in recent years in tackling this question. Much remains
to be done, however, if we are to reach our desired
goal, which will require the political determination and
will of the international community and its institutions.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict must be a top
priority for the United Nations in the coming years if it
is to adequately deal with the problem.

The Middle East region offers the clearest
example of suffering of civilians in armed conflict. The
most vivid example of the problem is the failure of the
international community thus far to shoulder its
responsibilities for the protection of the unarmed
Palestinian people. The number of Palestinian victims,
including women, children and the elderly, over the last
two and a half years amounts to more than 2,460
martyrs and tens of thousands of wounded and
disabled. This is not to speak of the practices that
Mr. Oshima touched upon in his statement before the
Council this morning, such as the constant closing of
Palestinian towns and villages, blocking the delivery of
supplies and medicines to Palestinians and preventing
them from getting to hospitals and clinics. Such
practices are no different from those that Israel carries
out in the occupied Syrian Golan.

My delegation believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention must be strictly respected in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the occupied Syrian territories
and all conflict zones in the world. This requires that
the international community promptly apply
international instruments to provide civil and legal
protection under international humanitarian law and
continue to apply pressure in that regard.

My delegation affirms that reconciliation and
justice must necessarily go hand in hand in order to
deal with the root causes of conflict and prevent
impunity. We wish to stress the need to prevent parties
engaged in conflict from enjoying impunity.

The Secretary-General is to be commended for
presenting several reports on the plight of the victims
of armed conflict and the gross violations of human
rights, so that such issues can occupy a more prominent
position in the deliberations of the United Nations,
including in the Security Council.

The growing cooperation among the various
organs, agencies and departments of the United Nations
is an important factor in strengthening the work of
United Nations mechanisms to protect civilians in
armed conflict. We welcome the current cooperation
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Political Affairs and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Finally, my delegation would like to express to
Mr. Oshima its great appreciation for all the sincere
efforts that he has made in the service of the lofty aims
of our international Organization and his admirable
dedication in shouldering his responsibilities to make
our world more capable of coping with the
humanitarian questions and challenges it faces. We
wish Mr. Oshima every success in his future
endeavours.

