Mrs. Rodriguez Gomez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of President
Nicolas Maduro Moros of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important meeting on this subject.

Venezuela has historically condemned terrorism

in all its forms and wherever it originates. As we
reconsider the Middle East and what is happening there,
there is even more reason to welcome the convening of
today's meeting. The situation there is deeply worrying.
Seventy years after the birth of the United Nations,
I am ashamed to say, we are still talking about the
Palestinian issue. But there is still a moral and ethical
debt that needs to be settled there, with the stagnation
of the peace process and what is going on there. What is
going on - and what we want to warn the international
community about - is a very worrying and dangerous
situation. That political conflict, caused by Israel's
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory, has
been compounded by violence and attempts to turn the
conflict into a religious one, which could complicate
the situation in the Middle East even further.

We all agree in this Chamber when we hear about
a two-State solution, but the States must be genuinely
equal and sovereign. We cannot put together a two-State
solution in the face of the current unequal situation in
which Zionist terrorists murder the Palestinian people
and discriminate against them. As we sit here, some
Palestinian citizens, boys and girls and women, are
being prevented from gaining access to basic services
that are crucial for their survival and are being subjected
to cruelty and violence. If we truly believe in creating
two States, they must be two equal and sovereign States,
and we must join forces to turn the deadlocked peace
process into a genuine pathway through dialogue and a
peaceful settlement of the situation.

It is extremely disturbing that 70 years after the
founding of this Organization we still witness situations
that not only violate the rights of the Palestinian people
but in which the State of Israel promotes terrorism, which
in turn affects the Israeli people themselves. We cannot
talk about good terrorism and bad terrorism. When we
analyse its causes, we cannot deal with terrorism as
such; we can only react to the consequences, which suit
the various centres of power that control the daily life of
countries and their media and financial resources. We
should also be talking about the social and economic
model that breeds poverty and misery, but we must
also be honest. Terrorist groups do not emerge through
spontaneous reproduction. We would like to know who
is financing and training those terrorist groups and who
is giving them logistical support. That is something that
this multilateral forum should perhaps be investigating.

In a forum such as this, 70 years on, as we look
at the principles governing the conduct of equal and
sovereign States, it is discouraging to listen to the
arrogant, unilateral and belligerent exceptionalism
that we hear. There should be no room for that here.
Either we are a multilateral organization that respects
the conduct and standards of international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, or we are conducting an exercise in hypocrisy.

What has the Arab Spring done for these peoples?
Has it brought them greater happiness and more
democracy? Because what we are hearing today we have
heard before, all in the name of democracy, freedom
and the people's welfare. The unilateral, imperialistic
interventions we have witnessed have bypassed this
Organization, contravened the Charter and made people
less equal and more unhappy.

What has been the result in Iraq, in Libya, in
Afghanistan? The destruction of sovereign States. And
now what do we want to do for Syria? The same thing?
Can it be that the terrible photograph of a little Syrian
boy on a seashore does not affect us or touch our souls
and our hearts? How many more children must we
see die? We have heard all of this before. I must say it
frankly to the world, all of those imperialist wars have
been preceded by media wars and lies. It was lies that
led to the interventions by those countries in the Middle
East and North Africa, and 10 years later, they say that
yes, it was a lie, but we made mistakes and we have
learned a lesson. But what we see is that no lessons
have been learned.
What we realize now is that humankind has not
learned the lesson - or, rather, not humankind but
the hegemonic power centres of the world. That is why
President Maduro has called for a new configuration
of geopolitics that can truly guarantee peace, love and
happiness for humankind.

We cannot combat terrorism with more violence.
We know what happens if we fall in line with those
hegemonic centres: we get this kind of theatre. The
consequences are greater misery for the people, more
violations of human rights and greater inequality. If we
are really committed to combating terrorism, we must
do it honestly and frankly, and ensure that the lessons
of the past make us think and act differently. We cannot
continue acting this way, based on lies buttressed by
transnational communications conglomerates and the
belligerent, arrogant imperialistic power centres of
the world. That cannot bring the Syrian people more
happiness.

We must respect the principles of national self-
determination, territorial integrity and sovereignty,
because if we do not, why have we come here for the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations? Just to
discuss something very different from what it says

in the Organization's founding Charter? Why are we
here, then? We are here to enforce those purposes and
principles, because we know that in that way we can
contribute to humankind and a safer, less violent world,
if we really wish to combat terrorism. Today, in Syria,
there are more than 500 terrorist groups. Who is funding
them? We need an answer to that question. Who is
training them and giving them logistical support? What
we see are the vicious cycles of imperialism. They are
the cycles that first destroy nations and States and then
create a space where terrorist groups can proliferate.

Venezuela calls for such a new configuration. We
must abandon double standards and two-faced morals
and hypocrisy, and join together on this issue honestly
and truly prepared to combat terrorism. There should
be no excuses about how we do not like a particular
leader. The Arab Spring has already showed us what
can happen then. We must stop choosing that false and
immoral course of action. If we truly want a safer and
less violent world, we must fight the causes of terrorism
and not its consequences, which is a pretext to intervene
in other countries and trample on the Charter of the
United Nations.

We call on the United Nations to play its leadership
role and to apply international law to thugs roaming
the world with their violent armies, maintaining illegal
occupations and aggression against peoples.

