Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We are
delighted to see you, Madam, presiding over our work.
We are grateful to you for having organized this open
debate. We listened with great attention to the
outstanding briefing given by Mr. Kalomoh, as well as
to the statements by Mr. Malloch Brown and
Ms. Carolyn McAskie.

There can be no doubt that the international
community is making an enormous effort to put an end
to conflict by securing ceasefires and encouraging
warring parties to conclude peace agreements.
Concluding and implementing a peace agreement is
just the initial phase in a long process of national
reconciliation that must be encouraged and supported,
because it is the best defence against the re-emergence
of conflict. The success of national reconciliation will
determine how lasting the peace will be.

Even if conflicts in Africa have certain features in
common, every conflict has its own specific
characteristics and the actors involved vary from one
conflict to another. Examples of successful
reconciliation show that there is a need for an
integrated approach to be taken to the process of
reconciliation - an approach that looks to the long
term. The process of reconciliation cannot and should
not be a short-term exercise, because it must bring
together social, economic and political elements in a
coherent political programme, with a View to
rebuilding the State and revitalizing the institutions of
good governance. The goal should be achieved using
long-term solutions.

The specific nature of each situation must be
borne in mind, and that is why ownership of the
process of national reconciliation is crucial. The parties
must be allowed to state their views and concerns.
Participation in the process of reconciliation must be as
inclusive as possible, and the United Nations or the
regional organizations must play a facilitating and
support role in this regard.

It is important that discussions take place as much
as possible in the national language, or that
interpretation be made available, so that contributions
can be made at the grass-roots level. The national
dialogue organized in Niger with United Nations
support is an example of good practice from the
standpoint of ownership of or representation in the
process of national reconciliation.

Reconciliation involves action to prevent the re-
emergence or outbreak of an internal conflict. Here, I
would like briefly to allude to the process of
reconciliation in the context of the non-violent
restoration of democracy. Benin has had some
experience in this area. Fortunately, we did not have to
deal with an armed conflict, but all the ingredients
were present for the outbreak of civil war.

In keeping with the very African practice of
negotiating under the banyan tree, the National
Conference of February 1990 brought together
representatives of all social groups, whom we in Benin
referred to as the dynamic currents of the nation, in
order to find the most appropriate way in which to
resolve the crisis.

After eight days of debate, a consensus draft of a
social document was agreed to. The fundamental texts
were drafted and adopted during a transitional period
of 12 months, following which a new democratic
political system was established. Fourteen years later,
democracy, which was restored to Benin, is taking root
and ensuring social peace and political stability.

The success of the national reconciliation process
in Benin owes its success, first and foremost, to the
fact that the political stakeholders abandoned force and
violence. The second element - which was
decisive - was the fact that priority was accorded to
the political and economic dimension and to
restructuring the State, rather than to finger-pointing.
In order to strike a balance, to ensure that impunity was
not encouraged and to bring about social peace,
financial reparations were provided in the case of
proven human rights violations.

At a more general level, political transition has an
important role to play in the restoration of confidence
and the strengthening of national reconciliation. Given
the competition inherent in any election, hastily
organized elections could jeopardize a fragile balance
that has not been fully consolidated. A Government of
national unity or other power-sharing arrangements
may prove to be necessary - indeed, they may be
preferable.

It is often forgotten that democracy only survives
because democrats are there to guide its institutions. In
general, it is better to take the time to build a consensus
according to the rules of the political game before
embarking on the electoral process. In achieving such a
political process, rather than hastily organizing
legislative elections, it is sometimes a good idea to
establish an advisory body to consider crucial political,
economic and social questions - a body in which all
stakeholders in the country are represented.

Regarding the choice between amnesty and ad
hoc tribunals to bring about national reconciliation and
lasting peace, here again we believe that the nature of
each conflict and of the reparations to be made should
prevail. There needs to be a process of reflection on the
notion of war crimes in a situation where there is no
longer a regular army but only barbaric armed gangs.
Flagrant human rights violations, crimes against
humanity and genocide should not be tolerated and
require punitive justice.

The United Nations has an important role to play
in the reconciliation process by strengthening the
fragile environment in which such a process takes
place. The United Nations may assist civil society,
which is often a weak and poorly organized element
among the parties to a dialogue. The United Nations
can promote social peace by helping to reduce
economic inequalities. It can supervise the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, with special attention being paid to
child soldiers. It can help the subregional organizations
to carry out projects that strengthen subregional unity
and cohesion.

Finally, the United Nations can strengthen
reconciliation by promoting real prospects for social
progress by reweaving the social fabric. Ongoing
economic assistance to countries in a post-conflict
situation is essential in order to restore the general
socio-economic balance and to guarantee human
security.

It is for that reason that the United Nations must
also take into account the impact that poverty continues
to have on development and security.

