The President: Let me explain for the people who
are attending today how we will proceed. We will hear a
discussion by President Mandela of what he has done and
what he plans to do. There will be other speakers; every
member here has asked to speak. The first speaker after
President Mandela will be the Ambassador of Mali. At
the end of the session, we will adopt a Security Council
resolution. That will take place before lunch today.

It is now my great honour to call on the Facilitator
of the Burundi peace process, Mr. Nelson Mandela. I just
want to make a brief comment on behalf of all of us.

For almost everyone in this room - certainly, for
myself - Mr. Mandela was a large figure in our lives
before we even knew what he looked like, as we had not
been able to see photographs of him for so many years.
When he emerged from prison, in one of the great
moments for all of us who were able to see it, and we
realized that he was going to take his place on the world

 

stage in a new and historic role - a role of historic
proportions - it meant even more to us.

I am confident that history will rank him alongside
Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr., as one of the seminal
figures of our century - as perhaps our leading moral
authority. What he did for his country alone would justify
his unique role; but he is also a symbol to so many people
around the world. Mr. Gusmao in East Timor has talked
about Mr. Mandela as his inspiration; Ibrahim Rugova in
Pristina, Kosovo, has talked about it; and I know that is
true all over the world.

Upon his retirement, which he so richly deserves to
spend in peace with his new wife and his children and
grandchildren, he described himself to my wife and me last
month as just another pensioner. Well, some pensioner! He
has accepted one of the world's most difficult jobs, while
retaining an active interest in other issues around the world.

We welcome him today in his first appearance before
the United Nations Security Council. Our goal is simple: to
hear Mr. Mandela's report and, to echo the words of our
Secretary-General, to learn from him how we may assist
him. The Security Council is unanimous in appreciating that
he has undertaken this immensely difficult task.

It is now my great honour to ask Mr. Mandela to
address some remarks to the Security Council and to the
world.

