Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Sir, for your initiative
in holding today's meeting and to the Secretary-
General for preparing the overview report
(S/20lO/181). We also thank Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Mr. Khare, Ms. Johnson and Ms. Gurung for their
information.

Russia supports the call by the Secretary-General
to give due attention to all serious violations of the
rights of children in conflict. Crimes against children
should not go unpunished. In this connection, we
welcome the first practical steps for including in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's report information
on parties to conflict that are responsible for killing
and injuring children and rape and other sexual abuse.
However, we wish to stress the need to consider
correctly the issue of including in the report
information on specific country situations. In
particular, we do not believe it is right to include in the

current report several situations - specifically, India,
Pakistan and Yemen - that cannot be called armed
conflicts.

We firmly condemn premeditated attacks on
civilians, including children, and the deadly,
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force, as
described by the Secretary-General. Of particular
concern for us is what the report mentions with regard
to the increasing trend in the number of attacks by
parties to conflicts on education facilities.

Russia condemns the grave violations of
international humanitarian law during operation Cast
Lead in Gaza, which took the lives of hundreds of
children and destroyed schools. The statistics in the
report cannot leave anyone indifferent. We once again
call on parties to conflicts to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and to
refrain from violence against civilian populations.

Children continue to be victims of conflicts in
Afghanistan and Iraq, where armed groups attack the
civilian population and carry out terrorist acts. It is
important that Al-Qaida and the Taliban are once again
included in the list of violators. Unfortunately, children
in those countries are dying because of the actions of
foreign forces that are supposed to defend them. We
consider unjustified the attempts to describe deaths of
children as collateral damage. That is also in line with
the Geneva Conventions. We favour looking closely at
such incidents and punishing those responsible.

We welcome the work of the United Nations
missions and country teams aimed at getting parties to
conflict to accept action plans to prevent and halt
violations of the rights of children. However, contact
with United Nations structures and non-State armed
groups can take place only with the agreement of the
Governments involved. Moreover, action plans are
important instruments in protecting children and
should not be seen as a goal in and of themselves. True
improvements in the situation for children in the field
is much more important for assessing progress than
promises that exist on paper but are often not fulfilled.
The Working Group on Children in Armed
Conflict, led by France and later by Mexico, did a
significant amount of work in developing
recommendations on concrete situations. In order to
effectively implement them, it is necessary to develop
constructive cooperation with the concerned
Governments.

We studied with interest the recommendations set
out in the Secretary-General's report. We believe that
most of them deserve close study and analysis,
including from the point of view of practical
application. In particular, we consider that an exchange
of views on the criteria for qualifying parties to
conflicts as persistent violators would be useful. We
believe that a brief mention in the annexes to a report
of the Secretary-General is insufficient in this context.

We are grateful to the delegation of Mexico for
preparing the draft presidential statement that we will
adopt today.

