Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/729)
of 25 September, which is before the Council, provides
an update and analysis of the conflict, the political
situation and the operational environment in Darfur,
as well as the mandate implementation efforts of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). I will highlight key developments
identified in the report and over the past month.

As described in the report, the overall security
situation in Darfur remains precarious and unpredictable.
From December 2014 to June 2015, the forces of the
Government of the Sudan implemented the second
phase of the Decisive Summer counter-insurgency
operation. achieving considerable gains against the
non-signatory armed movements. The operation, which
involved a series of violent ground clashes and aerial
bombardment, led to over 104,000 newly confirmed
displacements, as well as 69,000 unconfirmed cases,
mainly located in the inaccessible East Jebel Marra
area. Since June 2015, with the exception ofintermittent
clashes with the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid,
which remains in East Jebel Marra, Government forces
have maintained an operational pause during the rainy
season.

In contrast, there has been no pause in
intercommunal fighting, which remains a major
source of instability in Darfur and has resulted
in approximately one-third of all conflict-related
fatalities and 40 per cent of displacement so far this
year. These disputes have been further exacerbated
by the involvement of local armed groups in counter-
insurgency operations against the armed movements,
their access to weapons, continued local influence and
widespread impunity for their attacks against other
tribes and other criminal activities. The Government of
the Sudan, particularly at the state level, has attempted
to contain the violence through the swift deployment
of security forces in hotspots in North, East, South and
West Darfur, and the organization of intercommunal
mediation conferences for the cessation of hostilities.
However, the underlying causes of these conflicts,
related to the use and management of resources and
impunity of actors involved in the violence, remain
unaddressed.

With respect to the negotiations, following earlier
announcements to this effect, on 28 September
President Al-Bashir issued decrees providing for a
two-month cessation of hostilities in Darfur, Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states, and an unconditional
pardon to members of the Sudanese political and armed
opposition who decide to participate in the national
dialogue process. On 18 October, following a meeting
of its leadership in Paris, the Sudan Revolutionary Front
declared its own six-month cessation of hostilities in
Darfur and the Two Areas in accordance with its road
map of 14 September. The road map further provides
for the protection of civilians, unhindered humanitarian
access and the creation of an environment conducive to
peace talks and the national dialogue.

These positive signals, however, did not reduce the
evel of distrust between the two sides. On 10 October,
President Al-Bashir launched the national dialogue in
Khartoum without the participation of the main armed
and unarmed opposition groups. In his opening remarks,
the President committed to creating an enabling
environment for the participation of all citizens in the
dialogue and the release of political detainees who have
not been charged with an offense, and highlighted the
Government's readiness to engage in discussions on a
permanent ceasefire with the armed movements.

In subsequent statements to the media, the Sudanese
political and armed opposition reiterated their boycott
of the process in the absence of a conducive environment
for a genuine dialogue, as well as their willingness to
participate in a pre-dialogue meeting in Addis Ababa
under the auspices of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP). The AUHIP meeting
on the national dialogue, followed by cessation of
hostilities talks on Darfur and the Two Areas that were
initially scheduled for next week, are now expected to
take place, respectively, in Addis Ababa from 16 to 17
and from 18 to 19 November.

During the reporting period, UNAMID and
humanitarian actors continued to face enormous
operational challenges in Darfur. The Government of the
Sudan continued to restrict the air and ground movement
of UNAMID and humanitarian actors primarily to
conflict areas, citing security concerns. Delays and
denials by the Government of customs clearances for
UNAMID containers, including food rations and visas
for staff, have threatened to significantly undermine
mandate implementation efforts.

I am relieved to inform the Council that, out of
the 190 containers previously blocked in Port Sudan,
52 have been released by the authorities and are being
transported to warehouses in Khartoum for further
inspections and subsequent transport to the Mission.
An additional 52 containers are expected to be cleared
and transported to Khartoum this week. The remaining
86 containers are at various stages of the clearance
process. In addition, as part of its contingency plan in
this context, UNAMID has successfully transported
by air locally purchased food items from Khartoum to
El Fasher, El Geneina and Nyala. There has been no
progress on the issuing of visas since Mr. Ladsous'
briefing to the Council two weeks ago.

In addition to these operational constraints, in
the past four months an increase in attacks against
UNAMID and its personnel has been recorded in Darfur,
including the killing of a South African peacekeeper
by an armed group north of Mellit, North Darfur, on
27 September. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate my deepest condolences to his family and to
the Government of South Africa.

Despite these considerable obstacles, UNAMID
remained steadfast in the implementation of its
strategic priorities and addressing key challenges to
mandate implementation. In response to the growing
levels of intercommunal violence and as part of its
strategic priorities, UNAMID supported the mediation
of intercommunal conflict through capacity-building
and engagement with national and local Government,
traditional mediators, tribal and community leaders
and the Darfur Regional Authority. In this regard,
the Mission also focused its efforts on developing
early-warning capacity and other preventive measures
with local stakeholders, promoting dialogue between
farming and pastoral communities and supporting local
institutions to address the root causes of the conflict,
in collaboration with the United Nations country team.

In support of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, and despite the tensions surrounding the
leadership contest among its signatories, UNAMID
continued to facilitate the demobilization of former
Liberation and Justice Movement and Justice and
Equality Movement-Sudan combatants and to support
the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultations process.
After extending the term of the Darfur Regional
Authority for an additional year in June, on 19 October,
President Al-Bashir announced the holding in April
2016 of a referendum to determine the administrative
status of Darfur.

In accordance with resolutions 2173 (2014) and
2228 (2015), UNAMID and the United Nations country
team continued their work on developing an operational
plan for the gradual and phased transfer of tasks to the
latter, outlining which tasks will be conductedjointly or
transferred and the requisite budgetary requirements.
The initial phases of the process are expected to focus
on capacity-building for the sexual and gender-based
violence prevention mechanisms, andjoint activities in
the police, justice and corrections sector.

Regarding the exit strategy, the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Deputy Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Foreign Minister of the Sudan met
in the margins of the seventieth session of the General
Assembly in New York, on 29 September, to discuss a
framework of cooperation regarding the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate and the format and exit
strategy based on the parameters and benchmarks set by
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Trilateral discussions are expected to
continue in early November.
I would like to conclude with comments on
the overall situation in Darfur and the relationship
between UNAMID and the Government of the
Sudan. A comprehensive resolution of the Darfur
conflict, allowing for the return of the over 2.6 million
displaced persons to their places of origin, requires
first and foremost a political settlement between the
Government and the armed movements. The stated
intent of the parties to engage in discussions on the
cessation of hostilities, as well as the national dialogue
in Addis Ababa, is therefore a commendable step in that
direction. It is crucially important that those meetings
take place as scheduled and that they create momentum
for future comprehensive direct talks on Darfur.

I would like to urge the Government of the Sudan
to maintain its current cooperation in ensuring the
swift clearance of UNAMID food rations and their
delivery to the mission. In order to fully re-establish
its collaborative working relationship with the United
Nations and the African Union on UNAMID and
allow the mission to effectively discharge its mandate,
I would furthermore call upon the Government to lift
all existing restrictions on the free movement of its
personnel and assets, particularly with regard to access
to conflict areas and, importantly, the issuance of visas,
consistent with the provisions of the UNAMID status-
of-forces agreement.

Finally, as Council members are aware, yesterday
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission announced the appointment
of Mr. Martin Uhomoibhi of Nigeria as their new
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
UNAMID. On behalf of the Secretary-General, I would
like to congratulate Mr. Uhomoibhi on his appointment.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Abiodun Oluremi Bashua for his dedication to
peace in Darfur and his tireless efforts to deliver on
UNAMID's mandate during his tenure as Acting Joint
Special Representative over the past year.

