Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make the
following statement in my national capacity.

Conflicts in Syria and Yemen, an unprecedented
refugee crisis and a surge in violent extremism have
contributed to the growing instability across the
Middle East region. In that context, the Palestinian
question takes on added importance. Especially at this
time of unprecedented unrest in the Middle East, when
our focus is on Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da'esh, and the exigent refugee crisis in Syria, the
world must not forget the dire humanitarian situation of
the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
especially Gaza, where conditions are indefensible. We
stress the urgent need for leadership in order to end the
marginalization and oppression of Palestinians in their
own land.

Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian.
Affairs, which keep the majority of the people in Gaza
supplied with the bare necessities, including education.
We reiterate the need for continued funding by the donor
community to enable UNRWA to function effectively.
As Chair of the United Nations Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Palestinian People and other Arabs of
the Occupied Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly
concerned about the escalating violence and the number
of civilian casualties, which include infants.

The settlement activities in the occupied territories
violate international humanitarian law, including
the Geneva Conventions, and exacerbate incidents
of violence in the region. The continuing practice
of administrative detentions is another factor that
exacerbates the situation in the occupied territories.

Movement restrictions in and out of Gaza continue
to be a major problem for the economy and welfare of
the people of Palestine. Restrictions on imports and
exports are stifling economic growth. The continuing
exploitation of natural resources in the occupied
territories in violation of international humanitarian
law has a negative impact on the rights ofthe Palestinian
people.

My delegation calls for a just and lasting solution

to the question of Palestine and an end to the suffering
of the Palestinian people. The ongoing settlement
activities are illegal under international law, and the
blockade of the Gaza Strip is yet another obstacle to
peace. Furthermore, settlers in the occupied Syrian
Golan enjoy disproportionate benefits in terms of water
and agricultural resources. Agricultural expansion and
the exploitation of natural and agricultural resources in
the area continues unabated.

Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment needed to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent necessity for mutual confidence-building
measures in support of efforts to resume dialogue
and substantive negotiations. Israel must protect
the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
territories and desist from actions that are contrary to
the established rules of international law and practice.

We recognize the security needs of Israel. The
indiscriminate attacks against Israeli civilians will lead
to a counterproductive cycle of violence. We urge both
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety
of civilians and for the greater goal of peace.

It is important to remain engaged in seeking a just
and durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions on the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.

We are encouraged that, despite decades of
disappointment, the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and strength of purpose in order
to obtain their legitimate rights, having prevailed over
the considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity. That is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.

