Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, Sir, to
thank you and the members of the Security Council for
your invitation to participate in this important meeting.

The Security Council convenes today at a time
when events in Syria are spiralling dangerously. This
requires that international efforts be concerted with
Arab efforts for a rapid, effective and decisive action,
first to ensure immediate cessation of violence in order
to protect the fraternal Syrian people, and secondly to
begin, as soon as possible, the implementation of the
road map for a peaceful political solution that rids
Syria of its grinding crisis and achieves the aspirations
of the Syrian people for change and reform - a move
to a peaceful democratic life in which all segments of
the Syrian people enjoy dignity and freedom, as called
for by every Arab country.

The security situation is increasingly grave and
urgent in light of the escalation that Syria has
witnessed in the past few days - the ongoing acts of
violence, the shelling and firing and counter-shelling
and counter-firing that have felled many innocent
civilians in the Syrian Government's clear resort to an
escalation of the so-called security option, in complete
contradiction of the commitments it took on in the
Arab plan of action as well as in the protocol signed by
the Syrian Arab Republic and the League of Arab
States on 19 December 2011, on the mandate of the
League's observer mission in Syria.

We therefore believe that the first priority now is
for the Security Council to adopt a resolution demanding
that all parties - I repeat, all parties - immediately
cease firing, protect Syrians and support the Arab plan
of action for a peaceful political settlement of the crisis.

Today's meeting has been convened in
implementation of subparagraph 3 of Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local
disputes through such regional arrangements or
by such regional agencies either on the initiative
of the states concerned or by reference from the
Security Council."

(spoke in Arabic)

It is in that very context that the League of Arab States
has come to the Security Council.

I should like to thank the Council for having so
quickly responded to the request from the League of
Arab States to inform this Council on the outlines of
the Arab demarche. The issue has been set out in detail
by His Excellency the Prime Minister of Qatar. I shall
repeat some points but will attempt to be brief.

The latest decision by the League was on
22 January, on a road map for a peaceful settlement of
the Syrian crisis. Before taking up the details of our
initiative, I should like to stress some of the
fundamental principles of the Arab demarche.

First, the fundamental objective of our initiative
is an immediate cessation of all acts of violence against
and killing of Syrian civilians, as well as the realization
of the aspirations and demands of the Syrian people -
demands for economic, social and political change, a
move towards a correct political life in true democracy
in which all fundamental rights and the rule of law are
maintained, and a peaceful alternation of power.

Secondly, Arab States aim at taking up the Syrian
crisis in an Arab context. We are attempting to avoid any
foreign intervention, particularly military intervention.
Thirdly, the Arab endeavour proceeds from the need for
a peaceful political settlement and, as I have stated, a
rejection of any military or foreign intervention.
Fourthly, all the resolutions of the League of Arab
States - all the League's resolutions - have always
stressed full respect of the security, sovereignty,
territorial integrity of Syria and unity of the Syrian
people.
Our objective is therefore for the Security Council
to support our initiative, not to take its place. The Arab
plan is the fundamental mechanism for a peaceful
settlement of the Syrian crisis, with international
support and agreement from the Security Council.

In our approach to the Syrian crisis, we have
taken up two fundamental pillars.

One is immediate action for an immediate, full
cessation of all acts of violence against and killing of
the Syrian people, while at the same time maintaining
the right of the Syrian people to expression by peaceful
demonstration and for the Syrian security forces not to
confront the demonstrations.

The second pillar is a road map leading to a
peaceful political settlement of the crisis through a
national dialogue that includes all parties, all sects, all
political currents and all segments of Syrian society in
order to realize the aspirations of the Syrian people for
a life of true democracy.

In fulfilling that endeavour, since July 2011 the
League has taken several actions and has put a number
of initiatives to the Syrian leadership. The most
important was on 27 August. Mandated by the Council
of the League, I personally handed it to the Syrian
leadership on 10 September last year. Thereafter, an
Arab ministerial committee - again, mandated by the
Council of the League and chaired by the Prime
Minister of Qatar - Visited Damascus and met with
the Syrian leadership on 26 October.

Based on that initiative and those contacts, the
Arab action plan took shape. The Syrian Government
promised to implement it, and it was then adopted by
the Council of the Arab League on 2 November. The
plan includes:

"First, the Syrian Government is to put an
end to all acts of violence, from whatever source,
to protect the Syrian citizens; second, the release
of those detained during, and because of, the
current events; three, withdrawal of all armed
elements from all cities and urban centres; and
four, opening the door to all institutions of the
League as well as Arab and international media to
move freely in Syria in order to ascertain facts on
the ground and monitor such events.

"Secondly, with concrete progress in the
Syrian Government's implementation of its
commitments, the Arab Ministerial Committee on
Syria would make the necessary contacts and
hold the necessary consultations with the
Government and all parties of the Syrian
opposition in order to hold a national dialogue
within two weeks of that date."

In order to verify the Syrian Government's
implementation of its commitments under the action
plan, on 19 December 2011 the Arab League drew up a
protocol establishing the legal context for the observer
mission. Observers from all Arab States and relevant
institutions were deployed beginning on 24 December
2011. The mission continued to deploy to all areas
where demonstrations were occurring in 15 cities in
Syria.

The head of the mission presented his first
technical field report covering the period from
24 December 2011, the date on which the team reached
Damascus, to 18 January of this year. The report was
transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on 22 January in order to inform him of the
situation on the ground and the cooperation and
consultations between our two organizations.

The Council of the League of Arab States decided
that, in the light of the conclusions presented in the
report, partial progress had indeed been made in
implementing some of the commitments undertaken by
the Syrian Government. However, progress was
incomplete and therefore insufficient. It was not what
was required or, indeed, what was wanted.

The resolutions of the League and the protocol
itself refer to the immediate and complete cessation of
acts of violence, the release of all detainees, the
withdrawal of all armed elements from cities and the
provision of unhindered access to Arab and international
media. In that context, I should like to take up some
fundamental points presented in the report in order to
provide the appropriate temporal and political context.

First, the Syrian Government should have met all
of its commitments before the monitors arrived, so that
the mission would merely verify implementation.
However, since it did not fully meet all its
commitments, the task of the team on the ground had
to change. The team sought to demand that the Syrian
Government immediately and fully implement its
commitments. It also sought to confront some painful
humanitarian situations that could not be ignored, even
though they exceeded the scope of the team's mandate.
By way of example, the team delivered food to some

areas, recorded witness accounts of human rights
violations committed against Syrian citizens, and
assisted in the exchange of the bodies of the fallen.

Secondly, the report covers a limited and brief
time frame. It does not address events during the nine
months preceding the team's arrival in Syria, between
15 March and 24 December 2011. During that period,
many events occurred, as did many violations that the
team did not address as they lay outside its remit. That
was not required of the mission. That must always be
taken into consideration when assessing the work and
findings of the observers.

Thirdly, the mission's task was very specific and,
indeed, very complicated. As the Prime Minister of
Qatar stated, never in the past had a team of civilian
observers been dispatched to a State facing escalating
protests by civilians calling for regime change. The
mission was deployed to verify that the Syrian
Government was fulfilling its commitments to end the
violence and killing and to withdraw armed elements
from cities and urban centres at a time when the
political, military and security forces of that country
were in control.

It must be clearly stated that the mandate of the
mission was to verify the Syrian Government's
implementation of its commitments, and not - I
repeat, not - to bring about disengagement or a truce
between warring parties, which is usually the case
when monitors or missions are dispatched by the
United Nations to any conflict area in the world.

Fourthly, the most important fact in the mission's
report is the reference to the excessive use of force by
the Syrian security forces since last March, which
sparked a reaction from protestors and opposition
elements. Paragraphs 71 and 74 of the report refer to
the state of severe tension, injustice and repression to
which Syrian citizens were being subjected. The
opposition had taken to bearing arms as a result of the
excessive force deployed by Government forces since
last March. That is taken directly from the report.

Fifthly, although the presence of observers on the
ground did not lead the Syrian Government to fully and
immediately keep its promises, it nevertheless had
some positive effects. For example, the Syrian people
have been given greater freedom to express their
demands, as was clearly evidenced by the increased
number of protestors in many cities following the
mission's arrival. Many Syrians found a mechanism by

which to directly express their own experience and
positions through witness accounts, which they provided
directly to the members of the mission. The mission
was able to monitor and record substantial information
regarding the human rights situation in Syria. The
mission was able to obtain lengthy lists of detainees
and missing persons through extensive contact with the
people in direct meetings and on the websites created
by the League of Arab States for that purpose.

In view of the conclusions presented in the
mission's report, having studied developments on the
ground in Syria since the League began to address the
crisis - and with a View to complementing the efforts
to resolve the Syrian crisis without resort to foreign
intervention or lapsing into civil war and in respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria, and the partial progress that was achieved by
the mission - on 22 January the Council of the
League, meeting at the ministerial level, adopted a
resolution in which it stressed several points.

The Council of Ministers underscored the need
for an end to all acts of violence and killing from all
quarters so as to protect Syrian citizens. It also called
on the Syrian Government to release all detainees,
withdraw all armed elements from the cities and
residential areas, and grant access to the relevant
League agencies and Arab and international media. It
highlighted the need to recall the Syrian Army and any
armed forces of whatever formation to their barracks
and original locations; to ensure the right to all forms
of peaceful demonstration and not to confront
protestors; and to facilitate the mission's work and the
entry of equipment, in particular communications
equipment. The mission called on the Syrian
Government and all parties of the Syrian opposition to
enter into a genuine political dialogue under the
auspices of the League of Arab States within two
weeks of the issuance of that resolution in order to
implement a series of initiatives.

The first initiative is the formation of a national
unity Government within two months of the dialogue,
with the participation of the current Government and
opposition under an agreed leader. Its task should be to
implement the provisions of the Arab plan of action
and prepare for free, multiparty parliamentary and
presidential elections, in accordance with a law
specifying the procedure under Arab and international
supervision and authorizing the Vice-President to
negotiate and cooperate with a unity Government to

facilitate the transitional period. I should like to stress
that the road map adopted on 22 January can in no way
be interpreted as calling on the Syrian President to
renounce power.

There is a precedent. I visited Damascus on
13 July last year and talked with the President of the
Republic on the need for true political reform. The
President said that he would entrust Mr. Farouk
Al-Shara, his first Vice-President, who is responsible for
the necessary fundamental reforms and that he would
inform me of those political reforms. That is similar to
the current demand of the League of Arab States.

Once formed, the national unity Government
would state that its aim is to establish a democratic and
multiparty political system that ensures the equality of
all citizens irrespective of their affiliation or sectarian
or religious identity, as well as the handover of power.
The national Government should restore security and
stability to the country, and reorganize the police force
so that it can perform security functions of a civilian
nature, with Arab States undertaking to fund such
efforts in coordination with the League of Arab States.

An independent commission should be established
to investigate the violations to which citizens have
been subjected. Within three months of its formation,
the national unity Government should hold free and
fair elections under Arab and international monitoring
in order to establish a constituent assembly.

In reporting to the Security Council on all such
developments, I should like to state that immediately
before coming to New York, I was compelled to take
the urgent step of suspending the work of the Arab
observers in Syria owing to the recent serious
deterioration of the situation in the country after the
Syrian Government openly declared that it would
resort to a security-based option. That led to some
observers being withdrawn until I take the matter to the
Council of the Arab League in a few days.

As can be seen from the brief report on the Syrian
crisis, the Arab League has consistently tried to find a
peaceful political settlement to the Syrian crisis that
would spare the lives of the Syrian people and meet
their demands and aspirations. Furthermore, the League
is fully aware that the international community's support
for the Arab plan as the necessary mechanism to resolve
the Syrian crisis is pivotal and crucial to its success
and to achieving its objectives.

Therefore, allow me to reiterate that the League
of Arab States looks forward to a supporting resolution
of the Security Council that calls on all parties to
immediately cease all acts of violence in order to protect
the Syrian people and to engage in a serious national
dialogue, under the aegis of the League of Arab States.
Such a resolution should adopt the Arab initiative as a
basis for resolving the crisis and should support the
Arab League's mission when it decides to resume.

As Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, I must also stress the importance of the prompt
cooperation of the United Nations and relevant
international organizations with the Arab League in
order to alleviate the worsening humanitarian
conditions of the Syrian people.

In conclusion, allow me once again to thank the
Security Council for having responded so rapidly to
our request and for its support of the Arab initiative. I
hope that such support will give a strong impetus to the
Arab League's efforts and serve as an example of
positive interaction between the United Nations and
regional organizations.

I urge the Council not to fail the Syrian people in
their plight. The violence and killing, whatever their
source, must stop. We need a clear resolution in
support of the Arab League's initiative. I would seek
the Council's support for the draft resolution submitted
by the Kingdom of Morocco.

