The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Tajikistan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan, document S/ 1998/ 113.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Tajikistan of 10 February 1998
(S/ 1998/ 113), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of
its resolution 1138 (1997) of 14 November 1997.

"The Security Council regrets that during the last
three months work on the implementation of the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510) and the
relevant activities of the Commission on National

Reconciliation (CNR) have proceeded very slowly.
It welcomes recent efforts made by the parties in
order to fulfil their obligations. The Council calls
upon them to intensify their efforts to implement
fully the General Agreement, including the Protocol
on military issues (S/1997/209, annex II). It also
encourages the CNR to continue its efforts aimed at
the institution of a broad dialogue among the various
political forces as foreseen in the General
Agreement.

"The Security Council commends the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
personnel of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for their work
and encourages them to continue assisting the parties
in the implementation of the General Agreement. It
welcomes the results of the international donor
conference in support of peace and reconciliation in
Tajikistan convened by the Secretary-General in
Vienna on 24 and 25 November 1997, and looks
forward to the contribution of those results to
consolidating the peace process in Tajikistan.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern that
the security situation in some parts of Tajikistan
remains precarious. It reminds both parties that the
international community is ready to continue
assisting in the implementation of the General
Agreement as well as in humanitarian and
rehabilitation programmes, but that its ability to do
so and also the ability of UNMOT to carry out its
tasks more effectively are linked to improvements in
security conditions.

"The Security Council firmly condemns the
hostage-taking of relief workers that took place in
November 1997 and urges the parties to cooperate
further in ensuring the security and freedom of
movement of the personnel of the United Nations,
the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (the CIS Peacekeeping Forces) and other international
personnel, and to take practical steps in this respect,
such as those mentioned in paragraph 7 of the report
of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council welcomes the
presidential decree establishing a joint security unit
with the task of providing security, including armed
escorts, for UNMOT personnel and calls upon the
parties to make the unit operational as soon as
 

possible. It also welcomes the readiness of the CIS
Peacekeeping Forces to arrange for the guarding of
United Nations premises in Dushanbe, as mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General, and encourages
UNMOT and the CIS Peacekeeping Forces to make
the relevant detailed arrangements.

"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-
General to continue the expansion of UNMOT to the
strength authorized by its resolution 1138 (1997) as
soon as the Secretary-General deems conditions
appropriate."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.

