Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): First, let me
join others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis, both for his briefings and
all the work he has done over the past three years and
nine months as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We are grateful for his leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the significant contribution he has made
to Iraq during this pivotal period in its history. We
look forward to welcoming in December his successor,
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and working with her
to build on all the progress that he has made. Like the
Netherlands, today I would like to touch upon three
issues: Government formation, accountability and the
question of missing Kuwaiti persons and property.

First, the United Kingdom joins other Council
members in congratulating Iraq on the conclusion of
the 2018 electoral process. We especially congratulate
President Barham Salih, Prime Minister Adel Abdul
Mahdi and Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi, as well
as the Kurdistan Democratic Party following the
Kurdistan Region parliamentary elections. We welcome
the formation of the Cabinet, which is well under
way, and encourage the appointment of the remaining
Cabinet members to be done in an inclusive manner
and within the constitutional timelines. However,
like the representatives of Poland, the Netherlands
and others, we share the disappointment at the lack of
female members among those appointed to the Cabinet
to date, and we would encourage the Iraqi Government
in its efforts to address that issue and promote the
participation and representation of women at all levels
of decision-making in Iraq.

Once the Government has been fully formed,
the United Kingdom looks forward to working with
it to support it as it tackles the challenges that Iraq
faces, those which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has outlined for us today. Those
include promoting effective governance, security sector
and economic reform, social protection for vulnerable
groups - including internally displaced people - and
improvements in the business environment. Recent
events that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has highlighted, particularly in southern Iraq,
demonstrate the importance ofproviding basic services,
including water and electricity, for all Iraqis.

Women have a vital role to play in all of the
areas that I have just mentioned, including national
reconciliation efforts. We note the encouraging
progress in that regard. In particular, we welcome the
introduction of the inter-agency gender-based violence
standard operating procedures in southern Iraq, which
will provide essential support services for survivors
of gender-based violence. The United Kingdom
encourages the incoming Government to ensure the full
implementation of Iraq's national action plan on women
and peace and security.

Several speakers this morning have spoken about
the importance of accountability in Iraq. The scale
of the challenges facing the new Iraqi Government
are clear. For example, the recent discovery of over
200 mass-grave sites demonstrates the importance of
achieving justice for the victims of Da'esh crimes in
Iraq. Those graves must be protected to ensure that
the evidence can be properly collected and stored. The
United Kingdom welcomes the continued strong support
from both the Government of Iraq and UNAMI for the
important work of the United Nations Investigative
Team for the Accountability of Da'esh. I would also
like to extend my own congratulations to Nadia Murad
for her well-deserved Nobel Peace Prize. Efforts must
continue to locate those still missing following their
brutal kidnapping by Da'esh.

Thirdly, and finally, the United Kingdom would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
(S/2018/976) on resolution 2107 (2013) on the issue
of missing Kuwaiti persons and property. The United
Kingdom welcomes UNAMI's ongoing support on that
important file. We hope that the new Government of
Iraq will make progress on locating and identifying
missing Kuwaiti persons and property. In that regard,
the United Kingdom welcomes the visit by the Iraqi
President to Kuwait on 12 November, and in particular
the transfer that took place of one instalment of
retrieved Kuwaiti property. It is very important that
this chapter of Iraq and Kuwait's history can be closed
and that relations between those two neighbours can be
further strengthened.

