Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
am pleased, Sir, to see you representing France and
presiding over this Security Council meeting devoted
to an item that connects two important aspects of
United Nations action in the world: the maintenance of
international peace and the protection of children.

My delegation is grateful for the presentations
made at the beginning of the meeting by the Secretary-
General, by his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and by the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol Bellamy. We acknowledge
the commitment of these latter two officials in ensuring
that peacekeeping operations focus on the special needs
of children in conflict situations.

The needs of children are one aspect of the broad
actions required to protect civilians in armed conflict.
In this respect, I would like to recall that in the
statement issued on 20 December 2002 on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts
(S/PRST/2002/41), the Council encouraged United
Nations agencies to cooperate with Member States in
formulating a comprehensive, coherent and action-
oriented approach to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/1299), which is the basis for this debate,
highlighted several special needs of children in conflict
situations. It referred, among other things, to juvenile
justice, education on the risks of landmines, and care
for internally displaced children and for girls who are
exposed to sexual abuse. Therefore, we encourage
Council members to bear those needs clearly in mind
when considering conflicts that are included in their
programme of work.

The problem of child soldiers is so important that
it has captured the attention of agencies, such as the
World Bank, which in the past were quite remote from
this topic. The report's list of military forces and rebel
groups that recruit children alerts us to the need to
resolve these conflicts and to counter the world trade in
small arms and light weapons.

We call on the Council to consider establishing
the origin of arms that are used by groups that recruit
minors, and we call, in particular, on arms-exporting
countries, for greater controls.

We regret the fact that many rebel groups within
Colombia continue to recruit and kidnap children in
order to carry out their attacks against society. The
Government of Colombia, in accordance with its
accession to international conventions - in particular
to the relevant Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child - does not recruit those
younger than 18 in its military forces. We encourage
other States to accede to the Protocol and to respect
this limit on compulsory recruitment and on the
participation of minors in combat.

As this is my last official function as
representative of Colombia to the United Nations, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in this debate. I assure you
that it will guide my personal action in this area in the
coming years. In addition, I thank my colleagues of the
countries members of the Security Council for the
friendship and cooperation that they extended to me
during Colombia's two years on the Council, which
concluded just a few days ago. Moreover, I should like
to wish the new members every success in their work
on behalf of international peace.

