Mr. Skoknic (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Poland
for convening and presiding over this important debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
also appreciate the briefings made by the Secretary-
General and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

This debate could not be more timely, as it is taking
place at a time when the international community is
bearing witness to the suffering of millions of women,
children and men trapped in armed conflicts around
the world. Chile is strongly committed to the agenda
for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts and
recognizes the link between the women and peace and
security agenda and that of children in armed conflict,
which form part of our foreign policy priorities. A clear
example of that is the open debate that we organized on
this topic during our presidency of the Security Council
in 2015 (see S/PV.7374).

The spiral of violence that leads to war,
displacement and abuses against vulnerable groups,
especially women and girls, is not inevitable. Chile,
like the Secretary-General, believes that the best way
to protect civilians is to address the root causes of
conflicts, promote human rights and the rule of law,
strengthen governance and institutions and invest in
inclusive and sustainable development.

We must move from delayed reactions to preventive
actions. The commitment to conflict prevention also
obliges us to deal with illicit and irresponsible arms
transfers, which facilitate conflicts and undermine
protection and peacebuilding initiatives. In that context,
I would like to highlight that only four days ago, on
18 May, we deposited our instrument of ratification of
the Arms Trade Treaty as a clear commitment of my
country to this matter. Consequently, 95 States have
ratified the Treaty.

We fully agree with the priorities set out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2017/414) of May
2017 and reiterated in his latest report (S/2018/462),
of 14 May, regarding the need to bolster respect for
international humanitarian law and international
human rights standards, promote good practice among
the parties to a conflict, protect humanitarian and
medical missions, prioritize the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations and prevent
forced displacement, while seeking durable solutions
for refugees and internally displaced persons.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that
accountability is a central tenet that ensures that the
parties to an armed conflict improve their compliance
with international obligations. Of equal importance are
justice and reparations for the victims of such crimes.

