It is a pleasure to see you, Your Excellency and my brother Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, presiding over this virtual meeting. We thank the Republic of South Africa for convening this important and timely discussion, and we express our gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and the Presidents of the Niger and Tunisia for their insightful remarks. As a committed member of the A3+1 group - the three African members of the Security Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - and of the sixth region of Africa, we place particular emphasis on the theme of today's debate. The strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union (AU), as envisaged under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is a critical instrument in our global security architecture, and one that significantly bolsters the international community's efforts to maintain international peace and security. Since the signing, in 2017, of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, the partnership has grown from strength to strength, not only as a mechanism for sharing the collective burdens of security, but also as an avenue for the international community to gain access to and benefit from the immeasurable expertise of local and regional actors, grounded within the unique historical and contemporary realities of the African continent. We have seen the tangible benefits of this growing partnership in the positive developments in the peace processes of the Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan. And with the adoption of today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/12) on Burundi, we are pleased that that country can now be removed from the Security Council's agenda. We believe that lasting solutions can never be imposed but must emerge organically from within. In that regard, we maintain that the positions and priorities as articulated by the African Union, including in the Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want and the Silencing the Guns initiatives, present the surest pathway to lasting peace and security across the continent. At a time when the world is facing the complex and overlapping effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic, rampant climate change, growing ecological destruction, mass human displacement, the proliferation of violent extremism and other contemporary drivers of human insecurity - many of which are felt most acutely in African countries - deeper coordination between the Council and the AU Peace and Security Council would significantly improve our collective security efforts both in conflict-affected countries and those in post-conflict settings. The nuanced perspectives and principled advice of the African Union should be sought out, systematically and as a matter of priority, ahead of all mandate renewals and mission transitions for peace operations on the African continent. The Security Council should also consult with the AU regularly on the implementation of mandated priority tasks for peace missions in those areas, such as security-sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, in which the African Union has a wealth of expertise and can provide operational guidance. We have also borne witness to the comparative advantages of the African Union playing a more involved role in peace operations in a number of contexts, such as the African Union Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. To that end, our delegation fully supports the use of United Nations assessed contributions for AU-led peace operations. We also encourage both Councils to communicate more regularly in a manner that allows African perspectives to be fully reflected in Security Council decisions on African issues, and to pursue in earnest all modalities for information-sharing, including through joint field visits. Finally, we echo the calls of the African Union to end all unilateral economic sanctions imposed on African countries so as to assist in the creation of conditions conducive to economic recovery, growth and stability. The immense challenges of today cannot be solved through incrementalism or an outmoded zero-sum game of militarism. Instead, we need principled and pragmatic multilateral solutions. Indeed, no country is an island unto itself, and our contemporary threats to international peace and security can be solved only through collective action and solidarity. To that end, we encourage a further deepening of the strategic partnership between the United Nations and the African Union to fashion comprehensive development and reparative solutions to the main causes of insecurity, including those grounded in historical wrongs committed against our global African civilization. As we seek to build back better from the coronavirus disease pandemic, we must remain ever mindful that a peaceful and prosperous Africa is a central pillar of a safe and secure world.
