Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I warmly thank Mr. Menkerios for the
his outstanding briefing, which he delivered to the
Security Council. I also thank the Secretariat for the
comprehensive report (S/2017/744) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union (AU).

The partnership described in the report has
evolved with regard to cooperation on various fronts.
The partnership between the AU and United Nations
has evolved in connection with peace and security.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2320 (2016)
in November 2016. The resolution emphasized the
importance of strengthening the existing cooperation
between the two organizations so as to ensure that
the partnership become strategic and institutional in
nature, thereby ensuring the tools necessary to build
and develop the capacities of both organizations to
confront the complex and complicated challenges
facing the African continent. That partnership will be
strengthened under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and will ensure that both parties can
benefit from it.

I would like to emphasize the importance for
the Security Council to consider all the alternatives
included in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/744), submitted in accordance with resolution
2320 (2016), namely, with regard to support for peace
operations on the African continent according to the
mandate issued by the Security Council, as well as
ensuring the principle of access to the peacekeeping
budget of the United Nations according to established
criteria. Adhering to those criteria will ensure sustained
and durable funding of peacekeeping operations on the
African continent.

Cooperation between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Peace and Security Council is a
key factor involving the two organizations, and against
that backdrop, I wish to commend the efforts of the
Secretary-General as well as those of the Chairperson
of the African Union Peace and Security Council to
bolster and promote cooperation between the two
parties with regard to the institutional and practical
aspects of their endeavours. Within that framework,
on 19 April, the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security was signed and established the areas of
priority for cooperation between the two parties. We
hope that the document will be implemented and that
once it is, it will bolster AU capacities, fully activating
all the components of the African peace and security
architecture in its entirety, including the African
Standby Force.

I also wish to stress the importance of implementing
the principle of sustaining peace and of integrating it
into the various facets of AU work. We must attach
greater importance to conflict prevention, early warning
systems, the peaceful resolution of conflicts, post-
conflict peacebuilding and the promotion ofcooperation
between the two organizations in those spheres so as
to ultimately reach a common understanding of the
challenges facing the African continent in the field of
peace and security. We must also be able to evaluate the
means that will allow those challenges to be tackled.

I would be remiss ifI did not refer to the efforts
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
to strengthen the partnership between the two
organizations. We hope that the report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General soon for the Council's
consideration, in accordance with resolution 2320
(2016), will be assess the needs of the Office in the
light of the strengthening partnership between the two
organizations. We hope that the Council will attempt
to enhance the capacities of the Office to ensure that it
can discharge its mandate, acting as a bridge between
the two organizations.

To conclude, I wish to emphasize that Egypt, as a
member of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council, is determined
to effectively contribute to the efforts to strengthen
the partnership between the two organizations. We
are convinced that that is the best way to address the
modern-day challenges facing Africa and the world
as a whole, which are complex and multidimensional
in nature.

