Let me first congratulate the delegation of Germany on its successful presidency of the Security Council during the month of July. I also wish to thank the delegation of France for presiding over the Council during the month of June. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. The world today is experiencing an exceptional situation shaped by the outbreak of the novel coronavirus. That situation is compounding the suffering of the Palestinian people, who live under Israeli occupation, have poor health facilities and rely largely on humanitarian assistance, including food and medical supplies. In spite of those constraints and its limited means, the Palestinian Authority is taking practical steps and doing everything in its power to combat the pandemic, in particular by introducing a lockdown, carrying out testing and quarantining infected persons and their contacts. Faced with such a state of affairs, all sides have an obligation to respond to the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive ceasefire, which Morocco supports. My delegation welcomes the joint appeal made by the Secretary-General's envoys to the Middle East addressed to all parties to the region's conflicts. The Palestinian people continue to live under Israeli occupation, and their legitimate rights are violated on a daily basis. Practices that contravene internationally recognized resolutions and international humanitarian law persist in the Palestinian territories. The decision by the Israeli Government to annex parts of the West Bank is a case in point. Morocco considers that such steps would compromise the internationally agreed principle of a two-State solution and undermine all efforts to achieve the just and comprehensive peace to which the international community aspires. Under the judicious leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Chair of the Al-Quds Committee, Morocco will always be a key supporter of the just cause and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people as they endeavour to fulfil their aspiration to live in freedom and dignity. Morocco emphasizes that it is fully committed to peace as a strategic choice for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It is firmly convinced that negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides remain the only viable way to reach a just and lasting solution to the conflict, one that would enable the Palestinian people to exercise their legitimate right to establish an independent viable and sovereign State with East Jerusalem as its capital. Morocco also renews its urgent call to intensify efforts, in conjunction with international actors and peace-loving forces in the world, to safeguard the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, confront Israeli practices contrary to international law and work to relaunch a constructive dynamic of peace that would enable all the peoples of the region to live in security, stability and harmony. Morocco firmly believes that East Jerusalem is part of the Palestinian territories occupied in 1967 and is the capital of the State of Palestine. East Jerusalem is therefore one of the final-status issues that must be addressed through negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. It lies at the heart of the conflict in the Middle East and is central to achieving any political solution between Palestinians and Israelis. Accordingly, Morocco rejects any unilateral actions that undermine the legal and historical status of Jerusalem as holy city and cradle of the three monotheistic religions. Such actions are contrary to resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). Morocco also reaffirms the importance of halting settlement activity and implementing resolution 2334 (2016). With regard to Palestine refugees, Morocco reiterates its support for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its efforts to alleviate the suffering of refugees throughout the region and facilitate their access to basic services, in particular children's education and medical care, especially in these exceptionally difficult circumstances with the spread of the coronavirus. For its part, the Bayt Mal Al-Quds Al-Sharif Agency, the executive branch in the field of the Al-Quds Committee, continues to support the city's people through a range of key projects, concerning in particular cultural and urban heritage conservation, social assistance and the preservation of the Palestinian national archives. Morocco continues to believe that there is a solution to the Palestinian question. The stalling of talks between the Palestinians and Israelis has nonetheless stymied any chance of breaking the cycle of violence, tension and mutual mistrust. It is therefore up to the international community to effectively and creatively summon the will to revive negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis so as to achieve a two-State solution within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine. Those negotiations must be based on proper foundations, in accordance with a specified time frame that restores trust between the parties, paving the way for the establishment of a viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace and security, in line with internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. Morocco also appreciates the efforts of various States to establish lasting peace and security in the Middle East.
