Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for convening this ministerial
meeting on Syria. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement.

The situation in Syria remains a major source of
grave concern. The war in that country has gone on
for far too long, and the Syrian people continue to
bear a heavy burden. It is high time to take stock of
the Council's action regarding the conflict, with its
multifaceted and multidimensional consequences.
Despite the Council's adoption of several resolutions
and statements concerning the situation in Syria, it
must be noted that the war drags on, with its funeral
march of atrocities, suffering, the forced displacement
ofinnocent civilians and the destruction ofthe country's
vital infrastructure.
Despite the complexity of the Syrian crisis, the
international community must not give up or spare
any effort in advancing the political process with a
view to achieving an end to the crisis that is lasting
and acceptable to all parties concerned. To that end,
we call on the parties to the conflict to be guided by
the force of reason rather than the logic of force, and to
resolutely commit to dialogue with a View to ending the
interminable cycle of violence.

It is clear that there is no military solution to the
Syrian crisis. Solely an inclusive political process can
put an end to the conflict, in which preliminary figures
indicate that the number of deaths, as has been noted,
is over 250,000, among which are 12,000 children.
Hundreds of thousands have been wounded, with some
7 million internally displaced persons and more than
4 million refugees.

Chad welcomes the convening this morning in New
York of the International Syria Support Group, and
warmly welcomes the intensive diplomatic efforts of
its initiators, notably the United States of America and
the Russian Federation, as well as other regional and
international partners. We hope that the new dynamism
created by the Vienna and New York conferences and
endorsed by resolution 2254 (2015), which was adopted
earlier, will allow us to overcome our differences and
set up a political transition in line with the already
established road map and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) and in full respect for the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria. In that regard,
we call on the regional actors to play a constructive role
with a view to encouraging the parties to demonstrate
flexibility and to commit in good faith and without
preconditions to the political process.

The option of peace requires difficult choices and
concessions from both sides. Continuing the war is not
just disastrous, but also provides a breeding ground
for the spread of terrorist groups, such as Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, which could destabilize the entire
region. Indeed, the scope of the threat is worldwide. In
a region wracked by crises that are each as grave the
next, the rapid settlement of the Syrian crisis is urgent.
It will require further action and commitment to joint
efforts and cooperation on the part of all regional
and international partners, aimed at restoring peace
in Syria. Along those lines, Chad voted in favour of
resolution 2254 (2015) in the hope that it might help the
Council progress towards peace in Syria.

