Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Special Representative Kubis back to the
Council and we thank him for his briefing today. We
express our deep appreciation to him, the staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United Nations country team for
their continued service to the Afghan people. We
also thank Ambassador Tanin for sharing his views.
As always, we value his close cooperation with
the Security Council. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Witting for his leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and for the Afghanistan-related resolutions
adopted by the Council over the past two years.

Today I will address Afghanistan's continued
transition, recent developments in the Afghan-led peace
process and the need to begin robust planning efforts
for the United Nations role in Afghanistan post-2014.

Afghanistan continues to take the necessary steps
towards a security and political transition in 2014.
The security transition progresses as planned, with
over 75 per cent of the Afghan population, including
every provincial capital, now living in Afghan-led
secured regions. As pledged in Chicago this year, the
international community is committed to sustained
assistance for Afghanistan's security. In Tokyo we
committed to development support for Afghanistan
in the context of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Those actions demonstrate the international
community's unwavering commitment to the Afghan
people, through transition and into the transformation
decade. President Obama reaffirmed the United States'
commitment in May when he signed our strategic
partnership agreement.

With the Afghan elections in 2014 approaching, we
welcome the efforts under way by Afghan authorities to
hold inclusive, transparent and credible elections. Those
elections, as confirmed at the Tokyo Conference, will
help to build a political system that reflects a pluralistic
society and remains firmly founded in the Afghan
Constitution. We appreciate the role that Afghan civil
society is playing in the preparations and, of course, the
United Nations work in support of the electoral process.

Recent regional economic development efforts have
also shown encouraging signs, such as the economic
focus and confidence-building measures of the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan. We welcome the next
ministerial meeting, to be held in Astana in April 2013.

As Afghanistan looks forward to security and
political transitions in 2014, an inclusive political
dialogue among Afghans is the surest path to long-term
peace and stability. When President Obama Visited
Afghanistan, in May, he discussed the importance
of pursuing an Afghan-led reconciliation process. In
Bonn in 2011 and in Tokyo in 2012, the international
community again affirmed its support for a peace and
reconciliation process.

We are encouraged by the briefing of Aghan High
Peace Council Chair Rabbani to this Council in the 1988
Committee last month. Afghans are sitting down with
other Afghans to determine the future of their country.
It is vital that all voices be heard. We welcome the forum
held in Kabul this month, at which Afghan leaders and
parliamentarians joined with women representatives
of the provincial peace councils and the High Peace
Council to discuss strategies for integrating the views
of women in the reconciliation process. We also look
forward to UNAMA's plans for a complementary track-
two national dialogue.

We appreciate the role that regional actors can play.
Their support will be critical to peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The visit by Chair Rabbani to Islamabad
in November and the resulting joint statement was a
powerful message to the region. We welcome Pakistan's
engagement and its call to bring the Taliban to the table
in peace negotiations.

The Security Council aided in that process by
supporting and promoting Afghan-led reconciliation
through the 1988 Committee. We again demonstrated our
commitment this week by reaffirming the Committee's
mandate to enact sanctions against those individuals
associated with the Taliban who constituted a threat to
the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan, and to
encourage sanctioned individuals to reconcile. Those
who refuse to meaningfully participate in reconciliation
should know that the Security Council will continue to
develop the necessary measures to inhibit their ability
to execute violent attacks in Afghanistan. At this point,
it is up to the Taliban to fulfil its obligations and decide
to move forward.

With the security and political transitions under
way, we believe it is time to begin discussions about
the United Nations role, including the roles of UNAMA
and the United Nations agencies, after 2014. United
Nations support has been indispensable and will remain
so going forward. We look forward to the United
Nations consulting with Afghanistan, the Council,
regional partners and Member States in its planning an
integrated vision for long-term support to the Afghan
people.
The future of Afghanistan is indeed for Afghans to
determine. Afghans themselves will need to have the
difficult conversations about how to build an inclusive
society that reflects their own needs and wants. The
United States will continue to support them, and
welcomes the valuable contributions of the United
Nations in those efforts.

