Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to wish you every success. I
would like also to express our great appreciation to
Ambassador Joy ngu of Nigeria, and to her team, for
the excellent conduct of our work in October.

Let me thank Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo
for his informative briefing and for the second report
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). Brazil renews its
support for the Court and for the work of Mr. Moreno-
Ocampo's office.

The situation in Libya has entered a new phase
that is veering away from conflict and towards peace
and reconciliation among Libyans. In that new phase,
some of the principles that inspired the creation of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), namely, justice,
accountability, non-discrimination and respect for the
rule of law, will be fundamental to Libya. The role of
the International Criminal Court will therefore be even
more important in assisting Libya to bring about a truly
democratic State that responds to the aspirations of the
Libyan people for respect for human rights, a greater
voice and representation for the people in their
country's life, and enhanced opportunities.

Brazil welcomes the statements made by the
National Transitional Council that stress the

importance of ensuring human rights, as well as the
intent to avoid reprisals and acts of vengeance.

Tolerance and inclusiveness must mark the new
era in Libya. We expect the new Libyan authorities to
make every effort to bring the perpetrators of
violations of human rights, regardless of their
affiliation, to justice. Impunity must not be allowed to
taint the transition. In that vein, reports of the arbitrary
detention, torture and execution of Qadhafi loyalists
must be investigated. Likewise, we are concerned by
the circumstances that led to the death of Muammar
Qadhafi. Brazil supports the call by the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for an
investigation into that case.

We are encouraged by the news that Prosecutor
Moreno-Ocampo has been in indirect contact with Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi concerning his surrender. Such
efforts must be continued in order to ensure that
Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Gadhafi and Mr. Abdullah
Al-Senussi are brought to trial.

We encourage the Prosecutor to proceed on all
lines of investigation mentioned in the report, in
particular those related to possible war crimes by all
actors and the protection of vulnerable sectors of the
population, including African migrant workers. The
continuation of ICC investigations carried out with full
independence and impartiality will be crucial in the
post-conflict stage in order to ensure accountability
and justice. Those are essential elements for
reconciliation and the establishment of durable peace,
which should be the Council's ultimate goal for Libya.

