Afghanistan was hit by another devastating and deadly terrorist attack last week, another sad event that prolongs the suffering of the country's civilian population. The 100,000 victims since the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) started counting more than a decade ago testify to the folly of this conflict. The violence adds to the growing concerns over the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the country and its impact on the Afghan population, in particular on the most vulnerable. Recent large-scale movements across borders are likely to put further pressure on the country's health system. In the context of the pandemic, we echo the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire. The period of reduction of violence was a step in that direction. Unfortunately, hostilities are still ongoing. We call on the Afghan authorities to display political leadership after the recent announcement of the election results. The Afghan population needs an inclusive Government that enjoys broad support, that is able to confront the pandemic and that seizes the opportunity for peace. We hope the announcement of a diverse and inclusive Government delegation to intra-Afghan negotiations can initiate these talks without delay. An exchange of prisoners can be a way to build trust. We expect that during the negotiations a key role will be assigned to women. It is important that the Council closely follow the process and emphasize the importance of respecting Afghanistan's Constitution and fundamental rights and freedoms. In the last three months of 2019, 687 grave violations against children were verified. We will continue to look for consensus on Council conclusions with regard to children and armed conflict and count on members' support. We need a strong voice and clear leadership for the United Nations in Afghanistan. We welcome the appointment of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General and reiterate our deep gratitude for Mr. Yamamoto's service. Both bilaterally and as member of the European Union, Belgium will continue to support - on the basis of clear conditions and parameters - the peace process and the Government and the people of Afghanistan. Examples of ongoing support include our contributions to the implementation of the national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to the Afghan National Army trust fund, as well as our participation in NATO's Resolute Support Mission, with approximately 100 military personnel. Finally, I would like to support the press elements proposed by the co-penholders
