Mr. Belliard (spoke in French): I speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova align themselves with
this statement.

As stated by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
African continent is no longer defined by conflict.
A continent where change is in full swing, fuelled
by vigorous and creative youth, Africa will be one
of the drivers of future global growth. At the same
time, despite the successes mentioned by Chairperson
Mahamat - in the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Madagascar - Africa continues to face
security challenges. That is why the European Union
fully supports the African Union's Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative. It is also the reason the European
Union places conflict prevention and early warning,
mediation and crisis response measures at the heart of
its Common Foreign and Security Policy.

Given that the conflicts and their causes are
multifaceted and deep-rooted in socioeconomic,
historic and climatic factors, the European Union is
committed to taking a comprehensive approach to
strengthen the resilience of States and societies. The
Sahel is perhaps the best example of such an approach,
a subregion in which the European Union has invested
€8 billion over recent years.

The European Union also supports the African
Peace and Security Architecture and has learned to
listen to the voice of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and to ensure our actions are anchored
in African ownership. That is an absolutely crucial area
for Europe. The European Union is entering into the
fourth phase of its support for the African Peace and
Security Architecture, whose capacity development it
has been supporting since 2007, with up to €2.7 billion
to help in the African Union Mission in Somalia/Group
of Five for the Sahel fight against Boko Haram.
The African Union and the European Union
established a strategic partnership 20 years ago, in
Cairo. The most recent Summit of European Union and
African Union Heads of State and Government, held
recently in Abidjan, was an opportunity to redefine
our common priorities. Ministerial meetings, meetings
between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the European Union Political and Security
Committee and regular meetings between all of the
commissioners of both organizations have all been
opportunities to define and renew those commitments
in order to enhance our joint work.

In conclusion, I would like to cite the excellent
relationship among the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union, especially in the areas
of peace and security, the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union's Agenda 2063, sustainable and inclusive growth,
human rights and the fight against climate change, as
well as in the implementation of African Union and
United Nations reforms.

The meeting rose at 5.20p.m.
