Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We appreciate the
Secretary-General's active stand on the issue, and we
share the understanding of many States represented in
the Chamber that the status quo in the Middle East leads
only to further instability and makes the prospects of
a two-State solution increasingly remote. Therefore,
only proactive diplomatic efforts, including on the part
of the Council, combined with a common desire of
both sides to the conflict, can lay the groundwork for
restarting the political process and moving away from
the ongoing deadlock in the Middle East peace process.

We cannot allow the hopes for peace on both sides to
vanish completely. So many decades without real peace
are inadmissible. Ukraine welcomes any international
effort aimed at bringing a new dynamic to the Middle
East settlement and seeking opportunities for the
resumption of negotiations between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides. We therefore appreciate the ongoing
efforts of France to unblock the Middle East peace
process. We still hope that the Palestinian and Israeli
authorities will respond positively to the invitation to
hold an international conference in January next year in
Paris and will sit at the negotiating table in order to try
to revive prospects for a peace settlement.

Yet again, we have to signal our strong concern
over the continuous recurrence of violence in Gaza
and the West Bank. The incident that occurred this
week, on 14 December, left two Israeli police officers
wounded and a young Palestinian man dead. The attack
near the Austrian Hospice guest house in the Old City
is yet another reminder to all of us of the urgent need
for action.

We remain convinced that the establishment of
a stable, peaceful and democratic Palestinian State
is in Israel's long-term security interests. However,
the ongoing process of settlement expansion and
the legalization of outposts do not contribute to the
already moribund peace process, and must be stopped.
Settlement construction in the West Bank and the two-
State solution are two paths going in opposite directions.

