Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mark Lowcock and Martin
Griffiths for their detailed briefings on the military,
political and humanitarian situation in the Republic
of Yemen.

As we heard today, the situation in the country,
especially on the humanitarian front, remains dire.
In spite of the fact that the cessation of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah has continued, the outbreak of military
action in southern Yemen in September has jeopardized
the efforts to promote a peaceful settlement. In that
context, we welcome the initiatives, including the
launch of a dialogue in Jeddah, aimed at achieving a
compromise between the parties. We also welcome the
announcements by various parties about their intention
to cease armed attacks and refrain from the use of force
in resolving problems both in and around Yemen. We
hope that this positive trend will be consolidated in the
interests of de-escalation.
We are encouraged by the fact that momentum
for a peace agreement appears to be gathering, as
reflected in the fact that the initiatives put forward
by Ansar Allah have been positively received by the
Government of Yemen and Saudi Arabia's leaders, as
Mr. Griffiths and a number of speakers in this Chamber
today have discussed. We support Mr. Griffiths'
mediation efforts aimed at convincing the parties of
the futility of a military solution and of the importance
of achieving a universal ceasefire and formulating
confidence-building measures. In that regard, we
welcomed the meeting held on 8 and 9 September in
the framework of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and hope that the agreements reached
at the meeting will enable the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement to move forward.

The redeployment of military forces from the
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa will not only
contribute to de-escalation throughout the country but
will also make it possible to eliminate obstacles to other
aspects of the Stockholm Agreement, including the
exchange ofprisoners and de-escalation in Taiz, as well
as to move onto discussion of the framework for and
parameters ofa peace settlement.

The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate
and is increasingly resembling a full-blown disaster.
We talk about at every meeting on Yemen. Providing
humanitarian assistance to Yemen must be one of
our top priorities, but the best guarantee of success
in tackling the humanitarian problems is achieving
a peace settlement that will enable us to provide that
assistance unhindered and make it possible to start to
rebuild Yemen's war-ravaged economy.

We believe firmly that the resolution of the Yemen
conflict could create a future window of opportunity
for tackling other acute problems in the region as
well. In this context, the well-known Russian concept
of collective security in the Persian Gulf is becoming
ever more relevant, aimed as it is at resolving conflict
situations and developing confidence-building and
control measures. It is also in line with resolution
598 (1987), which we have continually reminded the
Council of and which instructed the Secretary-General,
in cooperation with the States of the region, to develop
a security and confidence-building architecture in
the region.

