Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1150). We would like to begin our statement by acknowledging the readiness expressed at the virtual summitamong the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda to root out negative forces, establish a plan for a cross-border response to the pandemic and explore new economic opportunities. We also recognize the rapprochement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. Such integration efforts are clearly essential to conflict resolution and socioeconomic growth. However, we are concerned about the impact that the break-up of the governing coalition may have on the political stability of the country. We therefore call on the political actors to avoid confrontation and to seek stability and progress, since the message of peace that the population so badly needs largely depends on that. The deteriorating security in the eastern part of the country remains a concern, where civilians, including women and children, continue to suffer due to internal clashes between armed groups, land use, ongoing inter-ethnic conflicts and attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces. We would like to express our support for the deployment of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in conflict areas and for the redeployment of United Nations operations in the context of the three-track approach in post- conflict areas. Similarly, we reiterate the importance of implementing Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz's recommendations and providing MONUSCO with the appropriate logistical and intelligence equipment on the ground to neutralize the armed groups and safeguard the lives of the members of the Mission. We also call for the strengthening and robust deployment of the Congolese armed forces in the areas vacated by armed groups and in the provinces included in the joint transition strategy, and we consider it essential that the revised national framework for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration be adopted and that the fight against impunity be further strengthened. We condemn human rights abuses and violations, including rape and gender-based violence. In that regard, we welcome the adoption of the resolution on technical assistance and capacity-building in the field of human rights by the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/ RES/45/34). We would like to commend the participation of civil society in the political and electoral life of the country. We stress that, despite the efforts of MONUSCO, greater participation by women and young people in decision-making and conflict resolution is vital for sustainable peace. The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo requires a united region to look after common interests by implementing regional treaties and agreements, particularly with regard to the trade in natural resources and arms control. A fragile humanitarian situation persists in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We therefore urge the international community to redouble its efforts to support the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by contributing to the humanitarian response plan to assist the most vulnerable. We are pleased that the Ebola outbreak in Equateur province has been contained and that the coronavirus disease pandemic is having a moderate effect on the population as compared to other countries. We hope that allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by members of the Ebola response teams will be properly investigated and those responsible brought to justice. We support the ongoing work of MONUSCO, even in such difficult circumstances, and we welcome the agreement between the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Mission regarding a joint strategy for the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO. In conclusion, we would like to urge that the exit strategy and the renewal of MONUSCO's mandate be based on realistic parameters and in accordance with the capacity of the country's authorities to assume the responsibilities successfully transferred by MONUSCO without jeopardizing the achievements to date with regard to peace and stability.
