At the outset, let me thank Special Envoy Huang Xia for his detailed briefing on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We continue to view the Treaty as the cornerstone of regional stability. We urge all its signatories to honour the commitments taken, including in terms of respect for the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity and non-interference in countries' internal affairs, as well as the strengthening of confidence-building measures. We are convinced that the full implementation of the framework, in particular its military provisions, could have a decisive impact on the overall situation in the Great Lakes region. We fully agree with the point made in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/272) that the momentum generated by the new leadership in Kinshasa in implementation of the framework more than a year ago is continuing and that our common task is to support it in every possible way. We commend the political will that the regional leaders are demonstrating to settle their differences through negotiation and to resolve cross-border security incidents through existing mechanisms. We particularly welcome the arrangements reached between Rwanda and Uganda with the help of the Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola. We continue to believe that the instability in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to be the most important factor in regional security. We remain seriously concerned over the military and political situation there, the continued activities of armed groups, intercommunal clashes and cases of Ebola. The situation has now been further complicated by the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We welcome the results achieved by the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in fighting some of the armed groups, in particular the Forces democratiques alliees, the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the Conseil national pour la defense de la democratie. We also commend the resumed repatriation to the Democratic Republic of the Congo of former combatants from the Mouvement du 23 mars. We thank the Special Envoy for his tireless efforts to promote a comprehensive approach to the neutralization of the negative forces in the region. Efforts to foster exchanges between the chiefs of intelligence and security services of the States of the region, as well as to uphold dialogue within the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network, are deserving of full support. We took note of the video-teleconference meeting of the guarantor institutions of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework held earlier this month with the assistance of the Office of the Special Envoy. We hope that the postponed tenth meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism will also take place soon. We also took note of the work that the Special Envoy has begun on a peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region. We stand ready to support that effort and hope that it will be carried out in full transparency. Many countries in the region are going through pivotal times in their political history. Some of them, such as Burundi, are entering a period of general elections. There is no doubt that political decisions can lead to long-term stability only if they are taken by the countries themselves. Imposing solutions on sovereign States is unacceptable. In that regard, we fully support the call made by the International 15/30 16/30 Conference on the Great Lakes Region Regional Inter-Ministerial Committee of Ministers for Foreign Affairs for the lifting of the unilateral sanctions imposed on the countries of the region by the European Union and the United States. We believe that in the time of the coronavirus, such a decision would be particularly relevant. It would also echo the measures proposed by the Secretary-General to fight the pandemic. As a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, the Russian Federation intends to further contribute to the quest for a peaceful settlement for the region.
