Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation thanks
and commends Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Be'dializoun Moussa Nebie, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic;
and Brigadier General Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force
Commander of the European Union Military Training
Mission in the Central African Republic, for their
detailed briefings on the reality of recent events in the
Central African Republic and the overall situation in
the country.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is concerned about the resurgence of violence
and virulence with which ex-Seleka and anti-balaka
armed groups control much of the country and attack
civilian and military targets, resulting in hundreds
of deaths and many injuries, through their operations
in the PK5 neighbourhood and other parts of the
country. The armed groups continue to focus their
attacks on humanitarian workers and peacekeepers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in Tagbara, north-east of Bambari, which
we strongly condemn, while expressing our deepest and
most heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families,
peacekeepers and MINUSCA. These constant acts are
aimed at trying to prevent MINUSCA from fulfilling
its mandate and commitments to the international
community. We believe that these deliberate attacks
on the United Nations peacekeeping forces are totally
unacceptable, must be condemned and constitute a war
crime, and the perpetrators must be held accountable to
international justice.

We also believe that the Government and national
authorities of our sister Central African Republic must
enjoy the strong support of the international community
so that it can promote and pursue the priorities, strategies
and activities aimed at achieving, strengthening and
promoting peace. We underscore that this process must
include the full and effective participation of all political
and social stakeholders and of the civilian population,
irrespective of ethnic background, gender, language,
religion, politics or other opinions. It is essential to
advance this process, achieve the desired objectives
and ensure that the socioeconomic and cultural needs
of all sectors of society are taken into account.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
call on all armed groups to lay down their weapons,
abandon all forms of violence and destabilizing
activities, and commit themselves to the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, whose adopted road map is the result
of the coordinated efforts of the authorities of the Central
African Republic, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Community of Sant'Egidio, together with the
support of several countries of the region, as well as the
direct and indirect support provided by the international
community, which makes the road map the principle
framework for achieving a political solution to the
crisis in the Central African Republic.

We welcome with optimism and commend the
decision agreed by the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States during their meeting in Lome
to hold a joint summit, in July, on peace, security
and combating radicalization and violent extremism.
We also appreciate the joint visit to the Central
African Republic by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and the
Secretary-General of ECCAS, during which they
reiterated the support of the United Nations and ECCAS
for the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation.
During the meeting between the two senior officials
and President Touadera, they welcomed the decision of
the Central African Government to reactivate the joint
commissions among the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan to address regional
security issues.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea supported
in its time the renewal of MINUSCA'S mandate until
15 November, and we closely followed and praised the
work of Special Representative of the United Nations,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, with various groups
and with national authorities, MINUSCA and other
stakeholders. Those efforts are vital in order to focus
increasingly on developing synergies and common
ground among the various actors operating in the
territory to better coordinate of their activities.

We commend the training provided to the units of
the Forces armees centrafricaines, which could support
the efforts of MINUSCA, thereby contributing to
strengthening the authority of the State. We therefore
call for the lifting of the obstacles to the rearmament of
the Forces armees centrafricaines.

It would be remiss of me to end this statement
without underscoring the deteriorating humanitarian
and human rights situation, which directly affects
vulnerable people, in particular women and children,
and has resulted in an increase in the number of Central
Africans seeking refuge in neighbouring countries,
including Chad, Cameroon and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We conclude this statement by emphasizing
once again that, among the myriad tasks set forth in
MINUSCA's mandate, the protection of civilians and
support for the central Government and its armed
forces must be prioritized so that the Government can
exercise its authority over the entire national territory.
To that end and to reiterate a point made by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, it is Vital that broad and resolute
support be lent to MINUSCA so that it can carry out the
huge and very complex mission that has been conferred
upon it by our Council.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
full support for our sister Central African Republic
in its efforts to address violence and in its genuine
desire to achieve sustainable peace through inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation. We congratulate
the Government of the Central African Republic for the
slow but steady progress it is making towards restoring
its authority throughout the entire country.

