Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative, Mr. Jan Kubis,
for his briefing and his efforts, as well as the Secretary-
General for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and security
(S/2012/907). We are also grateful to Ambassador Tanin
of Afghanistan for his statement. I would also like to
express our deep appreciation to Ambassador Wittig
of Germany and his team for their excellent leadership
and valuable contribution as penholder for Afghanistan
over the past two years.

Since the Council last considered the issue, in
September (see S/PV.6840), Afghanistan has continued
to make vigorous strides to achieve the objectives of the
transition process to be completed by the end of 2014.
The unanimous adoption by the General Assembly on
27 November of resolution 67/16, which Azerbaijan had
the privilege of co-sponsoring, once again reaffirmed
the irreversibility of the Afghan Government's choice
for the future of the country and the international
community's strong resolve to stand by Afghanistan on
that path.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment of
the Afghan Government's efforts to operationalize the
Tokyo commitments. We welcome the promulgation
of a comprehensive timeline for the 2014 presidential
and Provincial Council elections, ongoing electoral
reforms and measures to ensure greater public activity
and involvement in the pre-election process. Successful
elections will further strengthen the political
foundations of the country ahead of the transformation
decade. Therefore, we encourage the Government
to continue its progress in that realm and stress the
imperative of uninterrupted international financial and
technical assistance to Afghanistan to that end.

The activities of the High Peace Council aimed
at advancing an inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned reconciliation process, in particular its practical
initiatives to reach out to a wider spectrum of Afghan
society and its close interaction with regional partners,
are creating the necessary conditions and confidence
conducive to a durable peace in the country. Resolution
2082 (2012), adopted on Monday, on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), will further facilitate this process.

The continued support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
Council's activities and for the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme is
critical to the promotion of a unified vision among all
Afghans on the peaceful future of the country. In that
regard, we welcome the plan announced by UNAMA
to initiate a complementary track-2 dialogue aimed at
encouraging diverse Afghan stakeholders to join the
reconciliation process in an individual capacity.

Despite the quantitative decrease in security-
related incidents during the reporting period, the high
death toll prevailing among civilians as a result of
the unabated assassinations and suicide bombings by
insurgents is a matter of grave concern. All parties
in Afghanistan must take the necessary measures to
minimize the number and scale of civilian casualties.
In particular, insurgents must renounce the tactic of
targeting civilians, which not only violates international
law and contravenes religious and humanistic tenets,
but also seriously undermines reconciliation efforts.
We commend the Afghan security forces for their
decisive actions to thwart insurgent attacks in Kabul
and other provinces. Overall, we welcome the progress
in the ongoing implementation of the first three
tranches of the transition of security responsibilities to
the Afghan national security forces. We also welcome
the accomplishments in the areas under their control.
We look forward to the earliest commencement of the
fourth tranche in the remaining parts of the country and
to the phased completion of the transition by mid-2013.

Greater political dialogue and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range of issues based
on a common vision and mutual confidence is an
imperative for the peaceful and stable future of the
country and the region. That having been said, we
emphasize the particular importance of the Istanbul
Heart of Asia process on regional security and
cooperation for a secure and stable Afghanistan and the
timely realization of the agreed confidence-building
measures. The meetings of senior officials involved
in the Istanbul Process, which were held in September
in New York and in October in Ankara, reviewed and
agreed on the elaboration of implementation plans for all
of the confidence-building measures. We will host the
next meeting of senior officials in Baku on 6 February
2013, when all plans are expected to be endorsed.

Azerbaijan has long been a part of international
efforts in Afghanistan. My country joined the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) almost
at its beginning and has steadily increased its military
participation in ISAF. Azerbaijan provides its territory
to ISAF countries for overflights and transits to
Afghanistan, accounting for 35 per cent of all non-lethal
goods transit.

Azerbaijan has consistently expanded its
contributions by providing capacity-building
assistance in non-military spheres in Afghanistan
and has provided financial support for the training
of Afghan security forces. As part of the Istanbul
Process, my country participates in a number of
confidence-building measures and serves as one of the
leaders in the implementation of counter-narcotics and
regional infrastructure confidence-building measures.

The meetings of NATO-ISAF defence and foreign
ministers in October and December, respectively,
adopted important decisions on the post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission in Afghanistan. In
furtherance of its long-term commitment to be a part
of international assistance to Afghanistan and given
its ongoing contributions, Azerbaijan has decided to
partner with NATO in that endeavour.

To conclude, I would like to reaffirm my
Government's strong support for Afghanistan's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and we
reconfirm our determination to further assist the
Government of Afghanistan and its people, bilaterally
and multilaterally, in their legitimate aspiration to
become a secure, self-reliant and self-sustaining State.

