I would like to begin by thanking the presidency of the Dominican Republic for having convened today's open debate to recognize the importance of young people to peace and security. I also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their updates and valuable insights. Nepal welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, dated 2 March (S/2020/167). As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his report, there are about 1.85 billion young people in the world. Undoubtedly, the future of humankind depends on them. Youth's marginalization and exclusion from any process foment socioeconomic and political challenges. We cannot imagine a global future in which the youth suffer from hunger, unemployment or other socioeconomic menaces. Youth have the resilience and capacity to amplify development goals and promote peace and stability. Youth suffer not only from conflict but also pay the opportunity cost of not receiving a proper education as a result of conflict. Young people fight on both fronts during conflicts, either as soldiers or as rebels. If they are left behind and marginalized in post-conflict situations, the likelihood of a relapse into conflict will be very high. Young people aged from 16 to 40 constitute more than 40 per cent of Nepal's population. That is a huge demographic dividend for Nepal. Young people have played crucial roles not only in Nepal's socioeconomic development but also in its political transformation. They have also played a significant role in the progressive political changes that have occurred in the last 70 years of the history of modern Nepal. That is one reason why Nepal has a policy of engaging youth in every sector of national life. In line with the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Government of Nepal recognizes young people as agents of change in the maintenance and promotion of peace and security. We focus on participation, partnership, prevention, protection and disengagement, and reintegration as five pillars for action on young people's contribution to building and sustaining peace. Similarly, to achieve the aspirations of the Constitution of Nepal and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Government of Nepal has laid out plans and policies to include and ensure the political, economic, social and employment rights of young people. Nepal's National Youth Policy 2015 places emphasis on the quality of vocational education, employment, entrepreneurship, skill development, health and social security, youth engagement and leadership development, and sports and entertainment. We have also set up a Youth Information Centre to increase young people's access to information. We believe that only well-informed youth who participate meaningfully in politics, the economy and other sectors can play a significant role in the country's socioeconomic progress. Nepal has also increased its youth investment through its youth self-employment fund, aimed at creating jobs for young people and utilizing their skills for the country's development. We are committed to ensuring the active and equitable participation of youth in decision-making processes in order to promote a peaceful and inclusive society. Our policy of inclusion seeks to ensure proportionate youth representation from various communities at all sectors and levels of governance. In conclusion, my delegation is confident that today's deliberations will provide further impetus to effectively implement resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). I also hope that this fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) will serve as an opportunity to better integrate the youth, peace and security agenda, facilitate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, help prevent conflicts and sustain peace.
