Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2012/l33), which is the basis for today's
meeting. We also thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for their respective briefings. Guatemala
supports Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve
democracy, prosperity and peace.

As we all know, Afghanistan has been on the
agendas of the Security Council and the international
community for many years. Many conferences have
been convened to mobilize resources and take steps
towards peaceful reconstruction of the country and a
better life for its people. The endeavour is a complex
one whose execution falls to the Afghan people
themselves. Progress must be made simultaneously on
political stabilization, security, development and the
rule of law.

We are concerned that the security situation
remains problematic. We especially regret the frequent
bloody incidents with civilian victims. The
international community must redouble its efforts to
support the Afghan Government in achieving sufficient
stability to move towards the gradual transfer of
security maintenance to the Government.

We support the long-term commitments taken on
by the international community at the Bonn Conference
last December, aimed at spurring political development
in the country, which depends, inter alia, on
reconciliation among various groups of the population.
We welcome the process, building on commitments

previously undertaken in London and Kabul, as well as
a structured follow-up and a clear timetable for its
implementation. The upcoming regional conferences in
Tokyo and Kabul will provide further opportunities for
progress.

We encourage all to carry on with the road map
and not to be sidetracked from the successes achieved
through cooperation between the international
community and Afghanistan. We must not lose sight of
the big picture, even as we recognize that much
remains to be done. Guatemala supports the transition
under the leadership and ownership of Afghanistan,
even as we acknowledge the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That includes
confronting the transnational problem of drug
trafficking that plagues the country and the region. We
applaud the long-term commitment of the United
Nations to cooperating with the Government and
people of Afghanistan. We lend our full support to the
excellent work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

We would like to make a few points about the
UNAMA mandate. First of all, we endorse the
recommendations of the mandate review team, which
include the United Nations taking the role of facilitator
rather than implementer. Secondly, we support
extending UNAMA's mandate for an additional 12
months. Thirdly, we commend the Organization for
strengthening the coherence of international efforts in
Afghanistan and successfully promoting Afghan
ownership. Fourthly, despite some progress on human
rights, we call for further efforts to respect and protect
the rights of women and children. Fifthly, we believe
that UNAMA should play a more active role in
elections, which are critical to promoting democracy,
the rule of law and Afghan ownership. Sixthly, we
eagerly await the Special Representative's of the future
presence of UNAMA at the subnational level, as called
for in paragraph 76 the Secretary-General's report.

Lastly, we would like to mention the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme. We note the
number of armed groups identified in the report as
participating in the reintegration process, which is a
highly positive development. We fully endorse the
principles and outcome of the Bonn Conference,
especially those reflected in paragraph 18 of the
Conference Conclusions. We also support the work of

the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), which is a positive addition to efforts for
national reconciliation in Afghanistan. We further
believe that UNAMA should continue to support the
Government's efforts to build its capacities and to
promote the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.

