Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express the
appreciation of the Government of El Salvador for the
initiative to convene this meeting of the Security
Council to review the situation in Haiti.

The delegation of El Salvador welcomes the
significant presence here today of the President-elect,
Mr. Rene' Garcia Preval, and would like to join in the
congratulations that have been expressed here upon his
election on 7 February.

My country supports the efforts made by the
Haitian people to maintain the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of their nation.
Likewise, we are encouraged by the successful holding
of the elections, which were marked by a massive
turnout by the Haitian people to democratically elect
their authorities.

Special mention should be made of the role
played by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), which we firmly support. We also
welcome the steps taken towards self-governance in
Haiti. Our own experience allows us to affirm the
importance of civic participation in the strengthening
of democratic institutions. We are encouraged to see
the Haitian people expressing a renewed commitment
to fighting against violence, sharing, in a spirit of hope,
a national vision that will lead to the sustainable
development of their country.

The international community must also continue
to provide consistent and comprehensive support for
the economic and social stabilization process in Haiti.
My country, for its part, reaffirms its commitment to
the people and the Government of Haiti. Thus, if
requested, we will share our experiences in the area of
the strengthening of democratic institutions and social
cohesion, where we have met with some success in
recent years.

The history of El Salvador, with its transition
from conflict to peacebuilding, has certainly provided
us with valuable lessons in the use of dialogue and
negotiation in settling our differences. In order to
counter violence resulting from the evolution of the
transitional process itself, a commitment on the part of
all citizens is required so as to lay the foundation for
good governance.

In that context, El Salvador would like to
welcome the importance accorded to the role of Haitian
women as a critical factor in the context of change,
governance and long-term development in the country.
We urge the new authorities to strengthen that
approach, which could be decisive for the success of
policies and programmes aimed at eliminating extreme
poverty and contributing to long-term national
development.

In that context, we are encouraged by the steps
taken towards coordination between MINUSTAH and
the Haitian national police. In particular, we welcome
the interest shown in ensuring the participation of a
larger number of women in tasks related to peace and
security, such as indicated in Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). We reaffirm our willingness to
continue participating in Haiti with a larger number of
police officers, especially women, so that they may
contribute, from a gender perspective, to building
confidence in the institution, to enhancing the
effectiveness of police stations, and to providing
technical and logistical training to the Haitian national
police.

We are committed also to making the necessary
efforts to strengthen cooperation in our Central
American region in terms of providing training and
guidance to the police through special programmes.
Relations between citizens and police must be based
upon trust and efficiency.

It is also necessary to undertake comprehensive
reforms in the area of security, which, among other
things, will promote the professionalization of the
national police, the modernization of the judicial and
electoral systems, and the educational process in the
area of respect for human rights. Here, El Salvador
would like to welcome the coordination of actions
between MINUSTAH and UNICEF aimed at
promoting, among political parties and civil society
representatives, the issue of the protection of children.
Our country believes that that critical area requires
attention and prevention on the part of the national
authorities as well as the international community,
since that vulnerable group is capable of emulating, on
certain occasions, acts of violence patterned on the
illegal activities of juvenile gangs.

In conclusion, we reiterate the political will of the
Government of El Salvador to support the people and
the Government of Haiti in their efforts towards
stabilization, peacebuilding and development, through
support for MINUSTAH as well as through
hemispheric and subregional initiatives, in particular
within the framework of the Central American
Integration System and the Organization of American
States.
