Mr. Zuma (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for affording me the opportunity to
address the Security Council today. It is indeed an
honour and a privilege.

I find it important and prudent to brief the
Security Council in pursuance of the common objective
of security, peace and stability on the African continent
in general, and in Burundi in particular. The efforts to
find peace in Burundi are being made within the
context of our overall objective of creating a climate of
peace, order, stability and sustainable development on
the African continent. We are fully aware that the
United Nations shares that vision and that mission.

Today's meeting is a follow-up to the visit by a
Security Council delegation to South Africa in April of
this year. I had indicated to the delegation that I would
come to New York to brief the Security Council on
progress in the ceasefire negotiations. That intention
was endorsed by the Nineteenth Great Lakes regional
Summit on Burundi, which was held a few days ago,
on 1 and 2 December. The heads of State attending the
meeting believed that it was important that we should
keep the Security Council informed and actively
involved in the process of cementing peace in the
region.

It has been more than two years since former
President Nelson Mandela, the chief mediator in the
Burundi conflict, asked me to facilitate ceasefire
negotiations between the belligerent parties in Burundi.
There were two armed groups at the time, the National
Council for the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the
Defence of Democracy (CNDD-FDD) and the
Palipehutu Forces for National Liberation
(PALIPEHUTU-FNL). Due to infighting, they later
split, resulting in four armed movements with the same
names but with different leaders. Last year, the
facilitation responsibility was expanded, when former
President Mandela asked President Omar Bongo of
Gabon to assist, in order to widen expertise and
capacity. Later on, we also requested Tanzania to help,
particularly with regard to relations with the CNDD-
FDD of Pierre Nkurunziza.

When we last met with the Security Council
delegation in South Africa, earlier this year, there was
every reason to have mixed feelings about the Burundi
peace process. The armed movements and the
Transitional Government were far from finding
common ground. Interaction with the armed
movements was characterized by the issuing of
preconditions and demands, many of which had already
been addressed, or were being addressed, through the
Arusha Agreement of 2000. Many of them were indeed
also being implemented by the Government of
Burundi. There was also a sense from the armed groups
of not accepting the Arusha Agreement and of seeking
to negotiate a new type of agreement outside of
Arusha. There was also an impression on the part of the
armed groups that the international community
supported their reluctance to negotiate and conclude a
ceasefire. The unequivocal support of the Security
Council delegation for the peace process and the
message it gave to the armed groups directing them to
enter into negotiations immediately and without
conditions eliminated the wrong impression of
sympathy held by the armed movements. The
leadership provided by the Security Council in that
regard was indeed invaluable.

Given the difficulties we have faced in the past, it
is therefore pleasing and encouraging that we are today
meeting with the Security Council in a climate of
optimism and hope. Only two days ago, President
Pierre Buyoya signed a ceasefire agreement with Pierre
Nkurunziza of the CNDD-FDD at Arusha, Tanzania.
On 7 October 2002, the CNDD-FDD of Jean-Bosco
Ndayikengurukiye and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL of
Alain Mugabarabona signed a ceasefire agreement with
the Transitional Government. Indeed, these are positive
developments, as the delay in securing a ceasefire had
led to continued suffering by ordinary innocent people
in Burundi.

When the Arusha Agreement was signed, on 28
August 2000, all the signatories and stakeholders
understood that it would remain incomplete until a
ceasefire agreement was concluded. That meant that
the resources that were pledged by the international
community for the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement were kept in abeyance until that
requirement was fulfilled. The Council will recall that,
at the request of former President Mandela at Paris in
2000, international donors pledged $440 million in aid
to war-weary Burundi, subject to the conclusion of a
ceasefire agreement. The serious and challenging work
of implementing the agreements has now begun.

The signatories of the 7 October document -
President Buyoya, Alain Mugabarabona of
PALIPEHUTU-FNL and Jean-Bosco
Ndayikengurukiye of CNDD-FDD - have already
held three meetings, in Pretoria and Dar-es-Salam, to
unpack the details on various implementation issues.
Those include the return to Burundi of former fighters
and leaders, the participation of former armed
movements in the transitional institutions of the State
and Parliament, and issues relating to disarmament and
demobilization and to the building of a new, inclusive
security apparatus in the country.

With regard to the CNDD-FDD of Pierre
Nkurunziza, the agreement will come into force on 30
December 2002. The first 14 days after the date of
signature have been designated as a period to allow the
belligerents to communicate to their rank and file the
decision to stop fighting. Under the agreement, the
truce or the cessation of fighting is to enter into force
with 72 hours of signing. By 30 December, the
combatants should have commenced their movement
towards the assembly areas. Within thirty days the
parties are to discuss the establishment of
implementation structures, such as the joint monitoring
commission and joint liaison teams. The agreement
also provides for the establishment of an African
mission that will be responsible for the verification and
control of the ceasefire. The mission is to set up the
organs and machinery required for the control and
verification of the ceasefire.

The Nineteenth Summit Meeting on Burundi
mandated us to assist the parties to work out the
implementation details. Another key pending task is
the facilitation of the discussion of outstanding
political issues that could not be finalized during
negotiations. Those issues, among others, include the
return to constitutional legitimacy, issues relating to
post-war management, the transitional period and its
leaders, the welfare of the combatants after the
ceasefire, the location of the combatants, issues such as
good governance and the reconciliation and
reconstruction of the country. Those issues are part of
the annex to the agreement. Under the agreement
signed, negotiations on those issues will not constitute
preconditions for the implementation of the ceasefire.

The implementation process is a difficult and
involved one that requires the strong support of the
international community, especially the United
Nations. We are aware of the stringent prescripts of the
United Nations, including the difficulties of deploying
peacekeeping forces where there is not a total
ceasefire, as in Burundi. We say not total because of
the PALIPEHUTU-FNL. But we believe that creativity
and innovation in looking at the situation would make
it possible for the United Nations to become involved.
The nineteenth summit of heads of State directed the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL to enter into negotiations
immediately and conclude a ceasefire agreement by 30
December, or face robust sanctions. We will be
interacting with the movement shortly to arrange
negotiations, because the Summit Meeting again felt it
was necessary to give PALIPEHUTU-FNL another
chance.

In addition, the uniqueness of the Burundi
agreement has necessitated the provision that
combatants should move to assembly areas armed.
Weapons will be taken away from them and stored in
an armoury to which they will have access, should the
need arise. Again, that is a provision unique to
Burundi, allowed in order to allay fears. One of the
critical tasks of the African mission will be to monitor
the movements of the belligerents to the assembly
areas with their arms.

I also wish to add that that was considered
because, as you know, Mr. President, in the Great
Lakes region the conflict has tended to involve mass
killings, massacres and genocide. Therefore, the fears
by the CNDD that, if they were unarmed or had no
arms near them while the army was armed, that could
prejudice them, and we could therefore end up with a
situation of that nature. That is why that arrangement
was necessary.

We trust that the less-than-perfect nature of the
Burundi ceasefire will not stand in the way of United
Nations support, especially given the fact that there
have been precedents for such ceasefire arrangements.
We have in mind Mozambique and Zimbabwe in our
region, although the situations might not be identical.
We believe that, when the Security Council considers
the matter, it will take this into account. We appeal for
understanding of the Burundian problem. Given the
nature of the conflict, we are never going to have a
straightforward and classical ceasefire agreement. We
made this point when the Security Council visited
South Africa. That was precisely the reason why we
thought it would be important to come to the Security
Council as we have done. The process has been
complicated by the fact that there are more than one
belligerent party, all with divergent demands, which
had to be engaged separately and differently. The
Security Council delegation that visited South Africa in
April had some experience with the problem when the
CNDD-FDD of Pierre Nkurunziza refused to meet the
Council delegation in the same room as the CNDD-
FDD of Jean-Bosco Ndayikengurukiye.

We believe that support of such a unique situation
is possible under Chapter VIII of the Charter, which
supports the establishment of regional initiatives for
the resolution of conflicts, provided such arrangements
are consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, as well as Chapter VI, which provides
for the use of regional initiatives for the resolution of
disputes without the active, direct involvement of but
with the full support of the United Nations.

We consider the introduction of the African
mission as a bridging instrument, opening the situation
for the United Nations to come in when we have
perfected the conditions. The African mission and
other structures to be set up will require the support of
the United Nations apparatus to ensure success. Other
areas of United Nations support that we will soon be
asking for include training, integration support and
other humanitarian assistance, particularly for returning
combatants, especially those who cannot be integrated
into the security forces. We will certainly be discussing
more issues in that regard, because we believe that the
role of the United Nations will be very critical in
making this mission a success.

Allow me at this juncture to sincerely thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the Security
Council for this unwavering support provided while we
have been involved in this process. We are here today
because we know we can count on your unique and
continued support.

I am sure it will interest the Council to know that
as we discussed the ceasefire, all parties kept on
mentioning the United Nations. This indicates their
confidence that the Organization's participation boosts
confidence and makes people implement what would
be difficult to implement without that participation in
one form or the other.

We must also record our gratitude for United
Nations assistance in providing military experts, who
worked with South African and Tanzanian military
experts in drafting the ceasefire agreement as a basis
for discussion, discussed and lent their assistance, up to
the signing of the agreement among the belligerent
parties.

The contribution of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, Ambassador
Berhanu Dinka, is also extremely valuable to all of us.
We are grateful for this contribution. It has brought
confidence and hope to the Burundians and to those
who participated in these processes.

I must also use this opportunity to thank the
heads of State of the Great Lakes region for their
continued support to the process. I also wish to single
out President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, the
Chairperson of the Regional Initiative on Burundi, for
his unwavering support of the facilitation team. On the
first and the second, he sat with us throughout the day
and night as we negotiated the process.

Since its launching, the African Union (AU) has
also played a critical role in the Burundi peace process,
alongside the United Nations. As I have indicated,
Ambassador Bah, who represented the AU, was always
together with Ambassador Dinka. The AU participates
actively through the special representative of the
Secretary General of the AU. In addition, the
Chairperson of the AU, President Thabo Mbeki of
South Africa, has taken a hands-on approach to conflict
resolution in the Great Lakes region, and we value his
contribution to the process, not least by allowing his
Deputy to spend so much time on Burundi matters.

Once again, Mr. President, thank you for allowing
me the honour of interacting with you today. We have
come a long way with the Burundi peace process, and
we know that we cannot achieve the results we seek if
we work alone. We need the wholehearted support of
the United Nations and the international community.

We are convinced that peace will be sustained, for
we have experience in this regard. Many people
initially thought the Pretoria Agreement between
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would be impossible to implement; yet, within the
deadline Rwanda left the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is therefore possible that with initiatives by
Africans, and with the commitment shown by Africans,
we can move and address the conflicts in the continent.

Again, many thought that the Arusha Agreement
would not be concluded in 2000, and it was. They
thought there would never be a transitional government
in Burundi, yet it was installed on 1 November 2001.
This shows that regional solutions work if people are
determined to succeed. All they need is support from
this body.

Burundi is now poised for peace. We hope we can
count on the international community to invest in this
peace and ensure that we eliminate conflict, once and
for all, in Burundi.

