Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefings today
on the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
As always, we take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the intense work of the United Nations
and its partners towards achieving peace, development
and the well-being of the Syrian people.

Alleviating the suffering of the more than
11 million people with humanitarian needs remains
a global concern. That was apparent at the recently
concluded Brussels Conference, where the international
community expressed its willingness to help alleviate
the plight of the Syrian people, including the 5.6 million
refugees and the communities that host them. It is truly
everyone's responsibility to improve the conditions of
the people caught up in one of the longest and most
heartbreaking conflicts of recent times.

Eight years of devastating clashes have left women
and children disproportionately affected by the lack of
security and stability, and 80 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line. We therefore applaud
the success of the Conference and hope to see a broad,
accelerated, transparent and sustained implementation
of the humanitarian response plan. We encourage the
humanitarian actors involved to observe and uphold
international humanitarian law, the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence in
each of their operations and in all circumstances, and to
keep the Syrian people at the centre of their plans and
actions. With your permission, Mr. President, I would
like to elaborate on the following points.

In view of the current situation in the country,
where 5 million people have acute humanitarian needs,
we believe that one of our main priorities is to work
to increase the access of the United Nations to the
communities where those people are found, throughout
the country, in order to provide adequate assistance to
enhance their own resilience.

With respect to the recent displacements recorded
in north-eastern Syria, most ending up in the Al-Hol
camp, we would like to highlight the extraordinary
work to accommodate and attend to the more than
70,000 people - mainly women and children - who
have arrived at the camp in recent months. We are
particularly concerned about the malnourishment of
the child population. We urgently need tools to
provide medical and nutritional assistance to the most
vulnerable. We call for additional financial support in
order to expand those services.

We also highlight the conditions for humanitarian
access to Rukban camp. We are very concerned that
the provisions of the most recent convoy are about
to run out and there is still no permission to return.
That is why we call on the Syrian Government and the
countries that can - in one way or another - make
that possible to work together so that a new convoy
can reach Rukban as soon as possible. We welcome the
initiative to establish a coordination process with the
Syrian Government on possible evacuations from the
camp. We emphasize, however, that all returns must be
voluntary decisions, based on reliable information and
carried out in a safe and dignified manner. In addition,
basic standards of protection must be met in the pursuit
of durable solutions for Syrians.

Iwould like to add my voice to those who have spoken
before me regarding the worrisome situation in Idlib
and the hostilities that have taken place in recent weeks.
This is a serious concern for the civilian population that
resides there and creates major challenges in terms of
protection, including for the thousands of displaced
people. In that regard, we reiterate the need for full
compliance with the Idlib ceasefire agreement in order
to halt that escalation, which could have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences and could jeopardize the
political process under way.

That leads me to highlight a few points regarding
that process, which we see as the only solution to this
conflict. We reiterate our support for the five pillars
of the Pedersen proposal for future peace in Syria.
We applaud their inclusive yet ambitious approach
and awareness of the realities on the ground and the
lessons learned along the way. With that approach,
and under the guidelines of resolution 2254 (2015), we
believe it necessary to continue to work arduously and
strategically towards revitalizing the political process
with the creation of the constitutional committee.
We call on the parties to continue a constructive and
meaningful dialogue, facilitated by the United Nations,
so that the committee can be established and meet at a
not-too-distant date.

Finally, we reiterate that the pursuit of sustainable
peace in Syria that will alleviate the suffering of its
people and help to steer its course towards a new future
must be carried out with the effective participation of
all parts and segments of society, particularly that of
women and young people as agents of change for peace,
progress and the well-being of all.

