Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): It is
encouraging that today the Council members are joined
by the representatives of Northern and Southern Sudan,
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and Mr. Mkapa to
deliberate on important issues concerning the Sudan.

Maintaining peace, stability and development in
the Sudan is in the interest the Sudanese people. It is
also conducive to peace and development in the region
and on the African continent. Since the Council held a
high-level meeting on the Sudan last month (see S/PV.6425), the peace process in the Sudan continues
to make progress. Voter registration for the referendum
in Southern Sudan has concluded smoothly. We
commend Northern and Southern Sudan, the African
Union and the United Nations Secretariat for their
efforts to that end.

We hope that Northern and Southern Sudan will
retain their momentum, accelerate preparations for the
referendums and ensure that the referendums are
conducted in a peaceful, free, transparent and fair
manner, in compliance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. We call on the international community to
create favourable conditions for the referendums and
refrain from prejudging the outcome.

No party should take any unilateral action. No
matter what the outcome might be, peace and stability
in the Sudan and the region should be ensured. China
hopes that the North and the South will cherish the
hard-won peace, continue to dialogue and consult as
equals and reach an early agreement on border
demarcation, Abyei, wealth-sharing and other
outstanding issues. That is of great significance to the
long-term peace and stability of the Sudan and the
region.

China believes that achieving substantive results
at an early date in the Darfur political process and
reaching a comprehensive political agreement
represent the fundamental guarantee for long-term
peace, stability and calm in Darfur. Without a robust
political process there will be no peace or stability in
Darfur, and neither will there be protection of civilians,
humanitarian assistance, economic recovery or
reconstruction. We once again urge the armed groups
outside of the Doha political process to join the peace
talks immediately, without any preconditions.

