Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, for your personal presence in the
Security Council to preside over this meeting that is
very relevant to the Council's mandate. We thank you
and the Colombian delegation, under the able guidance
of Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso, for taking the
initiative to hold this open debate on small arms. Your
country's commitment to the issue of small arms has
been effectively manifested through the leadership of
Ambassador Camilo Reyes at the first ever United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, held recently in New York.

The well-articulated, forward-looking statement
from the Secretary-General at the outset sets the tone
for today's meeting. We thank him for that. Let me also
thank the Colombian delegation for circulating a
background note which sets the issue in perspective for
today's debate.

With the changing nature of conflicts, the
involvement of small arms and light weapons in
sustaining and aggravating conflicts has increased
manifold, with devastating effects on our society and
economy. The last decade, which saw the upsurge in
intra-State conflicts, also witnessed an annual toll of
almost 500,000 Victims, caused by more than
550 million small arms.

The arms resources nexus is now well
documented in at least four of the recent conflict
situations active on the agenda of the Security Council.
As mentioned in the Colombian note, small-arms-
related issues have been repeatedly addressed by the
Council, with regard to protection of civilians in armed
conflict; children in armed conflict; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; conflict prevention
and peace-building. We believe that the rationale
behind today's debate lies in this premise. Further, the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Small Arms Conference covers areas in which Council
action could be relevant in appropriate situations. My
delegation would therefore like to address six priority
areas.

The first is illicit arms flows. The unbridled flow
of arms across borders remains a difficult problem even
after a settlement of a conflict has been reached. In his
report of ll February 2000 on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the Secretary-General
refers to the need of imposing a local arms embargo
and deploying United Nations forces along national
borders to stop smuggling. The case of Kosovo is
worth noting in this regard. By its resolution 1160
(1998), the Security Council imposed a prohibition on
the sale or supply of small arms and light weapons.
This needs to be further strengthened, with provision
for severe punitive measures to curb large-scale
smuggling.

Putting an end to the illegal ownership of arms
and crossings of the boundaries of Kosovo was
important, as the United Nations Mission there is
mandated to hold elections soon. Curbing the
widespread availability of illegal arms and the
disarmament of the illegal armed groups is an
important precondition for ensuring the safety of the
population and the conduct of a free and fair election.
In East Timor, as in Kosovo, the problem of small arms
is recognized even though it has not come to the fore.
With elections to be held at the end of this month, this
issue needs to be given priority. The legislative
measures taken by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor in the form of small-arms
regulation and security arrangements are commendable
steps that could be replicated in similar situations
elsewhere. Small arms are often used by armed groups
operating in refugee camps. The Security Council has
in the past addressed this issue because of its disruptive
effect on post-conflict rehabilitation and resettlement
of refugees.

The second priority is arms embargoes. States
participating in the Small Arms Conference undertook
in the Programme of Action to take all necessary
measures against any activity that violates a Security
Council arms embargo. In cases of armed conflicts
involving multiple actors, the active cooperation of
neighbouring States is essential for the full
implementation of arms embargoes.

The enforcement of arms embargoes depends
fully on States fulfilling their obligation to provide the
Security Council sanctions committees with available
information on violations. Widespread violations in a
number of specific cases necessitated more effective
means of monitoring on a continuous basis.

The cooperation and assistance of Member States
in compiling the information and updating the database
is an essential prerequisite. The Council should call
upon Governments to ensure that they provide the
information required to update the lists regarding arms
trafficking that have been established by the respective
sanctions committees.

The third priority is regional cooperation.
Through the sharing of information between law-
enforcement and customs-control agencies, regional
organizations can play an important role in monitoring
the flow of arms. The Security Council, in addressing
situations of armed conflict, should continue to
encourage such regional actions and stress the
importance of regional cooperation in tackling the
issue of illicit trade in small arms. As called for by the
Council in the presidential statement of 24 September
1999, States concerned should also strive to establish
and strengthen voluntary national or regional moratoria
or similar measures to prohibit or discourage the
manufacture, trade and transfer of small arms in
affected regions or subregions.

While taking into account their different
characteristics, regions may benefit from the
experience of others. The examples of the Economic
Community of West African States moratorium, the
Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials
and the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms
Exports stand out in this respect.

Fourthly, there is the human rights and
humanitarian perspective. No discussion on small arms
can be complete without addressing the human rights
and humanitarian perspective. The Inter-Agency
Standing Committee survey, released on the eve of the
Small Arms Conference, makes clear the link between
irresponsible use of lethal small arms and massive
violations of humanitarian law and of the human rights
of civilian populations. On the ground the examples of
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo only substantiate these findings. Among other
things, that the presence and proliferation of small
arms in these conflict areas acts as a multiplier of
Violence cannot be overemphasized.

We believe that Security Council action to
address specific conflict situations can be greatly
enhanced if the reports of the Secretary-General
contain an analysis of the availability, stockpiling, lines
of supply, brokering and transportation arrangements in
respect of small arms and light weapons. Recent
experience shows that tracking the financial network
behind the illegal arms trade is of vital importance. The
engagement of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
Sanctions in tracking the financial network of UNITA
is only a beginning. The success of this initiative
should be extremely useful in other such cases.

The fifth priority is peace agreements. The issue
of the disposal of arms and ammunition often becomes
a stumbling block in the implementation of peace
agreements. A determination about this question during
peace negotiations and its appropriate reflection in
resulting peace agreements is useful for stabilizing
post-conflict security situations.

The report of the Secretary-General of
11 February 2000 on the role of United Nations
peacekeeping in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration mentions the United Nations keeping
custody of collected weapons so that they can be
handed over to restructured armed forces. The
Programme of Action has provided for the destruction
of seized or collected weapons with prior marking and
for keeping a record of the disposal. The Council
should support destruction as the most effective mode
of disposal and call for its inclusion as a provision in
peace agreements between parties. We are very happy
that the destruction handbook has been circulated to us
today.

Sixth and finally, child soldiers. We particularly
welcome reference to this aspect in the statement of the
Secretary-General. Children are the most helpless
victims of armed conflicts that are exacerbated by
small arms and light weapons. Their plight becomes
more intolerable with their forced recruitment and use
as child soldiers. In this context, Bangladesh affirms
the need for the declaration of child-soldier-free zones
in various regions of the world.

In conclusion, it must be stressed that the
challenge posed by small arms is multifaceted and
involves, inter alia, security, conflict resolution and
humanitarian dimensions. Clearly, Council actions in
these areas must therefore complement the contribution
of civil society, non-governmental organizations and
industry. At the same time, a system-wide approach in
the United Nations, epitomized by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee and the Coordinating Action on
Small Arms, must also be encouraged. In conflict
areas, the Council would do well to encourage regional
initiatives which can generate global action.

We believe that the issue of small arms and light
weapons cannot be Viewed in isolation of its peace and
security perspective. Given the role of small arms in
perpetuating the cycle of violence, we must focus on
prevention. In this regard, I cannot overemphasize the
importance of promoting a culture of peace and non-
violence, particularly among children and young
people, through education and advocacy, so that
today's victims do not become tomorrow's
perpetrators.

