It is a great for honour for me to deliver the following statement from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, on the theme of today's open debate, entitled "Peacebuilding and sustaining peace: contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity". "At the outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Ralph Gonsalves on the assumption of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines' presidency of the Security Council. This event is not only significant for your country, but also for all the other small island States, whose independent voices must be heard on the Security Council. "The theme of today's open debate reflects the concerns of many countries that are facing the rise in complex security threats in the present trying circumstances. This focus is all the more important as all of us are fundamentally confronting a new challenge - the coronavirus disease pandemic - which has been indiscriminate in its ruthlessness vis-a-vis every country. The pandemic attests to the lesson that history has taught us, namely, that there is no alternative to solidarity, cooperation, responsible behaviour and mutual assistance. "Regrettably, not all countries share that approach. Some continue to prioritize their own egotistical and mercenary interests. The practice of unilateral sanctions is being applied ever more broadly, hampering other States' efforts to combat the pandemic and its socioeconomic consequences. "In this context, we would like to once again express our solidarity with the appeal made by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for a global ceasefire, which includes lifting, or at least easing, illegal restrictive measures. Given the current circumstances, the proposal of the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, to establish green corridors, free of trade wars and sanctions, would be of particular importance. It would help ensure that vulnerable populations gain access to basic necessities and medicine. "Countries facing an uphill battle in transitioning from conflict to sustainable peace are especially in need of the international community's assistance. In granting such assistance, it is necessary to be guided by the principle that it is the primary responsibility of the countries themselves for developing and implementing peacebuilding strategies and priorities in accordance with the needs and requirements of their societies. Every case requires a particular, unique approach without the imposition of automatic one-size-fits-all solutions and policy prescriptions. "The same applies to efforts to prevent crises. It is alarming that increasingly frequent attempts are being made to establish universal conflict indicators, which create opportunities for abuse and interference in the internal affairs of others with a view to pressuring so-called objectionable Governments. "Tam referring to the attempt to present human rights violations as all but the main prerequisite for crises. We believe that the successful settlement of armed conflicts and the reconciliation of conflicting sides create the foundation for improving human rights, promoting sustainable development and resolving environmental and other issues. "We do not deny the link connecting these issues in the maintenance of international peace and security. However, we proceed from the premise that economic troubles do not automatically trigger a lack of security, and vice versa. Moreover, we deem it extremely important that, through division of labour among the main United Nations agencies, each one must perform its functions in strict accordance with its mandate. "That applies, for instance, to the Security Council discussion on the climate agenda. We do not believe that climate change is a universal factor underlying conflict and global instability. In that regard, its impact on the socioeconomic and political situations in a number of countries and regions must be viewed on a case-by-case basis. "The leading role in that area falls to the relevant United Nations agencies with the appropriate expertise and tools for drafting long-term decisions on effectively countering climate change. We fully share the concerns of our friends from the small island states and intend to actively help them adapt to climate change, both through national development institutions and universally recognized international bodies, including under the aegis of the United Nations. "At the same time, we support the cooperation and pooling of efforts of various United Nations agencies, when appropriate and agreed to by all Member States. In that regard, we would like to mention the Peacebuilding Commission, which is an advisory platform for developing strategies for the post-conflict recovery of countries based on their priorities. We advocate for the development and strengthening of dialogue with the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council. "T once again thank the presidency of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for calling attention to the current challenges and security threats. I am convinced that an honest and open exchange of views will facilitate an effective search for ways of responding to such extremely urgent problems".
