Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate on a subject of universal
concern, namely, the proliferation and possible use by
non-State actors of nuclear, chemical, bacteriological or
radiological weapons. At the same time, we commend
Spain for its successful chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
especially during the process of the comprehensive
review of its implementation.

The Constitution of Ecuador expressly condemns
the production, possession, commercialization,
importation, transfer, stockpiling and use of weapons
of mass destruction regardless of who does it. For
this reason, Ecuador is developing the legislative and
regulatory framework appropriate for preventing the
proliferation and illicit trafficking in these weapons
and their delivery systems.

The National Assembly of Ecuador is about
to approve, as a step prior to ratification, the 2005
Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, thereby reiterating our
commitment to fighting sabotage and smuggling of
nuclear materials and their possible use for terrorist
purposes. Ecuador played an active role in the recent
international conference on nuclear security convened
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which organized the meeting as the right forum for
addressing challenges in the field of physical nuclear
security in an inclusive manner, where all IAEA member
States were represented and expressed their ideas and
their commitments. Ecuador is concerned that in forums
with limited participation outside the framework of the
United Nations or its specialized agencies and bodies in
which only a few States participate, issues of universal
interest, such as nuclear security, are addressed.

As long as nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
remain in the possession of States, there is a risk of
their use. For this reason, when we speak of weapons
of mass destruction and the risk of their proliferation
to non-State actors, we cannot overlook the primary
responsibility of States to fulfil their obligations
under the various international, universal or regional
instruments in this sphere, including their destruction,
without forgetting that the 85 per cent of existing
nuclear material in the world is for military purposes.
By its very nature, then, it is outside international
nuclear-security agreements.

Nor can we forget that the sole category of
weapons of mass destruction that is not prohibited
by a universal legally binding instrument are nuclear
weapons. For this reason, Ecuador, along with other
States, sponsored resolution A/C.l/7l/L.41, which was
adopted in October in the First Committee by almost
two-thirds of the United Nations membership, which
called for the start of a negotiation process in 2017
on a treaty banning nuclear weapons with a View to
their complete elimination. In so doing, my country is
fulfilling its obligations under article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We
urge all States, beginning with nuclear-weapon States
and States possessing nuclear weapons, to participate
in these negotiations that will have authentically
inclusive nature.

As long as stockpiles ofweapons ofmass destruction
exist, the risk oftheir being used for criminal or terrorist
purposes is high. So the best guarantee that this does
not occur is to completely eliminate them.

