Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): The tragedy in the former
Yugoslavia, of which the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the worst manifestation, has always been
a matter of serious concern to my Government. The
former Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia was a
friendly country, with which Nigeria enjoyed years of
fruitful and mutually beneficial relations. We have
therefore supported all the peace efforts and diplomatic
initiatives that have been aimed at reaching a
comprehensive resolution of the crisis. As a testimony of
that concern, my country was one of the first to
contribute a battalion of troops to the initial United
Nations peace-keeping operation deployed in Croatia in
1992; even now that we are no longer part of the
contingent, our personnel are part of the military observer
component of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR). Furthermore, since joining the Council,
we have supported all well-meaning proposals, in the
form of resolutions and presidential statements that have
been presented in the Council aimed at moving forward
the peace process.

We continue, however, to view with concern the
lack of unity of purpose and harmonization of policies
among the key players in the crisis, and specifically
within the Contact Group. The tendency on the part of the
major Powers to pick favourites and to let off the other
side easily has not helped to advance our collective search
for peace. My delegation has therefore repeatedly called
on the regional Powers and organizations most directly
concerned and with the capability to take action to
coordinate their efforts with those of the United Nations
in promoting a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

The recent developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the major offensive in Croatia, have marked a turning
point in the crisis. My Government had called upon all
concerned to intensify the search for a political solution.

 

And we had been encouraged by some signs that such was
beginning to happen. However, the Sarajevo market
incident threw another unexpected wrench into the wheel of
the peace process.

Another aspect of the problem that has engaged the
attention of my Government has been the role of our Blue
Helmets in the conflict. While we felt the need to enhance
the credibility of the United Nations efforts by enhancing
UNPROFOR'S capacity to defend itself and execute its
mandate, we also cautioned about the prospects of the
United Nations becoming involved as a party to the
conflict. In this regard, we have seen the recent NATO air
strikes as an appropriate and measured response to the
recent artillery attack by the Bosnian Serb forces against a
civilian centre, but at the same time we regretted that it
became necessary to employ such force.

None the less, let me restate that my Government's
preferred option continues to be a negotiated political
settlement, and we urge that all concerned accept the
pursuit of this option in good faith. The military option is
futile and should be abandoned.

The hope of my delegation is that these strikes have
not done irreparable damage to the neutrality of the United
Nations, as well as impaired the recent glimmer of hope for
a peaceful settlement. We think it is not too late to reassess
the current strategy and take a long-term view of where it
could eventually lead us. Such a reassessment should be
carried out by both the United Nations and NATO, not in
competition but in partnership.

My Government therefore calls for restraint on all
sides and requests those Governments with the greatest
influence on the parties to exercise their leverage in
bringing them to the negotiating table.

We hope that the conclusions reached today at the
meeting in Geneva will provide a springboard and the
necessary momentum for advancing the peace process.

