Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I also welcome
First Deputy Prime Ministers Daeie and Thaci to the
Security Council.

Since the Council last met in this format (see S/PV.7327), only two months ago, we have witnessed
welcome progress in Kosovo. The formation of a new
Government in Pristina in December, after a long gap,
marks an important step forward following free and
fair elections throughout the territory of Kosovo in
June of last year. With the key institutions now in place,
we look forward to the new Government enacting the
reforms highlighted in the European Commission's
annual Kosovo Progress Report 2014. There is much
for the new Administration to take forward, including
economic development and the rule of law, ensuring
greater independence of the judiciary and tackling
organized crime and corruption.

The formation of a new Government is also a chance
to bring renewed momentum to the European Union
(EU) facilitated high-level dialogue. The Governments
of both Serbia and Kosovo have shown welcome
commitment to that process, and we wish them every
success in their first meeting of 2015, next week. I
welcome the strong commitments to this process that
we have just heard from First Deputy Prime Ministers
Thaci and Daeie in their statements this morning.

Continued progress at the working level will
be vital. I am pleased that the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/74) notes that some progress was made
in the technical-level dialogue in December. The
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia
is integral to both countries' European Union accession
paths.

We also welcome the new Government's commitment
to establish judicial proceedings for the investigation
into the allegations reported by the Special Investigative
Task Force. As the Secretary-General makes clear in
his report, that will be an important step forward for the
new Government. We urge them to ensure that relevant
laws are passed to enable that.

Ijoin the representative of Angola in commending
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, supported by UN-Women and the
United Nations Development Programme, on women
and peace and security, including the holding of an open
day to mark the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women.

We also welcome the adoption of the Kosovo action
plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In that
context, the legislative provision made for survivors
of sexual violence during the Kosovo conflict is an
important step. Women and peace and security and
the prevention of sexual violence are rightly important
priorities of the Council, and it is heartening to see
these issues being addressed in Kosovo.

While the Secretary-General's report underlines
the continuing stability of the overall security situation
in Kosovo, the violence in Pristina during recent
protests is a matter of concern. We all support the right
to peaceful protest, but Government authorities and the
opposition in Pristina must do all that they can to avoid
violence and escalation. It is vital that the Government
and the international community in Kosovo continue to
engage with the opposition to address the underlying
causes of the protests, including the economic situation.

The report of the Secretary-General also prompts
us to note the need for continued focus on tackling
ethnically motivated incidents. We urge all political and
community leaders to work towards creating greater
cooperation in and between communities, tackling
issues from the past and reconciliation.

Later this month, we will mark the seventh
anniversary of Kosovo's declaration of independence.
It is an important moment to reflect on the progress
Kosovo has made. It is also a chance to recognize the
progress made in the international community. Since
2008, well over half ofthe States Members ofthe United
Nations have recognized Kosovo, including many of its
neighbours in the Western Balkans.

Thanks to the historic agreement reached with
Serbia in 2013, Kosovo now has a strong foundation for
cooperation with Belgrade and for negotiations on EU
membership. In addition, Kosovo has secured access
to funding from the international financial institutions
and will compete in the 2016 Olympic Games, having
gained membership of the International Olympic
Committee. We welcome that progress. It demonstrates
that Kosovo's independence is irreversible. We
encourage those countries that have not yet recognized
Kosovo to do so.

Precisely because of that level of progress, the
United Kingdom reiterates its View that it is past time
to adjust the frequency of these meetings to reflect the
new realities on the ground. The situation does not, in
our view, merit quarterly meetings. The Council must
recognize and adapt to progress, particularly when
there are so many genuine challenges to international
peace and security confronting us. In practice, these
meetings see largely predictable exchanges of well-
known positions by Council members. The format tends
to lead to the accentuation of differences between the
two countries at a time when our shared goal should be
to inject momentum into the EU-facilitated dialogue.
We would like to see less talk in New York and more
action in the EU-facilitated dialogue.

