Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Feltman and
the convening of this meeting at this delicate moment
for Ukraine and the region.

Since the last time the Council met to discuss
the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7157), the crisis
has intensified in the eastern area of the country, in
particular in Donetsk, Sloviansk, Kharkiv and Luhansk,
owing to the acts of violence committed by separatist
groups.

Chile would like to express its serious concern
regarding the grave and even fatal consequences of the
escalation of the crisis. In that respect, we condemn
the kidnapping of the military monitors from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Ukrainian security staff in Sloviansk. We
call for their physical and psychological health to be
preserved and for their immediate and unconditional
release.

It is essential that the Council contribute to
promoting maximum restraint and moderation by the
parties, and we call upon all those with influence on
the parties to take actions aimed at stopping the crisis.
It is urgent that tensions be reduced and that we return
to the spirit of compromise evidenced in the Geneva
talks of 17 April, which led to the joint statement by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Russia and Ukraine,
the Secretary of State of the United States and the
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union. That statement listed
concrete steps that Chile believes to be essential to
reducing tensions and restoring security for all citizens,
including abstaining from violence and intimidation,
disarming the armed groups and vacating the illegally
occupied buildings, among other things. We also
believe that it is equally important that a broad and
transparent constitutional process be launched, leading
to the immediate establishment of an inclusive national
dialogue.

We reiterate again the need to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Furthermore, we reiterate the obligation of
Member States to abstain from resorting to the use or
threat of use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of any State.

Once again, we call for the parties to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis through direct political dialogue,
abstain from taking unilateral measures and support
the international mediation initiatives, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 68/262. That process
should be inclusive and ensure respect for the rule of
law, human rights and fundamental freedoms and full
respect for the rights of minorities.

I would like conclude by expressing my appreciation
for the good offices of the Secretary-General and by
underscoring the work of the United Nations human
rights monitoring group for Ukraine and of the OSCE
aimed at establishing the facts, reducing tensions and
helping to create a climate conducive to the holding of
presidential elections on 25 May.

