Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the European Union statement on the important
topic we are dealing with today. Nonetheless, I would
like to add some further points stemming from
Croatia's hard-earned experience on the matter.

The complexity of post-conflict management
could probably be best explained through the metaphor
of growing a tree. To grow a strong and long-lasting
tree with deep roots and wide branches, many
components are required, such as soil, water, sunshine
and nutrition. But, above all, time and patience are of
the essence. Unfortunately, in many post-conflict areas,
the international community's approach sometimes
lacks both in trying to achieve too many things in too
little time.

Like the growth of a tree, post-conflict
reconciliation cannot be rushed. It can be assisted
through political, financial, technical and other means,
but it cannot be imposed from the outside. Like a tree,
when the moment is right, it will grow and blossom. If
it is not yet an opportune time, if it is still early in the
process, external pressure can only damage the fragile
growth.

There is an important distinction between
confidence-building and reconciliation. The former is a
crucial prerequisite for the latter, and only when the
two sides gain confidence in each other can the process
of reconciliation begin. To ignore the differences
between the two will slow down the process. The
respective populations at the grass-roots level are fully
aware of these differences. This is a fact no
international mediation or assistance effort should
overlook. In this highly sensitive process, one must
carefully listen to the voices of the region, of the
nations and of the individuals concerned and respect
them.

From the pragmatic point of enhancing the
efficiency of our efforts, it would be more than useful
to precisely define what the two terms - confidence-
building and reconciliation - consist of, and to keep
those definitions in mind while conducting the
international community's work on the ground.

From our point of view, pivotal confidence-
building measures are, among others, the return of
refugees and displaced persons, exchange of data on
missing persons, strengthening stability along borders,
arms-verification mechanisms, joint projects aiming at
cross-border cooperation and the fight against
organized crime, sport competition, and economic
cooperation, based primarily on private
entrepreneurship.

Allow me to briefly point out, starting from
Croatia's experience, two key components that serve as
the bedrock for post-conflict confidence-building and
consequent reconciliation. These are prospects and
justice.

Providing the population in war-torn areas with
the prospect of a better life is the best possible
investment in national and regional stability. These
prospects go way beyond basic economic categories,
although providing steady jobs for the respective
population, especially for former combatants, remains
an unsurpassed priority. A quest for new vehicles of
cooperation and coexistence that will provide a secure
framework for democratic and economic prosperity is
what former enemies usually have in common. The
international community should assist them as much as
possible to fulfil this quest fruitfully and in the shortest
possible time.

Commonly shared goals and interests are at the
core of the confidence-building process. The prospect
ofjoining the European Union, for example, serves as a
strong incentive for all the countries in the area of the
former Yugoslavia, initiating a number of far-reaching
reforms in the fields of the economy, justice and
domestic affairs.

Because of the strategic importance of this
prospect for every individual and for the country as a
whole, it is of the essence not to blur it or put it beyond
reach. The prospect has to be clearly defined and the
road towards it must be cleared of moving benchmarks
and ever-growing conditionalities.

Over the last decade, it has become evident that
the issue of justice tops the agenda that has to be
addressed in post-conflict societies.

When respective countries are unwilling or
unable to face the responsibility of crimes themselves,
the international community has to be ready to step in.
On the other hand, we should encourage domestic
judicial systems to deal with this pivotal issue and,
once the conditions are fulfilled, to transfer to domestic
courts as many war crimes-related files as possible.
Justice is often referred to as a parent to peace. It
is indisputably an essential part of confidence-building
and reconciliation. In addition to that, amnesty and
forgiveness are equally important elements of the
healing process in fragile post-conflict societies.
However, we must be aware of the fact that, as much as
they can reconcile, these approaches can add to the
polarization of societies. That is why any external
influence has to be carefully measured in order to
strike the right balance between judicial and non-
judicial means in achieving confidence-building.

Justice has to be served, but a historical record
that leaves no room for misinterpretation must be
preserved as well. Forgiveness does not necessarily
include forgetfulness. History should not dictate the
course of the future or be pushed into oblivion. Justice
well and justly served fortifies a country's political
stability by creating a new moral climate centred
around the rule of law and respect for human rights,
while avoiding denial about the past and the causes of
conflict.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that Croatia
remains determined to continue promoting confidence-
building and good-neighbourly relations throughout
South-East Europe. In this respect, I would like to
conclude by quoting the newly-appointed Prime
Minister of Croatia, Mr. Ivo Sanader, who recently
stated:

"It is with renewed courage that we build a more
tolerant society, a society of patience and trust, so
as to achieve the victory of forgiveness and
compassion over the challenges of divisions and
disparities."

