Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Kazakh presidency for convening this open debate and
for its efficient stewardship of the Council this month.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). We look forward to participating in the
forthcoming Ministerial Meeting of the NAM
Committee on Palestine, to be held in Addis Ababa.

We thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for his comprehensive briefing and
share his profound concern over the recent escalation
of tension and violence around the Palestinian question.
We urge all concerned to exercise maximum restraint
and to keep all meaningful options open for resuming
the peace process negotiations, thereby keeping alive
our conviction in a two-State solution.

It is a tragic irony that while we were hoping to
see some glimmer of hope in the fiftieth year of
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
territories, we instead witnessed the situation spiralling
into unwarranted provocative acts and violence,
jeopardizing the prospects of the peace process and
seriously undermining the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people.

Bangladesh remains deeply concerned over
unilateral decisions and actions that compromise the
standing of East Jerusalem as a final-status issue in
the peace process and contribute to changing the city's
historical and legal status, demographic structure
and Arab-Islamic character. Bangladesh reaffirms
the overriding importance of preserving the legal
status of Jerusalem within the framework of relevant
United Nations resolutions, including those adopted by
the Council.

Bangladesh urges the Council to prevail upon
Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, lift the blockade in the
Gaza Strip, and put an end to all forms of occupation
and violence. We remain concerned over Israel's
total disregard for complying with the provisions of
resolution 2234 (2016). Immediate priority must be
given to ensuring international protection for the
Palestinian people, who have suffered for decades from
the occupying Power's policy of collective punishment.

The continued breaches of international
humanitarian law and systematic human rights
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories have
given rise to an egregious culture of impunity. In the
absence of effective international accountability, the
occupying Power continues to persecute Palestinian
civilians, imprison and abuse scores of Palestinians
in its detention centres, and dispossess and evict
thousands of Palestinian families through its unlawful
construction and expansion of settlements.

Bangladesh shares concerns over funding cuts
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
will have grave consequences for millions ofPalestinian
refugees in a number of host countries. We reaffirm the
need to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable
funding for UNRWA, and urge Member States to help
uphold UNRWA's ability to make a difference in the
lives of Palestinian refugees.

Under the guidance of our Honourable Prime
Minister, the Government and the people of Bangladesh
remain steadfast in our support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self- determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in the framework of a two-State solution.

Bangladesh looks forward to seeing positive signs
emerge from various regional and bilateral initiatives
being pursued to address the Palestinian question.
We emphasize that provocations, unilateral actions
and the escalation of tension are totally incompatible
with our shared pursuit of peace and security in
the region. We expect the Council to demonstrate
unity of purpose in finding peaceful, just and lasting
solutions to all protracted conflicts and the resulting
humanitarian situations around the world, including the
Palestinian question.

