Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Bearing in mind the important stabilizing role
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the Russian delegation voted
in favour of resolution 2296 (2016), extending the
mandate of the hybrid mission. As a result of intensive
consultations, members of the Council managed to
make the text sufficiently balanced. In particular, the
resolution reflects the fact that the security situation
in Darfur has significantly improved of late and that
relative calm prevails in four of the five states of the
region. Isolated pockets of resistance on the part of
insurgents are found only in the mountainous region of
Jebel Marra in Central Darfur.

Against that backdrop, we must raise the issue of
developing an exit strategy for UNAMID. For us, an
important provision of the resolution is that which tasks
the Secretary-General with providing recommendations
by October about benchmarks for UNAMID. We hope
that future reports of the Secretariat will fully reflect
the conclusions and recommendations of the Joint
Working Group tasked with developing an exit strategy
for UNAMID.

The recently published special report of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2016/510) does
not meet those criteria at all. It is not by chance that the
African Union Peace and Security Council has shown
relatively little enthusiasm for that document. The Joint
Working Group on Darfur adequately incorporates the
views of all parties interested in the situation in Darfur
and various aspects of UNAMID activities, including
that of the host country. If the Secretariat took the
conclusions and proposals of the Working Group into
account, that would be fully in accordance with the
basic principles of peacekeeping.

At the same time, we cannot agree with all the
provisions of the resolution just adopted. For example,
we in now way share the concern expressed about the
referendum in Darfur. Over 70 per cent of voters of the
region took part in that referendum. I believe that the
Security Council should show respect for the expression
of the will of the voters ofDarfur, especially against the
backdrop of recent referendums in Africa and Europe.
Year after year, the tone of the resolutions on Darfur
have become increasingly negative. It is our impression
that the only goal of the authors and co-authors of those
resolutions is basically to ramp up pressure on the
Government of the Sudan, using every opportunity at
their disposal. Unfortunately, it is UNAMID that often
finds itself hostage to those political games.

