Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me,
first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
accession of the Russian Federation to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September and
to thank you for the invitation addressed to my country
to participate in this debate.

I would also like to join those who have preceded
me in strongly condemning, on behalf of Morocco, the
terrorist attacks that struck Burkina Faso yesterday
and in expressing our heartfelt condolences to the
Government, the Burkinabe people and the families
of the victims. Morocco takes this opportunity to
reiterate its full support to its sister country of Burkina
Faso in its fight against terrorism, a scourge that is
destabilizing the entire Sahel region. In that respect,
increased support for the Group of Five for the Sahel is
more important than ever.

I would also like to warmly thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing,
which expressed the United Nations firm commitment
to peacekeeping that is adapted to contemporary
realities, on the basis of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, of which he was the driving force and which
Morocco fully and firmly supports. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, in a letter addressed to the Secretary-
General, was among the first Heads of State to express
his full support for the initiative. I would like to take
the opportunity of our debate today to pay resounding
tribute to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, whose
peace and security reforms and initiatives have a
positive impact on peacekeeping operations.

This debate, almost a year after the official launch
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, is timely and
will allow us to collectively assess the progress made and
the challenges that remain. Furthermore, we commend
the Secretariat's leadership in implementing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping
Operations, including through the proposal of an action
plan. In that context, Morocco welcomed the concept
of "champions" and committed itself from the outset
to supporting performance and accountability and
to improving partnerships in peacekeeping. In view
of other important themes, the Kingdom of Morocco
has also committed to supporting the strengthening
of leadership and to improving the safety and security
of peacekeepers, who are so very important to us all.
Allow me to share with the Council the concrete actions
undertaken by my country since its endorsement of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, nearly a year ago.

With regard to force generation, the recent
deployment of a rapid deployment battalion under
the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), with new equipment that fully meets
requisite standards, was completed in record time of
two months, from the submission of the expression of
interest to deployment. This is all the more important
as the battalion was deployed just in time to support
the security arrangements put in place by MONUSCO
in preparation for the latest elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That feat, which was the result
of exemplary collaboration with the Secretariat, could
serve as a model ofa good practice. I would like to take
this opportunity to note that this endeavour would not
have succeeded without the support and cooperation of
the Secretariat.

Morocco enjoys cooperation in the security sector
with many friendly and allied countries, including in
training and military capacity-building. My country is
using its expertise and experience in peacekeeping to
ensure adequate training for its troops and those of many
partner countries. We will soon have an opportunity
to announce a new type of partnership with another
major troop-contributing country. We also welcome
the positive feedback expressed by several delegations
from the Department of Peace Operations (DPO) and
the Department of Operational Support (DOS), which
recently visited Morocco and had an opportunity to
visit the training centres.

In order to optimize support, a series of training
courses were planned, primarily for French-speaking
African countries, within the framework of the
triangular cooperation programme proposed by DPO
and DOS, pursuant to the recommendations of resolution
2378 (2017). The initial training of planning officers is
currently under way in Morocco, until 13 September,
with 46 officers from approximately 30 countries. An
engineering training course is planned from 16 October
to 11 December, with a medical training course slated
for the first quarter of 2020.

Morocco is also working to strengthen the impact
of peacekeeping operations on efforts to ensure the
sustainability of peace, particularly through our role
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which I have the
honour to assume.

With regard to conduct and discipline, including
the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse, the
Kingdom of Morocco fully supports the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy and continues to take
various measures to eradicate that scourge, especially
since His Majesty King Mohammed V1 is a member of
the Circle of Leadership established by the Secretary-
General.

In addition, the Royal Armed Forces have made
considerable efforts to promote the inclusion of women
in peacekeeping operations, which has enabled Morocco
to exceedthe required level of participation. Moreover, in
the context of bolstering its international commitments,
Morocco recently endorsed the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

All of those actions are part of Morocco's policy,
which considers peacekeeping to be one of the most
effective tools for ensuring global peace and stability.

The Kingdom of Morocco also attaches particular
importance to the primacy of political solutions and
partnerships with regional organizations, particularly
the African Union (AU). The Central African Republic
is a perfect example, with successful cooperation
between the United Nations, the AU and the Economic
Community of Central African States, which led to
the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. As
Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the AU for
the month of September, Morocco will spare no effort to
strengthen that strategic partnership. This success is an
additional guarantee of our continental Organization's
ability to meet important challenges and, we hope,
should help advance discussions on United Nations
financing for the AU peace support operations - a
priority for our continent.

I would also like to stress the importance of the
decision taken at the end of July by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations to review the structure of
the report according to the eight themes of the Action for
Peace initiative. Morocco, as peacekeeping coordinator
for the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, will spare
no effort, with the support of all Committee members,
to achieve a positive outcome at the next session, to be
held in March 2020.

Finally, I would be remiss ifI did not pay tribute to
the women and men serving in peacekeeping operations,
often in difficult and life-threatening circumstances.

