Mr. Vedrine (France) (interpretation from French): A
year ago we met to discuss Africa, on the initiative of Mrs.
Albright, and asked the Secretary-General to present a
report to us on this subject. The report contains many
proposals and recommendations. The Security Council has
already acted to take these recommendations forward.
Several resolutions and presidential statements were
adopted to that end on the initiative of the African
delegations last week.

I would like to make a few short observations on the
experience of the past year and the work that has been
accomplished.

The number of conflicts on the continent remains
high; it has actually risen. Conventional conflicts between
States have not gone away, as evidenced by those in East
Africa. The source of instability is most often internal, but
the nature of these crises is such that they spread rapidly
by generating and fuelling the movement of refugees,
arms-trafficking, ethnic solidarity, guerrillas and foreign
interference. This is the case in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in particular.

The contagious effect of these crises on the region
warrants a greater role by the regional organizations in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In this regard,
I commend the African mediation effort led by President
Bongo in the Central African Republic; that of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
in the crises in Liberia, Sierra Leone and, in cooperation
with the community of Portuguese-speaking countries, in
Guinea-Bissau; the efforts by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) for Somalia and
southern Sudan; and those of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council must retain primary
responsibility for international peacekeeping and security
operations, in Africa and elsewhere. The persevering
efforts of the Secretary-General's special envoys and
representatives in the settlement of several conflicts -
tribute should be paid here to Maitre Blondin Beye -
and the presence in the field of observer missions and
peacekeeping operations are evidence of the United
Nations role. The Council was right, in spite of the bitter
experiences of the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM) in Somalia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in Rwanda,
not to abdicate its responsibilities, and to establish last
spring the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA) for the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) for Sierra Leone, and to try to maintain the

 

United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) in
an effort to save the peace process in Angola.

The Secretary-General is right to insist on the need to
give the Organization the financial, material and human
resources needed for intervention. Peacekeeping cannot
depend solely on shifting coalitions and optional financing.
My country, for its part, will continue to make a major
contribution, whether by participating directly in United
Nations operations, such as MINURCA, in which 200
French soldiers are serving, or through a $40 million
cooperation programme to strengthen the peacekeeping
capabilities of the African countries.

Good coordination between the United Nations and the
very positive actions of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) - and I welcome what was said here by its current
Chairman, President Blaise Compaore - and subregional
organizations takes on special importance in this context.
The Security Council adopted a welcome resolution on this
matter on 17 September. MINURCA and UNOMSIL are a
good illustration of positive interaction between the United
Nations and regional initiatives. The former has taken over
from an inter-African force, the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), in order to consolidate its achievements with a
broader mandate. The latter is supporting a regional force,
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). In Africa, as
elsewhere, the Security Council must of course retain
control of the operations it authorizes, in accordance with
its responsibilities.

The particular nature of the present conflicts calls for
a comprehensive approach. The regional crisis involving six
or seven States on the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo demonstrates the need for an international
conference on peace in the Great Lakes region which would
permit all the protagonists to address and try to resolve
together the problems of security, refugees and minorities
and to lay the groundwork for regional cooperation. I think
that this idea is gaining ground. France hopes that the
countries concerned will commit themselves to this path,
and it will support all efforts in that direction.

With regard to refugees, the Secretary-General is right
to say that it is essential at one and the same time to
guarantee their rights and safety, ensure the security of the
countries which receive them and prevent the refugees from
being used by one or another party as a pretext for political
or military action.

Similarly, illegal flows of arms are helping to
transform many tensions into armed confrontation and to
maintain a climate of insecurity. Our Council must
continue to urge the supplier countries and the users to
show restraint and to try to enhance the effectiveness of
Security Council arms embargoes, which recent history
shows too often remain a dead letter.

In the long run, the only way to prevent these
conflicts will be to build, consolidate and bring out of
crisis States governed by the rule of law, capable of
convincing their citizens to settle their conflicts from this
point on by peaceful and lawful means, not by arms or
violence. The Secretary-General made this point very
well. This presupposes clear-cut rules, the maintenance of
order in a way that respects democracy, and a judicial
system that operates fairly. One of the keys to progress
here lies in the successful combination of recognizing the
legal role of the majority and respecting the rights of
minorities.

The Secretary-General also rightly emphasizes the
imperative need for sustainable economic and social
development. How can one not be worried by the sharp
reduction in aid to Africa we have seen in the past few
years? Development assistance remains a vital
complement to the policies pursued by the African
countries. This concerns, in particular, the least developed
countries, three-quarters of which are in Africa.

For its part, France will maintain its official
development assistance. It devotes nearly 0.5 per cent of
its gross national product to such aid - $6.3 billion in
1997 - and ranks second among the donor countries.
Half of this official aid goes to Africa. France has
consistently pleaded the case for easing the debt burden
and has acted to do so. France and its European Union
partners have also worked for a long time to obtain
broader access to world trade for the African countries.
The choice does not have to be between aid and
commerce. Both are indispensable.

The developing countries, especially those which
have opened up, commendably, to world trade and
international financial flows, are the first to be hurt in the
present financial turmoil. No industrialized country today
could have developed under such conditions. Compliance
with a number of rules, which is essential, and the
establishment of protective mechanisms should benefit
them first and foremost. The African countries should not
be the first victims of disorders that started elsewhere.
This concern inspired the proposals France is presenting

 

for the reform of the international financial and monetary
system.

When the Secretary-General presented his report in
this very Chamber, he insisted, rightly, on the indispensable
political resolve which must be demonstrated by the African
countries, and also by the rest of the international
community, in order to resolve Africa's problems. France
shares this conviction and hopes that the Secretary-
General's call will be heard.

France is confident in the future of Africa, and
confirms the continuity of its commitment.

