Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this wrap-up meeting - a meeting that is also a
preparation for the two missions that are to leave for
Africa in the coming days. I would also like to thank
Ibrahim Gambari for his statement this morning. I
believe that a number of his recommendations should
be considered carefully by the Council.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria associates itself with the statement to be made
later by the representative of Greece on behalf of the
European Union. I would, however, like to make a few
brief comments in my national capacity.

Bulgaria considers it natural that a great deal of
the Security Council's effort and time, and much of its
agenda, should be devoted to Africa, since the conflicts
on that continent have an unfortunate tendency to be
intense, long-running and cyclical in nature. They take
a heavy toll in terms of the number of victims and the
human suffering they cause. From that perspective, it is
important for the Security Council and the United
Nations system to continue not just to have a presence
on the African continent, but to be very active there.
The missions that the Council has been undertaking for
some years now on that continent are a manifestation
of the sustained attention the United Nations gives to
Africa.

This morning the two leaders of the missions -
Jean-Marc de La Sabliere and Jeremy Greenstock -
clearly set out the objectives of those missions. I have
little to add, but I would like simply to refer to a
comment by Ambassador Pleuger relating to the
problem of small arms. That is certainly a major
problem in Africa, and it is linked to the issue of the
illegal exploitation of natural resources, since the
exploitation of such resources is the main source of
funding for the arms trade.

I agree with his analysis, but I would like to draw
the attention of Council members to one of the links in
the chain of the arms trade - international arms
dealers. This is a relatively small group of individuals
who are well known to the legal authorities and the
police in many countries throughout the world. Those
who work on sanctions committees are well aware that
the same names crop up again and again. We must
begin to deal with that problem once and for all, as it is
of crucial importance for the African continent, as well
as other parts of the world. It also has a negative
impact on the countries where such arms brokers
operate, as they are a source of corruption with respect
to administrations of many arms-producing countries
that serve as intermediaries in this traffic. I wanted to
make that point during this debate, because it seemed
that, in the context of the fight against organized
crime - and this is clearly one aspect of that fight -
we could not remain silent on the harmful role of such
arms brokers.

Another point to which I would like to refer is the
partnership of the Security Council with African
regional and subregional organizations, which I think
we all agree is very important. Judging from my own
personal experience, very often such organizations
need enhanced capacity - institutional, financial and
personnel capacity - in reacting to crisis situations.

With regard to the situation in the Great Lakes
region, I believe that it is important to ensure that
regional and subregional cooperation not be confined
merely to the drawing up of successive peace plans but
go beyond that. In this context, the experience of
certain continents - and I, of course, can speak of
Europe - could be considered by our African friends.
The situation with regard to the reciprocal recognition
of borders, for example, is somewhat similar to that in
Europe in the 1970s and 19805, when the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe was involved.
That might not provide an exact model, but it could
prove useful to African countries.

Before concluding, I would like to make one
point very forcefully. Our experience during the
Security Council missions has shown us the importance
on the ground of the work of non-governmental
organizations. Those organizations do outstanding
work, and their partnership with the United Nations is
extremely useful and should be encouraged.

I must say that our discussions on Africa would
not make much headway if we did not take account of
the global context in which African conflicts take
place. Africans often come up against globalization in
the form of the internationalization of arms trafficking,
which, in its turn, benefits from a very effective
international banking system. I believe that to some
extent, the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations represent the human face of
globalization. That is why the role of the United
Nations in Africa is irreplaceable.

