Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We pay tribute to
the wisdom and ability you have demonstrated in
conducting the Council's deliberations, enriching its
proceedings by organizing open debates on very
important issues, including our periodic debate today
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I should also like to thank
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing,
information and important observations on recent
developments in the region.

At a time when our region is experiencing
significant changes and as the people of region struggle
to regain freedom, dignity and the rights to a decent
life and to determine their own fate, and as we hope for
a better future that is more equitable, we still see the
terrible and painful suffering of the valiant, brotherly
Palestinian people, who have fought for decades for the
same rights, especially the right to live on their
historical territory in an independent and free State. We
are also seeing a serious paralysis in the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, as well as the same
repressive and provocative practices on the part of
Israel, the occupying Power, which flouts the dignity of
the Palestinians, deprives them of the most basic rights
and jeopardizes their lives, property and living
conditions.

The international community admires the changes
and the transitions towards democracy and dignity
among the peoples of the region, and was the first to
commend them on those preliminary accomplishments.
However, the same international community is
startlingly silent in the face of Israel's blatant defiance
of every international instrument, in particular those
pertaining to the obligations of an occupying Power
vis-a-vis the people occupied. In that regard, my
country's delegation would like to recall some painful
facts regarding the situation in occupied Palestinian
territory. We would like to share with Member States
certain facts that threaten to escalate events in the
region and that require courageous positions that would
lessen tensions in the region and lead to the
achievement of peace.

First of all, the gravity of the process of the
Judaization of Jerusalem, and faith in peaceful
coexistence among the three monotheistic religions,
call for mutual respect among those three religions as
the very foundation of peace and security throughout
the world. On that we must all agree. The Holy City of
Jerusalem is the example par excellence to illustrate
that historical reality, which must be protected against
any attempt to distort or change it. We are all aware of
the significance of that Holy City for Muslims,
Christians and Jews, which should impel us to be
vigilant with respect to any plans to change the
religious, demographic and geographical character of
the city, as has been the practice for years under the
Israeli occupation, despite repeated calls on the part of
the international community to stop such practices.

My country condemns the Judaization of the city
of Jerusalem, which seeks to change its character and
its image in a colonial and expansionist way, to other
ideological ends. We would therefore call upon the
international community to ask the occupying Power to
respect both the legal and the religious status of that
Holy City, a status that was not addressed in resolution
181 (II), of 1947.

Secondly, with regard to the increase in
settlement activities, which threaten the establishment
of a Palestinian State and peace itself, it is curious that
the Government of Israel, which tries to portray itself
as serious about returning to the peace process, still
acts in a way that contradicts the most basic principles
of peace and the rules of international law. We wonder
about the allegations by Israel that have enabled
settlements and residential units to be built, which
increased by 20 per cent in 2011 as compared to their
number in 2010, to say nothing about the acceleration

in the adoption of legal frameworks to recognize the
legality of those settlements. According to a report on
the occupied Palestinian territory published in
December 2011 by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, that cannot but
have an effect on any attempts made to resolve the
situation, because the historic territory of Palestine is
shrinking on a daily basis due to the practices that I
have mentioned, which seek to promote demographic
changes and the Israeli presence on Palestinian land
and to impose a fait accompli that could affect the
future of negotiations on final status issues.

On a number of occasions, the Quartet has
asserted that any unilateral action that could be
prejudicial to those fundamental issues would be null
and void and would have no legal basis. Acts of
colonization and the establishment of settlements
causes the fragmentation of Palestinian territory -
which risks undermining the foundation of a viable,
contiguous Palestinian State that could exist side by
side with Israel, the occupying Power - since
expansionist policies have been clearly condemned
under international law, especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. For that reason, putting
a stop to those policies would not be considered a
sacrifice, but should be done in order to ensure respect
for international law. Respect for those principles
should be approached without exclusivity and without
discrimination among States.

Thirdly, with respect to the legality of Palestine's
demand for membership in the United Nations, my
country was among the first to support that claim,
whose legitimacy is historically, morally and legally
grounded. Tunisia believes that, after six decades of
struggle, the Palestinian people have the right to have
their existence recognized by the international
community. In that regard, I would also like to recall
the path along which my country embarked last year to
combat oppression and authoritarianism. My country
fully supports the struggle of the Palestinian people
because we are firmly convinced of the legality of their
claim, which, moreover, has been recognized by the
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
Organization.

In that respect, my country believes that nothing
in that claim should be considered a unilateral action,
for the measure was put before the United Nations in
the context of full respect for the existing rules in that
regard. The Palestinian people therefore have the right
to be recognized by the Organization, just as they were
at UNESCO.

My country's delegation would also like to praise
the Palestinians who are working for national
reconciliation. We would like to pay homage to the
wisdom of the Palestinian leadership, which is
attempting to promote their national interests in order
to transcend their differences and to close the gaps that
exist among the different Palestinian parties. Along
those lines, Tunisia hopes that the Palestinian side will
close ranks to tackle their internal differences so as not
to give the occupying Power an excuse that would
allow it to evade its responsibilities and continue its
repressive policies.

My delegation calls for the immediate and
complete lifting of the Gaza blockade, which continues
to exacerbate the humanitarian suffering of almost
2 million Palestinians, despite Israel's allegation to the
contrary. In fact, the suffering due to the closing of
more crossing points has increased.

The Arab States presented Israel, the occupying
Power, with a peace initiative that they agreed to
respect and that reflects their sincere desire to achieve
a lasting, just and comprehensive peace that guarantees
peace and security in the region and allows its peoples
to focus on development and reconstruction. However,
the occupying Power continues to adopt the same
policies, which consist of evading its responsibilities
and commitments, by implementing programmes and
projects aimed at transforming the reality on the
ground. But no one is any longer taken in by Israel's
claims, because Israel does not have the right to
trample democracy or to crush the rights of others.
Democracy is no longer Israel's monopoly. Democracy
is the diametric opposite of occupation.

In conclusion, Tunisia calls for caution in the face
of the gravity of the situation and stresses the need to
end Israel's policy of colonial oppression when people
elsewhere are being liberated from injustice,
authoritarianism and persecution. While some welcome
these changes, selectively, they ignore a bitter struggle
that has been waged by one people for over six
decades. We all have an historic responsibility in this
regard that should lead us to take firm positions and
bolder measures to implement the desired peace.

