Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, we would like to thank and
congratulate the Secretary-General for his report
(S/20l9/103), which highlights the latest trends in
the international terrorist threat posed by Da'esh. We
also thank Ms. Coninsx and Mr. Voronkov for their
excellent briefings. We are pleased to note that the
Security Council has the necessary tools, through the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Monitoring Team, to conduct an independent
and in-depth analysis of the threat posed by Da'esh.
We commend its fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and encourage it
to continue on that path.

We note that, although Da'esh as a territorial
entity has been virtually defeated, its negative impact
on international security remains substantial and it
continues to attract some individuals, including from
within Europe. The international community remains
deeply concerned about managing the return of
foreign terrorist fighters and their families from Syria.
Diplomatic, legal and logistical difficulties persist
in ensuring the prosecution and security of foreign
terrorist fighters held in temporary camps and those
still at large.

Belgium has opted for a holistic approach to
fighting radicalization in our country. We believe that
the same approach, focusing not only on punishment
but also on prevention and reintegration into society,
should also apply to foreign terrorist fighters and their
families returning to Belgium. Our policy takes into
account the risk to public safety but, at the same time,
the Belgian Government recognizes its international
obligations in the area of humanitarian law and respect
for human rights, including the rights of the child.
Belgium therefore gives priority to the return of terrorist
fighters that are children under 10 years who are still
in the conflict zone, and takes measures to ensure their
rehabilitation and recovery. Once minors are returned to
Belgium, they will be provided with tailored assistance
that takes into account their individual situations.

To address the global threat posed by Da'esh, and
in particular by foreign terrorist fighters, we have the
right tools at our disposal. The recently adopted 2018
addendum to the 2015 Madrid Guiding Principles,
which guides us in implementing resolution 2396
(2017), is very useful. It proposes a balanced approach
to counter-terrorism measures, while emphasizing
the importance of prevention. Let us now make its
implementation one of our main priorities.

We are very much in favour of the new draft
resolution on terrorist financing announced by France,
to which we will lend our full support. As part of its
holistic approach, promoting justice and the fight
against impunity are priorities for Belgium. The fight
against impunity is not only essential in and of itself,
but also as a tool for prevention and stabilization. That is
why Belgium supports the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and its
Investigation Team in gathering evidence of crimes
committed by Da'esh in Iraq.

However, there are still problems related to
the terrorist threat that are not being sufficiently
addressed. We take note of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/103), which shows that, despite the
comprehensive documentation of acts of sexual violence
committed by Da'esh members, no prosecution of those
crimes has taken place yet. Those acts are a source of
serious concern for Belgium; they should be addressed
by establishing appropriate preventive structures,
fighting impunity and strengthening other deterrent
mechanisms, such as sanctions.

Lastly, as the report points out, the risk does
not disappear after terrorists and foreign terrorist
fighters are prosecuted and convicted. States face the
challenge of ensuring the deradicalization of prisoners
and preventing them from radicalizing their fellow
prisoners. We welcome the capacity-building efforts
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
collaboration with the Executive Directorate, but we
also recognize that much remains to be done to fight
that phenomenon at the global level.

