Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): First, we would
like to thank the Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her
comprehensive briefing this morning. We would like
to address the following three points in our statement
today, the political situation, the security situation and
the situation of women and children.
Regarding the political situation, South Africa
supports the mandate of UNAMI as it promotes the
strengthening of the Government of Iraq and its
subsequent electoral processes. We also welcome the
appointment of the Ministers for Justice, Defence and
the Interior. That serves to highlight the fact that,
despite political challenges, Iraq is strengthening
its democracy.

South Africa supports the drive for an inclusive
Government that will bring together all the diverse
sectors of Iraqi society into governance structures.
National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital to
avoiding future challenges resulting from the fracturing
of Government policies and actions. We would like
to urge the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
Regional Government to deepen their cooperation
in order to bring about a greater sense of peace and
stability in Iraq. That would benefit several areas of
society, especially in the efforts to rebuild and provide
services to the Iraqi people.

On the security situation, we believe that peace
and security is fundamental for Iraq to develop its
infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic
services to all of its citizens. In that regard, South
Africa supports the full consolidation of the Iraqi
army's control over its territory and welcomes the
continued support for the efforts of the Government to
eradicate the threat posed by Da'esh.

Thirdly, on the situation of women and children,
we note the improved situation - according to a
recent report by UNICEF - in terms of the number
of internally displaced persons. We believe that is a
positive development that shows that Iraq is recovering
from years ofconflict and instability. We would also like
to suggest the use of the Peacebuilding Commission to
support the efforts of the Government, specifically with
regard to institution-building and post-reconstruction
and development.

In conclusion, we are encouraged by the
commitment of both the Governments of Kuwait and
Iraq, in their sustained joint efforts, to locate the
missing Kuwaiti and other nationals, as well as missing
Kuwaiti property. We are encouraged by positive
developments in that regard, as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/632). We hope both
countries can work together with the relevant United
Nations institutions to resolve any outstanding issues
on this matter.

