Mr. Daeie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999).

I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
work to date.

The Republic of Serbia considers UNMIK as the
key factor in establishing peace and stability in Kosovo
and Metohija. We strongly support its activities aimed
at ensuring living conditions for all population groups
there.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia very
much appreciates the efforts of the international
community to establish a constructive atmosphere
in the talks between Belgrade and Pristina under the
auspices of the European Union.

I have studied carefully the report of the Secretary-
General on the work ofUNMIK from 16 October 2012 to
15 January 2013 (S/2013/72). It is with regret that I note
that the information set out in the report continues to
reflect the very precarious and sensitive position of the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as
the existence of considerable security concerns.

The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
building peace, security and stability in the region,
in its quest to establish a foundation for a common
European future. On a number of occasions during
the period under consideration, the Government of the
Republic of Serbia confirmed its readiness to make a
substantial and constructive contribution to overcoming
outstanding issues and to offer solutions that meet the
needs of all population groups.

My country's concerted policy is based on seeking
compromise while actively defending our national
interests, with equal respect for the legitimate rights of
both Serbs and Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija.
Accordingly, we continue to oppose unilateral steps
from all quarters * for example, the decision of the
Assembly of Kosovo to ask for an international country
code for Kosovo through the Republic of Albania, even
though negotiations regarding telecommunications are
pending.

We shall continue to promote and carry out our
policy based on the search for peaceful solutions through
a constructive dialogue with Pristina, which has already
yielded significant results. For the Government of the
Republic of Serbia, dialogue is the only way to find
sustainable solutions for the problems that the people
of Kosovo and Metohija face on a daily basis. We are
resolved to fully implement the agreements reached
thus far, and we are open to talks on all issues.

The Republic of Serbia has embarked upon
dialogue out of a desire to achieve concrete progress
in the talks between Belgrade and Pristina. A number
of very important issues were discussed at the recent
meetings held in Brussels, including the functioning
of the agreement on the integrated management of
crossing points as well as the exchange and the status
ofliaison officers.

The meeting in Brussels between Serbian President
Tomislav Nikolic' and Ms. Atifete Jahjaga once again
clearly confirmed our political positions spelled out in
the resolution of the National Assembly of the Republic
of Serbia. In line with that resolution, the specificities
of the territory of Kosovo and Metohija are recognized
in accordance with Council resolution 1244 (1999).
However, it also notes the existence of the Serbian and
other communities that should have certain autonomous
status.

The Republic of Serbia believes that the United
Nations should continue to perform its key role of
coordinating all international actors engaged in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija under its aegis. We
believe that the role of UNMIK in stabilizing the
situation in the region is irreplaceable. Its current
mandate must therefore remain unchanged and, if
possible, strengthened, irrespective of projected
budgetary restrictions. We support an increase in
UNMIK's activities, as well as a heightened presence
for the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and more efficient cooperation between
two missions. It is of the utmost importance that the
UNMIK Administration in northern Mitrovica continue
to fulfil its mandate and find a status-neutral way for
the missions in Kosovo and Metohija to function, as
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999).

For the Republic of Serbia, the continued financing
of the UNMIK Administration in Mitrovica is of
particular importance. We deem unacceptable any
further limitations on the activities of the Administration
for reasons of financial constraints due to the cessation
of financing by the provisional institutions of self-
government in Pristina. After all, UNMIK is the only
legitimate international presence that the people in the
north of Kosovo and Metohija continue to trust.

The Republic of Serbia has great interest in
strengthening the political composition of UNMIK,
in particular with respect to questions of special
importance for the Serbian community. In that regard,
special mention should be made of the protection of
cultural and religious heritage, in particular of the
Serbian Orthodox Church, improving the level of legal
and security protection and realizing the right to free
return and reconciliation. In fact, those questions
form the fundamental basis for the establishment of
conditions necessary for normal coexistence among all
communities in Kosovo and Metohija.

A few days ago, we commemorated the ninth
anniversary of the March pogrom during which
19 persons were killed, 4,000 Serbs were expelled
and 6 towns and 10 villages were ethnically cleansed,
while over 150 religious sites of the Serbian Orthodox
Church, of which 34 date back to the Middle Ages, were
damaged or destroyed. Some of them are of particular
cultural significance and under the protection of
UNESCO. According to United Nations estimates,
51,000 individuals took part in the pogrom, and none
of them were held accountable. For that reason, we call
for the resumption of the investigation, which would
lead to the identification of perpetrators, as well as the
instigators of the March pogrom, so that the crime does
not remain yet another crime without punishment.

In the period under consideration, the Republic
of Serbia once again demonstrated its willingness
and readiness to participate actively in, and to make
a contribution to, overcoming the existing problems.
The main goal of that constructive approach is to find
a solution that will improve life for all communities
in Kosovo and Metohija while also preserving the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Serbia.

I regret to note that, in spite of the long-standing
international presence, the situation on the ground has
not improved substantially. The main problems we
continue to face include limits to, and the prevention
of, the freedom of movement, a lack of security, the
impossibility of using the Serbian language, difficult
access to institutions, a lack of the necessary conditions
for the sustainable return of refugees, constant threats
to Serbian cultural and religious heritage, and the illegal
seizure of property owned by the Republic of Serbia.

Those problems are surely the most important
factors negatively affecting the quality of life itself.
According to the available data, 93 ethnically motivated
attacks were recorded between 1 October 2012 and
31 January 2013, in which one person was killed and
20 persons were injured. Within just a few days in
January of this year, 102 tombstones were damaged or
destroyed in Orthodox graveyards. As a rule, no one
was held accountable or punished for those incidents.
Of particular importance is the increase in the number
of registered ethnically motivated low-intensity crimes,
such as threats, intimidation and theft. Such "low-
intensity" crimes contribute to further limiting the
freedom of movement.

In the period under review, the continued increase in
the number of detentions and arrests of members of the
Serbian community - without any explanation of the
legal basis on which such warrants were issued - has
been the cause of additional concern and anxiety. The
unlawful detention and beating of 11 Serbian youths in
Gracanica on Christmas Eve further heightened concern
and fear among the Serbian population in Kosovo and
Metohija. Those incidents create additional pressure
on, and distrust within, the Serbian community, while
at the same time being gross violations of the basic
human rights guaranteed to each and every individual
by the Charter of the United Nations. They are equally
unacceptable from the perspective of the values upon
which the European Union is based.
Although they honour all previously agreed
procedures, officials and eminent public persons of
the Republic of Serbia are not allowed to enter and
stay in Kosovo and Metohija, in contravention of the
basic human right to freedom of movement. I would in
particular point out that, last January, even the President
of Republic of Serbia was banned from visiting Kosovo
and Metohija and attending the Christmas liturgy.

It is with regret that I must note that the process
of the return of internally persons from Kosovo and
Metohija is very slow. According to the most recent
data, for 2012, only 302 persons of Serbian nationality
returned to Kosovo and Metohija, while there were 464
such returns in 2011. That data provides telling evidence
of a continued reduction in the number of returnees.
Paradoxically, the international community shows less
and less interest in the problem. In particular, I would
like to point to the October 2012 report of the Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which states that the frequent plundering
of uninhabited houses, the intimidation of returnees
and the desecration of places of religious and cultural
importance have very negatively affected potential
returnees' perception of security.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia continues
to be concerned about the manner in which privatization
is implemented in Kosovo and Metohija by the so-called
Kosovo Privatization Agency. Of particular concern
is the privatization of public and social enterprises in
Serbian communities. The privatization of the large
Trepca mining complex, currently postponed, is illegal
and contrary to resolution 1244 (1999). The Republic
of Serbia holds majority ownership of the complex,
as well as of other Serbian enterprises. In addition, as
guarantor, the Republic of Serbia continues to make
payments to the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank and the Paris and London Clubs for loans
to enterprises in Kosovo and Metohija.

I take this opportunity to draw the Council's
attention to the disturbing facts presented in paragraph
31 of the report on the work of UNMIK, which indicates
that there is an increase in the number of complaints
against police and prosecution officials for inefficiency
in investigating crimes affecting minority communities.
Likewise, the reform ofthejudiciary andjustice systems
in Kosovo and Metohija - embarked upon recently, as
indicated in paragraph 28 of the report - has already
been criticized by the international community.

The inadequate level of development in the area of
the rule of law is referred to in the annex to the Secretary-
General's report - on the work of EULEX - which
draws attention to the "Compact". Once again, the
question arises as to the status-neutrality of that EULEX
act, especially at this very sensitive moment when
each and every inconsiderate and biased move can
cause unforeseeable consequences. I should therefore
like to recall that, under the Secretary-General's six-
point plan, UNMIK is obliged to oversee the process
of the transfer of powers to EULEX. However, it is
also obliged to see to it that the principle of the status-
neutrality of EULEX is maintained.

We have recently witnessed even more instances
of desecrations of Serbian tombstones and cultural
monuments in Kosovo and Metohija. Such incidents are
telling evidence of the need for the continued presence
of the Kosovo Force in Kosovo and Metohija.

I should again like to point to the importance of
carrying out a full and efficient investigation of the
allegations of trafficking in human organs set out in the
report by Mr. Dick Marty. To that end, Serbia is ready
to continue to cooperate with the EULEX investigation
team. The truth must be established in the utmost
professional and impartial way, while bearing in mind
in particular the information collected by UNMIK with
regard to the destruction of evidence. We continue to
call for more significant role for the United Nations in
the investigation.

We consider it necessary that UNMIK continue to
be present in Kosovo and Metohija at an appropriate
strength so that, among otherthings, the Security Council
can continue to be effectively informed, considering
that the United Nations plays an irreplaceable role in
providing legitimacy during the process of seeeking a
comprehensive solution.

Without respect for the basic human and other rights
of the non-Albanian population in Kosovo and Metohija,
without protection for their interests and cultural and
religious heritage, and without a full implementation
of European standards in those areas, the desired goal
of creating a secure and safe multinational society will
remain unrealized.

In order to achieve lasting peace in the region, we
must find a comprehensive solution for the question
of Kosovo and Metohija. Reconciliation between
Serbs and Albanians calls for difficult decisions and
compromise by both sides.

The meetings held thus far in Brussels and the
demonstrated readiness to achieve compromise are
proof of the commitment of the Republic of Serbia to
building confidence between the two sides. My country
will continue to cooperate in good faith, at both the
technical and the political levels. With a lasting solution
for sustainable peace based on mutually acceptable
compromises as its ultimate goal, Serbia is committed
to moving towards its European future and to the
process designed to bring about lasting peace between
Serbs and Albanians.

After years of conflict and tension in the Balkans,
our region has yet to enter a new era of cooperation,
confidence-building and dialogue. The Republic of
Serbia is strongly committed to the continuation of the
process of reconciliation as a key element necessary for
the establishment of regional peace and stability.

However, strong political will is of the utmost
importance for there to be tangible and sustainable
development of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, as is political courage and readiness on the
part of all participants in the dialogue to achieve
compromise. Serbia is fully committed to the
success of that dialogue; it is not ready, however, for
humiliation and double standards. I do hope, however,
that the dialogue in Brussels, with the support of the
international community, will bring about a just,
lasting and sustainable solution, and that we will all
turn towards the future.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that Serbia's
readiness to participate in the dialogue does not
mean that it will change its principled position on the
unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo. The
dialogue is status-neutral. Any agreement reached
in Brussels will not lead to the Republic of Serbia's
recognition of the unilaterally declared independence
of Kosovo. We would like to convey that message to all
the countries that have not recognized the unilaterally
declared independence of Kosovo, as well as to thank
them for their principled and consistent position.

