The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests that his delegation be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite him to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rule of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundn (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President (Spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Kassem, Chairman of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kassem to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have

before them document S/2002/l 146, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 October 2002 from the
Secretary-General, transmitting the final report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Mahmoud
Kassem, Chairman of the Panel of Experts, to introduce
the report.


