Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before
the Security Council today both as the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and as the President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I congratulate Ambassador Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for his country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and wish him
much success in the management of the Council's
activities during this very busy period.

As Ijust noted, I appear before the Council today
in two capacities and I will accordingly give two
reports - one on the progress made in relation to the
completion strategy of the ICTY and the other on the
launch of the Mechanism. Written reports concerning
both institutions were presented to the Council last
month (see S/2012/592 and S/2012/849, annex I).
Accordingly, in my remarks today, I hope to highlight
certain key issues, rather than repeat the contents of
those reports in detail. However, before addressing
specific successes and challenges faced by the Tribunal
and the Mechanism, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my deep appreciation for the efforts and
dedication of the Security Council's Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, which operates under
the able leadership of Guatemala. I would also like to
recognize the guidance and considerable assistance
provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism by the Office
of Legal Affairs. The sustained support and invaluable
advice provided by both of these bodies has been
instrumental to the continuing progress of the ICTY
and the Mechanism.

I now turn to the completion strategy of the ICTY.

As Council members will have seen in my written
report (see S/2012/592), the Tribunal is making excellent
progress in completing its work. At the trial level, the
judgement in the Haradinaj et al. re-trial was issued
just a few days ago, on 29 November. The Tolimir trial
judgement is scheduled for delivery on 12 December, in
keeping with previous estimates, and we still hope that
the Karadfie trial will conclude by 31 December 2014.
The first estimates for the Hadeic' and Mladic' cases
forecast those trials finishing by 31 December 2015 and
31 July 2016, respectively.

There have also been some delays in certain trials.
More specifically, we currently estimate that the trials
of Prlie et al., Stanisie and Zupljanin, and Stanisie and
Simatovic' will not be completed until March 2013, and
the Seselj trial is now expected to conclude no earlier
than July 2013. Still, once the Seselj trial judgement is
delivered, all trials will have been completed save for
those of the three late-arrested accused: Mr. Karadzie,
Mr. Hadiic' and Mr. Mladie.

With respect to appellate work, I note that the
judgement in the Gotovina and Markae case was
delivered on 16 November and that the judgement in
the Lukic' and Lukic' case was delivered yesterday,
4 December. It is anticipated that the judgement in
the Perisic' case, which was heard on 30 October,
will be delivered early in 2013. Other appeals
are progressing more or less as anticipated. The
Popovic' et a]. case is anticipated to be completed by
July 2014, several months earlier than previously
forecast, and the Bordevie appeal is on schedule to
conclude by October 2013. The Sainovic' et al. appeal has
suffered a delay of five months and is now anticipated
to be completed by 31 December 2013.

In short, there have been significant advances in the
estimated completion dates for several appellate cases,
while almost all others are on track to meet previously
reported forecasts.

At the same time, the Tribunal continues to face
a myriad of challenges in meeting the estimated
completion dates for some of its cases, and my written
report details the reasons for delays in trials and on
appeal that I have just mentioned. As President of the
Tribunal for the second time, I am well aware of the
frustrations that Council members may feel when faced
with shifts in forecasted completion dates, particularly
when updated forecasts fall short of expectations. I
share that frustration. However, I must underscore that
predicting the completion dates for trial and appellate
proceedings is more akin to an art than to a science, and
the forecasts the Tribunal provides must be understood
in that context.

As Council members are all too aware, the Tribunal
is situated far from where the conflicts took place in
the former Yugoslavia. The geographical scope of the
indictments and the number of charges alleged can
surpass the most complex of national proceedings,
and the number of crime sites and crimes alleged are
often of unparalleled scale. The documentary and other
evidence adduced to establish or defend against the
charges at stake runs in most cases to tens of thousands
of pages, and witnesses must be flown from various
parts of the world to give evidence in the proceedings.

In this context, even the most robust management
of cases cannot always guard against delays. Setbacks
can arise from the departure of staff members who
are experienced in the workings of the Tribunal and
deeply familiar with the factual record of the particular
cases, or when the accused or counsel become ill.
Witnesses may refuse to appear to testify, embroiling
the proceedings in ancillary contempt matters. States
may be slow in cooperating with requests for material
due to insufficient legislative frameworks or claims
of national security interests. The translation of
materials into a language that the accused or counsel
understands may take longer than anticipated. All the
while, the Tribunal's cases are inevitably subject to the
vagaries - the unexpected twists and turns - common
to all criminal law proceedings.

These are daily challenges in the work of the
Tribunal. I assure Council members, however, that
they are challenges that are met with tenacity by the
judges and staff of the Tribunal, whose commitment
to ensuring the completion of the Tribunal's work in
as timely a manner as possible is extraordinary and
deserves the Council's recognition.

Indeed, despite some delays in the completion
of the Tribunal's trials and appeals, there is no doubt
that the work accomplished by the Tribunal so far, and
the legacy that it will leave, are already of profound
significance. The Tribunal has established a robust
and authoritative body of jurisprudence on customary
international humanitarian and criminal law,
addressing everything from crimes of sexual Violence,
to international criminal procedure, to the erosion of
the traditional distinction between the laws applicable
to international and internal armed conflicts. In doing
so, it has transformed the face of international justice
forever, all the while paying full respect to the rights
of the accused and the principle of legality. Indeed, the
Tribunal has been instrumental in bringing about a new
era of accountability and a new commitment to justice
within the international community at large.

These accomplishments are priceless, and should
not be forgotten. While frustrations may arise due to
delays in the completion of trials and appeals, and while
my colleagues and I will continue to seek out new ways
to avoid further delays, I encourage Council members
to view such challenges in their proper context and from
the perspective of the Tribunal's broader achievements,
the salutary effects of which will be felt for many years
to come.

Before turning to my briefing on the Mechanism,
I wish to raise two final issues with respect to the
Tribunal.

First, I note that with the end of all but three trials
in 2013, the focus of the Tribunal's work will have
moved firmly to the Appeals Chamber. Indeed, during
the critical period between January 2013 and December
2014, it is anticipated that the Appeals Chambers of
the ICTY and the International Criminial Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) will be seized with up to 16 appeals
from judgement, as well as any number of additional
interlocutory appeals and other requests.

This change in focus is hardly unexpected. In
resolution 1877 (2009), the Council recognized that
the workload of the Appeals Chamber was expected
to increase upon completion of trial proceedings and
accordingly amended the Tribunal's Statute to authorize
the enlargement of the Appeals Chamber through the
redeployment to the Appeals Chamber of up to four
additional ICTR trial judges and up to four additional
ICTY trial judges.

While I am very pleased to note that three ICTR
trial judges have since been redeployed to the Appeals
Chamber and that the fourth is expected by March 2013,
unfortunately only one ICTY trial judge is now expected
to be available for such redeployment, which will occur
no earlier than July 2013 following the conclusion of
the Sesvelj trial. That is because all other available ICTY
trial judges have been assigned to either the cases of
two late-arrested accused, namely, Mr. Mladie and
Mr. Hadiic', which are expected to go past 2014, or to
the Karadeic' case, which will not be completed until
31 December 2014 - the date by which the Security
Council would like to see the Tribunal complete the
bulk of its work. I also note that Judge Kevin Parker of
Australia demited from the Tribunal in 2011 and was
not replaced because of our expectation that additional
judges would be moved from the Trial Chamber to
the Appeals Chamber. I am now concerned about the
resulting situation, in View of the increasing workload
of the Appeals Chamber. I am currently considering
what actions, if any, to take in order to ensure that that
does not impact the completion strategy.

Finally, I note that in my letter to the Secretary-

General of 29 October 2012 I signalled the necessity of
extending the terms ofoffice ofthe Tribunal's permanent
judges and certain ad litem judges. As set forth in that
letter, which I trust has been shared with the members
of the Council, the extensions requested vary in length
according to the expected timelines of the cases to
which each judge is assigned. Notably, no extensions
are presently sought beyond 31 December 2014,
although several cases - most notably the Mladic' and
Hadeic' trials and possible appeals in some cases, as
discussed in my written report to the Council - are
expected to go beyond that date. Those cases obviously
cannot be halted mid-stream. I will seek any relevant
extensions of the terms of the judges involved in those
cases at a later date, but I wished to bring the matter
to the attention of the Council now in the interests of
transparency.
As the Council may appreciate, judges, in common
with staff members, require certainty in the lengths
of their mandates. That certainty is instrumental to
the stability of the Tribunal and the retention of both
judges and staff members. I would also underscore
that a number of the Tribunal's judges are on leave
from national jurisdictions. Those periods of leave are
granted based on the terms of office approved by the
Security Council. It is important for both the national
jurisdictions and the judges themselves that they be able
to plan based on realistic expectations of the lengths
of trials and appeals. I would be extremely grateful to
the Council for considering the Tribunal's extension
request, which will greatly assist in achieving the
Council's completion strategy. In View of the fact that
the judges' current terms of service are due to expire at
the end of this month, I would be most grateful to the
Council for considering this matter expeditiously.

I would now like to turn to my report on the work
of the Mechanism, which commenced operations at
the Arusha branch on 1 July, in full conformity with
resolution 1966 (2010).

Notwithstanding the short time between the
appointment of its principals and the launch of its
first branch, the Mechanism is fully functional. It
has begun issuing orders and decisions in areas under
its competence. It has taken over the provision of
witness support and protection for those witnesses
who have testified in completed ICTR cases, and
assumed responsibility for the enforcement of ICTR
sentences. It is engaged in monitoring the ICTR cases
transferred to national jurisdictions for trial. It is also
actively providing assistance to States for domestic
investigations and prosecutions.

The Rules of Procedure and Evidence have been
adopted, practice directions have been promulgated, and
lines of communication and cooperation between the
Mechanism, on the one hand, and the ICTY and ICTR,
on the other, have been established. The Mechanism
currently relies upon its predecessors for a wide range
of administrative services and other support, but I can
assure the Council that it will be ready to assume those
functions and be fully self-sufficient when required to
do so.

Preparations are well under way for the launch
of the Mechanism's branch at The Hague. We have
begun to consider the additional challenges that the
Mechanism may inherit upon the eventual closure
of the ICTY and ICTR, including the Vital issue of
ensuring the relocation of persons acquitted before the
ICTR, should a solution not be found in the meantime.
In sum, the Mechanism is already deeply engaged in
fulfilling its mandate.

I am profoundly honoured to have been appointed
President of this new institution. The Mechanism
offers a unique opportunity to be involved in building
an international criminal institution from the ground
up. As I have undertaken this work, I have been guided
by my experiences of over a decade at the ICTY and
by the advice of the Mechanism's Registrar and a
team of talented and committed staff. But I have also
been guided by an awareness of what are often seen as
failings of international criminal justice, namely, that
international trials can be slow and costly. In overseeing
the creation and operations of the Mechanism, I
therefore feel a particular responsibility to demonstrate
to the international community that fairness and
efficiency are not mutually exclusive concepts. Making
international criminal justice sustainable in the long
run depends in great part upon demonstrating that it
can be an efficient, effective and affordable proposition
for the international community.

The Mechanism's other principals and I and
the Mechanism's staff are committed to making the
Mechanism a model institution. That approach is
evident in much of what we have accomplished thus
far. For example, last spring, I asked the judges of
the Mechanism to cooperate in ensuring the efficient
adoption of the Rules of Procedure by means of
electronic communications, thereby avoiding both
delays and the need to convene a costly plenary
meeting. For similar reasons, I appointed my friend
and colleague President Vagn Joensen of the ICTR
as the Mechanism's duty judge at the Arusha branch.
Because President Joensen wears two hats, as a judge
of both the ICTR and the Mechanism, he brings his
already considerable experience and understanding to
bear on the issues before him. In addition, his work for
the Mechanism is being performed at no cost to that
institution.

Finally, in assigning judges to handle the appeal
of Mr. Munyarugarama from a decision referring his
case to Rwanda, I selected Mechanism judges who are
already servingjudges ofthe ICTY or the ICTR, in order
to benefit from their experience and avoid incurring
unnecessary costs to the Mechanism. I anticipate
adopting - to the extent possible - a similar approach
in assigning the bench to hear any appeal that may arise
from the ICTR's Ngirabatware trial judgement, which
is expected shortly. That would be the first appeal from
judgement conducted by the Mechanism.

In relation to appeals, I would note that all notices
of appeal from ICTY judgements filed on or after the
launch of The Hague branch of the Mechanism on 1 July
2013 will fall within the competence ofthe Mechanism.
We can thus already anticipate that any appeals in the
Seselj, Karadeie, Hadeie and Mladie cases will come
before the Mechanism. However, the ICTY Appeals
Chamber will continue to operate in the meantime,
hearing appeals in cases in which the notices of appeal
are filed prior to 1 July 2013, potentially including
appeals in the Stanisvic' and Simatovic', Haradinaj et al.,
Tolimir, Stani§ie and Zupljanin, and Prlic' et al. cases.
Any appeals in the cases of Staniiie and Simatovic' and
Haradinaj et al.are predicted to be completed by the
end of 2014. The appeals of Tolimir and Stanis'ic' and
Zupljanin are anticipated to be completed in early 2015
and the Prlic' et al.appeal in late 2016. That is a situation
regarding which the Security Council has previously
been apprised.

Although the lion's share of the Mechanism's
judicial work will be in appeals, the Mechanism
wil nonetheless be prepared to conduct trials of the
three fugitives indicted by the ICTR whose cases
are still within the competence of the Mechanism:
Messrs. Felicien Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana, and
Protais Mpiranya. The arrest and trial of those three
fugitives is a top priority for the Mechanism. While
the Mechanism has sought and will continue to seek
the cooperation of States, I call upon the members of
the Council, in particular, to lead by example on that
critically important issue.

In closing, I would like to express my appreciation
to the members of the Council for their support of the
Tribunal and the Mechanism, and to urge Council
members to reflect on the achievements of the one and
the potential of the other. The ICTY has already had
a profound impact on the landscape of international
criminal justice, and the Mechanism has the potential
to build upon the achievements of its predecessors
by creating a model institution that is effective and
efficient and represents the international community's
strong commitment to the fight against impunity. I look
forward to working with you to turn that potential into
a reality.

