Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Chile for taking the initiative to convene today's
meeting on peacebuilding.

I welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs Mufioz
to New York to preside over today's meeting. I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
Ambassador Patriota for their briefings.

Peacebuilding is an important and integral part of
the international community's effort to help countries
with their post-conflict rebuilding. In recent years,
the United Nations has devoted greater attention to
and increased its input in peacebuilding, and has
made outstanding achievements in countries such
as Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and Haiti, which have
won the recognition of the countries involved and the
international community at large.

The Peacebuilding Commission has earnestly
implemented relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, successfully held its first annual
meeting, started preparing for the 2015 comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture, and focused
the attention of the international community on the
impact of Ebola on peacebuilding. China commends
the Peacebuilding Commission for its work and
Ambassador Patriota for the leadership role he played
as Chair of the Commission.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that United Nations peacebuilding is still in an
exploratory stage and has room for improvement and
is faced with many difficulties and challenges. China
believes that for the next phase of peacebuilding work
the United Nations should focus on the following four
areas of work.

First, with regard to respect for the leadership
role of the countries involved, United Nations
peacebuilding operations should follow the nationally
owned, nationally led and nationally driven principle.
The timing of peacebuilding should be decided in light
of local situations. The programme of work should be
tailored to the specific needs of the countries involved
and formulated with a priority focus on backing the
relevant efforts of the countries involved and should
assist them in strengthening institutional and capacity-
building so as to address the root causes ofthe conflicts.
The national initiative and dynamism of the countries
involved should be brought into play. Efforts should
be made to avoid simply copying the peacebuilding
models of other countries.

Secondly, with regard to promoting synergies
among the countries involved and other relevant parties,
peacebuilding is a project involving system engineering
and requires the broad participation of national
Governments and other players. The United Nations
should help national Governments to play the central
role in deciding their own peacebuilding priorities and,
at the same time, encourage the countries involved to
strengthen their communication and coordination with
other relevant parties so as to take into account the
opinions of all parties and synergize their efforts.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening integrated
management in an effort to rationally allocate
resources and enhance efficiency, Member States,
regional organizations and specialized agencies all
play an important role in peacebuilding. The United
Nations should clearly illustrate the Peacebuilding
Commission's role in integrated management and
facilitate the relevant parties' coordination so that
they will bring forth their respective advantages and
complement each other. In planning peacebuilding
operations, efforts should be made to budget carefully
and allocate human and material resources rationally
with a focus on efficiency and to avoid lopsided
expansion.

Fourthly, taking into account both short-term results
and long- and medium-term goals, peacebuilding is a
long, complex and arduous task, and its ultimate goal is
to help countries involved enhance their self-preserving
capacity and achieve self-sufficiency and sustainable
stability and development. At the same time, various
tools can be used in a flexible manner to introduce
quick-impact projects without a huge investment so
that the people in a country involved can enjoy the
peacebuilding dividend sooner. When the people's
hearts and minds have been won, they can support
and consolidate our achievements. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Fund should play a bigger role.

This year, the United Nations will undergo a
comprehensive review of its peacebuilding architecture
that will help it fully take stock of its experiences and
draw lessons from its past work in order to further
improve its peacebuilding work in an effort to better
realize the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. China recognizes the progress already achieved
in preparing for the review. China expects that relevant
parties will, on the basis of prior consensus, earnestly
carry out their respective responsibilities, conduct a
review according to the set time frame and effectively
implement the results of the review in the actual work
of the United Nations.

Chinawillactivelyparticipateinthe above-mentioned
process and play a constructive role in enhancing the
work of peacebuilding.

