Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor for a third time,
I will not be long.

The last thing I want is any personal sparring
between my colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait and
myself. I look after the interests of my people. What I
am saying is directed to him and to all present here. We
are no longer a member of the League of Arab States
since it came to the Council in an attempt to pit it against
us and militarize the situation in Syria. Therefore, my
colleague the Ambassador ofKuwait is wrong to cite the
League of Arab States as a credible reference. We are a
member neither of the League of Arab States nor of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Therefore, to us
those two organizations are not credible pertaining to
any political position that is binding for the Government
of my country.

We do not get information only from the press.
We have a responsible Government that has robust
intelligence service and institutions. We also have tens
of thousands of documents that we have obtained from
terrorist hideouts, documents written by terrorists,
containing vast amounts of information demonstrating
that certain Gulf parties are complicit in sponsoring
terrorism in Syria. This is a proven fact. We have sent
the Council hundreds of letters containing names,
addresses, accusations and places. We still have a lot
more information that will be revealed in due time.
All Council missions that visit us and are involved
in counter-terrorism are stunned when they receive
information from Damascus. Members should ask
the head of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for the outcome of his latest visit
to Damascus. We do not rely on newspaper articles
only; we have proven and established information and
confessions, a great deal of which has been sent to the
Security Council.

Maintaining the error is worse than the error itself.
Let us stop doing that. Support is being provided to
terrorism in Syria and Iraq. Did Daesh and the Al-Nusra
Front, this human garbage, appear out of thin air? Who
sponsored those terrorists and issued them visas? Who
allowed them to move across international capitals?
Who gave $2,500 to each terrorist in order to work as
a sniper and kill Syrians? Who trained them? How are
they being redeployed from Idlib to Nigeria, Algeria,
Afghanistan and Yemen? We are asking all these
questions to professional diplomats, not to amateurs. It
is a big issue.

What we are suffering today will hit others tomorrow
or the day after tomorrow. If Council members are
negligent about fighting terrorism in Syria, terrorism
will beset them all. Monsters have come to us from
Europe, Arab States and Central Asia. They are human-
shaped monsters. They must be returned to their homes
if international humanitarian law is to be enforced. Let
the monsters return to the countries and capitals they
came from. We do not want them. We have the right to
fight them until the very last among them. It is a matter
of sovereignty under international law.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.
