Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): I would like to
thank the delegation of Uruguay for organizing this
open debate on the important topic of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Eliasson; the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), Ms. Beerli; and the representative of
Oxfam, Ms. Rooijmans, for their valuable contributions
to today's debate. I align myself with the statement by
the Observer of the European Union.

As we see in today's conflicts in Syria, Libya, Yemen
and elsewhere, it is the civilian population, including
women and children, that is the main Victim of brutal
violence. The recent images coming out of Madaya and
elsewhere speak for themselves. We are appalled by the
fact that besieging civilian populations has become a
means of war. The appeal by the Secretary-General and
the President of the ICRC last October to act effectively,
decisively and in a timely manner to protect civilians
in conflict was unprecedented and is a strong wake-up
call for all of us.

The international community should address the
importance of the protection of civilians at the highest
political level. In this respect, I stress the importance
of timely briefings by the Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect in contributing to early awareness of potential
crises. This approach is in line with the Human Rights
up Front initiative. I also would like to emphasize
that the responsibility to protect and international
humanitarian and human rights law, including the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, are mutually
reinforcing.

Today, I would like to make the following three
points in relation to the protection of civilians: first,
the importance of compliance with international
humanitarian law; secondly, monitoring peace
operations in conjunction with consultation with troop-
contributing countries, and thirdly, the training of
peacekeepers.

First, with respect to compliance with international
humanitarian law, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
regrets that is was not possible to agree on the
establishment of a new mechanism to strengthen
compliance with international humanitarian law at
the 32nd International Conference of the Red Cross
and Red Crescent. Indeed, international humanitarian
law, when respected by all the parties, offers the best
protection for civilians during armed conflict. However,
on a daily basis, we are faced with the harsh reality of
systematic and often deliberate non-compliance with
international humanitarian law. We need to strengthen
our efforts towards the realization of a widely supported
State-led compliance mechanism. We owe this to all
those civilians in conflict situations that are currently
not being protected as required by international
humanitarian law.

Secondly, with respect to peace operations, the
Security Council could monitor more closely whether
peacekeepers do what is asked of them in a mandate.
Leadership and proper guidance on the protection of
civilians are necessary elements in the success and
credibility of a mission. Mission leadership should take
full responsibility and be held accountable for how well
a mission protects civilians. That includes the use of
force beyond self-defence to protect civilians when it is
necessary to fulfil the tasks set forth under the mandate.
And all missions should report when peacekeepers fail
in the area of protection of civilians. The Netherlands
underlines the importance of the Security Council
consulting in a more structural manner with countries
deploying troops and police to United Nations missions.
We welcome current efforts to have informal meetings
in advance of mandate renewals.

Finally, with respect to the training ofpeacekeepers,
in May last year the Kingdom of the Netherlands
participated in a conference on the protection ofcivilians
organized by Rwanda in the run-up to the Leaders'
Summit on Peacekeeping in September. We were among
the first signatories of the Kigali Principles that were
presented at that conference. These principles provide
clear and straightforward recommendations on how to
effectively implement protection of civilians mandates
in peacekeeping operations. In particular, they focus
on building peacekeeper capacity when it comes to
the protection of civilians. Together with Rwanda and
the United States, we are currently developing a tailor-
made training on the protection of civilians, as part of
the pledge we made during the Leaders' Summit.

The main objectives of this training are to apply
a comprehensive approach in peacekeeping to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and develop
leadership on translating military and civilian mission
responsibilities into timely and decisive action in the
area ofprotection of civilians. A pilot run ofthe training
will take place this spring. We look forward to sharing
the concrete results and good practices obtained.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to
serve as a constructive partner on issues ofpeacekeeping
reform. We advocate for an integrated approach to
peace operations, combining efforts in the fields of
political dialogue, conflict prevention and the rule of
law, protection of civilians, gender and development.

The report of the High-Level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) provides valuable
recommendations for strengthening United Nations
peace operations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has supported the work of this panel and looks forward
to further discussions on the implementation of the
recommendations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains fully committed to peace operations in the
years ahead, building on a strong and long-standing
tradition of active involvement in participating in
United Nations missions across the globe.

