Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the delegations of Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Indonesia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand and the Philippines, as well as on behalf of my
own delegation, Malaysia.

We join other Security Council members in
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015), on
the situation in Ukraine. We believe that the adoption
of the resolution will convey the Council's - and by
extension the international community's - strong
support for the steps taken by the parties concerned
to implement the ceasefire arrangements agreed
on 12 February. We reiterate our full support for all
peaceful efforts aimed at resolving the conflict in
Ukraine.

The recent developments in eastern Ukraine prove
that a diplomatic and political solution is more urgent
than ever. In that regard, we particularly commend
the diplomatic initiatives that yielded the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements last week.

The conflict in eastern Ukraine has gone on
for far too long and has claimed the lives of far too
many innocent civilians, including the 298 souls
aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was
tragically shot down over the conflict area on 17 July
2014. In the aftermath of the tragedy, the Council
responded by adopting resolution 2166 (2014), which,
inter alia, emphasizes the need for a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
incident and demands that those responsible for the
incident be held to account and that all States cooperate
fully with efforts to establish accountability. It also
clearly outlines the obligations incumbent upon all
States Members of the United Nations to cooperate in
that regard to bring those responsible to justice.

The resolution adopted today is unambiguous in
reaffirming the Council's demand in resolution 2166
(2014) for accountability for those responsible for
the downing of Flight MH-17. We reiterate that this
demand remains the international standard with respect
to accountability and applies to all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly set against the Minsk
agreements and the package ofmeasures. In that regard,
our delegations welcome the reaffirmation of resolution
2166 (2014) in the present resolution.

In conclusion, we call upon the conflicting parties
to fully adhere to and implement the Minsk agreements
in line with the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of
the United Nations as well as the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and unity of Ukraine. We wish
to see an immediate and full implementation of the
ceasefire agreement, which could ultimately pave the

way for a sustained political solution and restore peace
and stability to the affected areas.

