Mr. Steiner: First of all, let me thank the
Security Council as a body for its strong support for
the policy we have proposed to it.

There were not many questions raised this time. I
shall try briefly to address the ones that have been
asked.

The Central Fiscal Authority (CFA) has been
mentioned, as has the question of its merger into the
Provisional Institutions. By the way, the CFA had been
one of the most successful institutions of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Let me just say in this regard that, as of 1
January 2003, the Central Fiscal Authority does not
exist any more. It has been merged into the Ministry of
Finance. I think this is a major success. I believe we
have done what could be done in that regard.

Secondly, I wish to address the question of
conditionality, which is an important question not only
in Kosovo but, very generally, as regards the
engagement of the international community in various
areas. I think that conditionality is unavoidable, and
that we should pursue it. By the way, this is a policy
that is exercised by the European Union with respect to
the integration path of European countries. It is surely
a path we too should follow in implementing the
benchmarks in Kosovo.

I think the important point in this area is to think
about negative and positive conditionalities. Another
important point is that there is both a central level and
a local level. When we talk about conditionality, we
should also think specifically about the local level.
Why? Because the return of refugees and multi-
ethnicity take place at the local level in day-to-day life.
What is very important when looking at the situation in
Kosovo, I believe, is that one sees a very differentiated
picture. There are communities that are quite
successful as concerns respect for multi-ethnicity and
the rights of minorities, as well as return efforts. There
are others in which one can still hear noises from local
representatives that are not very helpful and not in line
with our common policy.

What we should do, I think, is look very carefully
at the situation on the ground to see how each
community fulfils its obligations, specifically with
regard to multi-ethnicity, but also in other areas of
good governance. We should then apply the concept of
conditionality there as well. There are a number of
municipalities that really deserve credit, including
financial credit, and credit from international aid, when
they go the extra mile specifically in relation to others.
I would view the situation in such a differentiated way.
The same is true, of course, at the central level. In a
way, the benchmarks are the measure of whether things
are fulfilled or not. No doubt, conditionality is one of
the essential elements of our work. But I would
propose that we think not only about negative
conditionality but positive as well.

The work plan for further operationalization of
the benchmarks was discussed. Let me say I agree fully
with the statement just made by the Norwegian
representative, who said that further specifics regarding
implementation of the benchmarks must be worked out
in cooperation with the local authorities, meaning the
Provisional Institutions. I think that this is key, because
we are now in a phase in which we hand over authority
as far as we can, legally as well as technically. Also,
when we have specific requirements, we have to act in
cooperation with the institutions, and mainly the
Government. That is surely right.

What we have tried to do today is to give the
Council a first indicator on where we stand. Thus, we
have a base line. The Council also has before it a
document that, although it does not contain very new
elements and follows the benchmarks with the sub-
benchmarks already established last year, tries to tell
you somehow where we are. This is a summary of a
much bigger paper that we ourselves prepared within
the Mission. The idea is that from now on we will
report to the Council on where we go and what we
achieve starting from this base line, so that we can be
as concrete as possible on our progress towards
fulfilling the benchmarks.

Concerning decentralization, I think that we need
to be clear on what the parties themselves have
requested. After the municipal elections, an agreement
between all Kosovo leaders was reached, including the
Serb community and the head of the parliamentary
faction in the Assembly, as well as Belgrade. I was
quite happy about that. I spoke with President
Kostunica, and he fully agreed to it. This is classic and
typical work that should be done by the Council of
Europe.

This is why, on the basis of a consensus between
all the leaders of Kosovo and on the specific verbal,
express recommendation of Belgrade, we have said: let
this job be done by those who understand it. There is
one institution that really has experience in
decentralization, and that is the Council of Europe. On
the basis of this consensus, we have invited the Council
of Europe to come to Kosovo and take over the lead in
this work. I am very glad that the Council of Europe
and its Secretary-General, Mr. Schwimmer,
immediately agreed to do so. I am also very glad that
this coming Monday, we will have a permanent mission
from the Council of Europe there doing nothing else
but elaborating a concept on local self-government and
decentralization.

This is exactly the right approach. We should now
let the Council of Europe do its work, talk to all the
parties, from the Provisional Government to the
different representatives, specifically including, of
course, those of the minorities, and then come up with
a proposal. I cannot implement such a proposal ex
offlcio. Of course, such a proposal must gain life in the
reality of Kosovo, which means it must be discussed in
the Provisional Institutions. If any legal conclusions
are to be drawn from this, it must be done in
cooperation with all the parties.

Let us continue on this road, which we have
established on the basis of a consensus of all the
parties. The Council of Europe is taking the lead, and it
should now prepare a concept. This should be done as
quickly as possible, but at the same time this is very
far-reaching. The issue of decentralization goes very
far in many aspects. Let them do their work, let them
talk to all of the parties. Then we shall look at that and
how we can implement the concept in the legitimate
structures as they are established in Kosovo.

I would like to make a final point on substance,
and that is the return and the numbers of returns. 1
would like to be very clear here. First of all,
concerning what we achieved last year and what we
hope to achieve this year, I think that we have the
structures to prepare operationally for the return
season, which starts in April and May, this year. We
have the structures both on the local level - because
return happens on the local level - as well as on the
central level. We have the Serb coordinator for return
in the Government. I have a senior adviser for return.
Also important, we have, I think, the necessary money
provided by the international community to prepare the
projects, which are costly. This is because someone
cannot simply be returned. There is a need for housing,
education, economic prospects, access to
infrastructures and the appropriate security. I think that
the international community has provided for this.
What we need is active cooperation from the local
institutions.

The numbers were mentioned. I would just like to
clarify here that all the numbers that we mentioned are
not ours; they are the official figures of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Just to be very clear, the UNHCR's most recent
numbers, summing up the situation as of 31 December
2002, say the returns in 2001 were 1,447 and the
returns in 2002 were 2,671. In total, there are 6,024.
These are not my numbers; they are the numbers of the
UNHCR. We have to take something as an objective
basis. We are just referring to official UNHCR
numbers.

Concerning the outflow, nobody has the exact
numbers, but there is common consent among the
entire return community and the institutions concerned
that the numbers are not high enough on returns
because of the problems we still have that have been
mentioned. But it is very clear that the number of
returns this year was greater than the outflow in the
past. Therefore, there is a positive development.

I have addressed the questions as I have recalled
them. But let me say at the end that UNMIK
understands itself to be an instrument of the Council.
We are following its guidelines. We will continue to
make proposals, but in the end it is very important that
the Security Council set the guidelines and we try our
best to fulfil them.

My impression from this discussion was that we
are right to focus on the standards. We are right to
focus this year on the three priorities, namely the
economy and the job situation, crime and multi-
ethnicity, including return.

I also detected here guidelines and instructions
from the Council to intensify work on the transfer of
power, as I have proposed - that we should do
everything we legally can not to reserve power but to
transfer it to the institutions, but also that the
institutions as well must make efforts to be in a
position to exercise it.

I am very encouraged also that the Council seems
to be in consensus in endorsing that we should now
have a direct dialogue on questions of mutual interest
between Pristina and Belgrade.

Finally, I think that it is fair to say that I have felt
here also a consensus on the fact that regional
integration - meaning integration into Europe - is an
important perspective for all of the countries in Europe,
and I am very grateful for the statement of the
President, who expressed exactly that. The Summit in

Thessaloniki on 21 June will be of particular
importance there. I am very grateful for this continued
support.

