The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Czech Republic.

The Czech Republic is pleased that today, just a
couple of days before the opening of the Fifth Review
and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
Security Council has adopted a resolution on security
assurances jointly sponsored by all permanent members of
the Council. Resolution 984 (1995) is a timely, long-
awaited political step in the right direction. The nuclear-
weapon States that sponsored the resolution have
displayed a certain sensitivity and have recognized the
justified security interests of non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the NPT.

We are all aware of the fact that the issue of security
assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States has for many
years been a complex problem. For the longest time, its
treatment could not move beyond individual formulas of
negative security assurances offered by nuclear-weapon
States. During the cold-war era, it was next to impossible
to achieve the objective of the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva - namely, a common security-

 

assurance formula - and to embody it in an international,
legally binding instrument. Thus, the Geneva Conference
had no other option but to engage in an endless, repetitive
and not-very-stimulating exercise on this subject.

Like other non-nuclear-weapon States, the Czech
Republic is interested in assurances against the use or the
threat of use of nuclear weapons, as well as in assistance if
indeed we were ever threatened by them, not to speak of
their actually being used against us. We therefore welcomed
the renewed interest in the question of security assurances
that followed the changes on the international scene at the
end of the 1980s. Given these dynamic political changes
and with the emergence of new States with nuclear-weapon
capabilities, it was not easy to save the existing nuclear
disarmament agreements or, in some cases, to ensure their
entry into force and their reliable implementation. It was
only logical that these problems were accorded priority attention.

However, these dramatic political changes
notwithstanding, the quest of the non-nuclear-weapon States
for security assurances lost none of its legitimacy and
urgency. Those countries which had forsworn their nuclear
option by adhering to the NPT and by faithfully
implementing all its provisions had a particularly well
justified demand.

The resolution the Security Council has just adopted
is of particular value since it combines both positive and
negative security assurances addressed to non-nuclear-
weapon States parties to the NPT. In its paragraph
concerning the provision of assistance to those States if
they are threatened with or become the victims of the use
of nuclear weapons, the permanent members of the Security
Council are further stressing the central role of the NPT in
the field of international security and its vital importance
for all States that adhere to it.

The resolution is a step forward compared with
Security Council resolution 255 (1968). We particularly
welcome that, in the event of aggression or threat of
aggression with nuclear weapons, the matter will
immediately be brought to the attention of the Council in
order to provide the necessary assistance to the State in
question. We also welcome the Council's mandate to
investigate the situation and adopt appropriate measures to
settle the core dispute and restore international peace and
security.

Nevertheless, this resolution is not the last word on the
question of security assurances. We expect that a further
international, legally binding instrument in this regard will
be agreed upon. The prospects for attaining it would
improve if further nuclear proliferation were permanently
curbed and if the process of nuclear disarmament
maintained its momentum. Such developments will be
more likely if the NPT is extended indefinitely and
unconditionally. We can all contribute to such an outcome
of the upcoming NPT Review and Extension Conference,
thereby contributing, above all, to our very own security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded its consideration of the item on its

agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.30 pm.
