Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that I take the floor under your
presidency, Sir, I would like to convey to you the
sincere congratulations of my delegation on your
election to the presidency of the Council for April.
(spoke in English)

It is my honour, on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, Chairman of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), to
express to the Security Council the gratitude of the
15 heads of State of the Community for taking up for
deliberation today the serious and disturbing matter of
Guinea-Bissau, only days after the situation in Mali
was discussed in the Chamber.

The Chairman of the Authority of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States also expressed his gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his abiding interest in, and
concern over, the fate of West Africa and for the
support that he has unfailingly given to the region's
efforts to stabilize the peace and security environment
there.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
able manner in which you are presiding over today's
meeting. I would also like to acknowledge the speakers
before me, in particular Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, for his comprehensive presentation on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

Over the past two decades, the efforts of West
African leaders and ECOWAS led to the progressive
entrenchment of democratic culture and the
consolidation of stability and, as a consequence, steady
economic growth and a bright outlook in the subregion.
However, ECOWAS has been under no illusion as to
the fragility and reversible nature of the situation.
Unfortunately, the unfolding developments in Mali and
Guinea-Bissau are confirming our worst fears.

It should be recalled that the electorate in Guinea-
Bissau went to the polls on 18 March to choose a
successor to President Malam Bacai Sanha, who passed
away on 9 January. The period following the
inconclusive first round of the election was marked by
mounting tensions that were notably characterized by
the following factors: the decision of five of the
candidates led by Mr. Kumba Yala, leader of the Party
for Social Renewal and the second-placed candidate, to
boycott the run-off; malfunctioning State institutions
amid rancour within the political class; fear among
members of a section of the political class for their
safety and fear of a possible military intervention; and
rising suspicion and animosity between the Guinean
military and the Angolan Technical and Military
Assistance Mission in Guinea-Bissau (MISSANG).

It was against that background that President
Ouattara of the Republic of C6te d'Ivoire, as Chairman
of the ECOWAS Authority, dispatched an ECOWAS
mission to Guinea-Bissau on 31 March. Led by the
President of the ECOWAS Commission, together with
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations, the mission was undertaken with a view to
calming the situation, persuading the five candidates
not to boycott the run-off election, and assessing the
role of MISSANG in the evolving situation and making
appropriate recommendations to the Authority.

The mission presented its report to an
extraordinary session of the Authority on 2 April. The
Authority, having become convinced of the seriousness
of the matter, appointed His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Conde, President of Guinea, as mediator of the crisis,
and warned the military once more to resist any
temptation to disrupt the electoral process.
Furthermore, the Chairman convened an extraordinary
session of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council on 12 April to discuss the situation, along with
the disturbing constitutional crisis and security
situation in the north of Mali.

Among the pertinent decisions taken at that
session, the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
called on the opposition candidates not to boycott the
run-off election, cautioned the military against
interference in the electoral process and took the
decision to request the withdrawal of MISSANG from
Bissau within two months, to be replaced by an
ECOWAS force. Unfortunately, neither the opposition
nor the Guinea-Bissau military heeded the advice from
ECOWAS. On 12 April 2012, just as the Mediation and
the Security Council meeting was coming to a close,
the Guinea-Bissau military began operations that soon
developed into a coup d'etat.

The military detained key political figures,
including the Prime Minister and front-runner in the
election, Mr. Carlos Gomes Junior, and the interim
President, Mr. Raimundo Pereira. It took over State
institutions and designated the military command as
the ruling body. The Chairman of the Mediation and
Security Council immediately condemned the coup,
while the President of the ECOWAS Commission
issued a statement on the same day, reiterating the
Council's denunciation of the putsch and demanding an
immediate relinquishing of power to the legitimate
authorities.

Only last Monday, 16 April, the Chairman of the
Authority dispatched a second ECOWAS mission to
Guinea-Bissau, where the delegation held intensive
discussions with the junta; the ruling African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde; the five
opposition candidates; ECOWAS ambassadors and the
representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations in Bissau. From the deliberations with the
different stakeholders, the following issues and
concerns were raised.

First, since independence, the political class and
the democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau have
evolved under persistent political instability, to the
extent that no elected President has ever served a full
term in the country.

Second, governance institutions in Guinea-Bissau
have often been dysfunctional, leading to constant
paralysis in Government. That was particularly the case
in the run-up to the last election. Also, corruption and
drug trafficking have permeated the fabric of politics
and the military.

Third, reversing that trend requires a very
sophisticated approach that combines the fast-tracking
of the ECOWAS-developed defence and security sector
reform programme, constitutional and electoral reform,
deep economic reforms to root out corruption, and a
conscious and determined effort to root out drug
trafficking and impunity.

Fourth, based on the statement of the junta and
statements from some key interlocutors, Angola's
military build-up in Guinea-Bissau through MISSANG
served as the immediate trigger for the coup. In the
period immediately after the 18 March election,
tensions rose exponentially between the two forces,
with the Guinea-Bissau Chief of Defence Staff
accusing MISSANG of secretly boosting its force size
and stockpiling combat weapons, which, according to
him, contravened the bilateral agreement under which
Angola deployed MISSANG. He went on to order
MISSANG to withdraw within 48 hours.

Fifth, at the meeting with the military command,
the spokesperson of the junta produced a letter
ostensibly signed by the Prime Minister under the
instructions of Angola and addressed to the Secretary-
General, requesting authorization for the deployment

of a peace enforcement mission to Guinea-Bissau by
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP) and its allies. According to the spokesperson,
the Bissau military had acted to pre-empt that
eventuality and the establishment of a counterforce in
the country. The junta was threatening a showdown
with MISSANG if the latter did not pull out within
48 hours.

Sixth, the psychosis generated by the threat of an
Angola-led intervention and the possible confrontation
between MISSANG and the Guinea-Bissau army had
led to acute fear and an exodus of the population from
the capital towards Senegal and other neighbouring
countries.

Seventh, Bissau and other cities no longer have
access to basic necessities and banking services, as
businesses have begun shutting down.

The ECOWAS mission managed to secure an
undertaking by the military command to restore
constitutional order with immediate effect. The junta
requested ECOWAS to assist in the development of the
modalities for the transition, which is currently being
handled by the mediator. Furthermore, ECOWAS
demanded the immediate release of the Prime Minister,
the interim President and other political detainees.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau is serious and
complex. It threatens to undo the progress made in the
subregion over the past few years. It also threatens
international peace and security. Now is the time to
take urgent and appropriate measures to defuse this
time bomb. Having carefully reviewed the situation,
ECOWAS intends to immediately deploy a military
contingent, under the United Nations principle of
subsidiarity.

The ECOWAS mission will ensure the protection
of institutions and eminent persons, as well as the
envisaged transition and electoral process. In the
medium term, the mission will ensure the protection of
witnesses during the investigation of acts of impunity
and the commencement of the implementation of the
defence and security sector reform programme.

The Chairman of the ECOWAS Authority will
convene an extraordinary summit a week from now, on
Thursday, 26 April, in Abidjan to further consider the
situation in Guinea-Bissau, with particular emphasis on
the restoration of constitutional order and the
deployment of ECOWAS troops. The Chairman of the
Authority also plans to dispatch a high-level ECOWAS
delegation to Bissau on Monday, 23 April to engage all
stakeholders in the transition process.

In accomplishing those tasks, ECOWAS shall
work in close cooperation with the African Union, the
United Nations, the CPLP and other partners, whose
support will greatly enhance efforts aimed at
re-establishing the rule of law and maintaining peace
and security in Guinea-Bissau.

ECOWAS requests the Council to support those
initiatives, which seek to contribute to international
peace and security in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

