Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Zahir Tanin for his update on recent developments.
We also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic',

and Ms. Citaku for their informative briefings.

We fully support the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in achieving peace and stability in Kosovo. We welcome
UNMIK's facilitating role in promoting dialogue
between the parties. My delegation also commends
the European Union (EU) leadership for successfully
hosting a high-level meeting between the two parties
in Brussels on 31 August, as well as on the margins of
the General Assembly in New York in September. It
was very promising that both sides agreed to conclude
steps to implement the judiciary agreement, aiming
to integrate judges and prosecutors from the Serb-
dominated north into the Kosovo judiciary. We also
see constructive measures taken to implement other
existing agreements between Belgrade and Pristina.
It is good news that on 21 October, 40 judges and 13
prosecutors from the Serb-dominated north were
integrated into the judicial system in Kosovo.

Kazakhstan welcomes the recent decision by
Belgrade and Pristina to institutionalize their dialogue
process with the engagement of representatives of
the Government, opposition, civil society, the media
and religious organizations. For that to succeed, all
interested parties must boost and encourage steps that
promote the deliberations of the peoples of Serbia and
Kosovo and convince the local population in Kosovo to
accept their outcomes.

It is crucial to communicate with the parties and
communities, accurately and in detail, the types of
economic benefits gained by the local population in
Kosovo. Residents need to know that dialogue is the
only way to bring about good governance, the rule of
law and human rights, as well as to solve the problems of
unemployment, corruption, organized crime, education
and health care, among others. All such outreach
activities will assist in gaining much-needed support.

It is very important that any discussions that follow
on the agreement on the establishment ofthe Association/
Community of Serb-majority municipalities should
be inclusive, with the close and active involvement of
all relevant stakeholders, first of all the EU and the
United Nations. The situation in Kosovo requires the
continued attention of the Security Council. There are
still a number of complex and sensitive issues, such
as a lack of intercommunity trust, a large number of
missing persons and implementation ofa law on the use
of languages.

Equally and crucially important is the protection of
vulnerable groups and the cultural heritage in Kosovo.
Fully implementing the languages laws to protect the
non-majority communities is crucial to ensure equal
rights and preserve the cultural diversity and heritage
of both Kosovo and Serbia. Special attention must be
paid to implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, by addressing the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, we
call on the authorities of Kosovo to withdraw their
decision to shorten the deadline for the verification of
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, and we
ask that victims be economically reintegrated, socially
empowered and psychologically supported.

The issue of returning refugees and displaced
persons, as well as their resettlement, will also have
to be addressed. With such a rapidly growing young
population in Kosovo, there is also a need to implement
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and
security, and to provide full support for the laudable
engagement of young people of all ethnicities in order
to promote reconciliation. Therefore, progress in the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo
remains crucially important to both sides, as well as
to the European Union and the Western Balkans as
a whole.

Finally, stability will be achieved only ifthe parties
follow agreements that avoid nationalist and provocative
rhetoric and focus on promoting intercommunity
reconciliation and mediation, as well as following
the path of trust, confidence-building measures,
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention in Kosovo.

