Mr. Mladenov: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, I will devote my regular briefing today
on the situation in the Middle East to presenting the
sixth report on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). As Council members have already received
the report, I will highlight some of the developments
on the ground and the ongoing United Nations efforts
in response. I invite Council members to note that all
developments are taking place in the broader context
of continued military occupation of the Palestinian
territory, uncertainties about the peace process and the
two-State solution, and instability and ongoing turmoil
in the region.

As detailed in the report, no steps were taken
during the reporting period to cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem as demanded by the
resolution. Approximately 3,500 housing units in
settlements in Area C of the occupied West Bank were
advanced, approved or tendered. One-third of those
units are in settlements in outlying locations deep in
the West Bank. Plans for 2,300 units were advanced
in the approval process. Plans for 300 units reached
final approval stage, and tenders were announced for
approximately 900 units. As in the previous reporting
period, no advancements, approvals or tenders were
made in occupied East Jerusalem. Today, in fact, the
Israel Central Bureau of Statistics released data on
construction starts in West Bank Area C settlements
during the first quarter of 2018 that saw the lowest
quarterly figure in six years, that is 250 construction
starts. The figure is significantly lower than the average
monthly rate for 2017, which was 410 and 766 for 2016.

The reporting period also witnessed an overall
increase in demolitions across Area C as compared to the
previous period, albeit at the relatively low rate that has
characterized the past year. The authorities demolished
or seized at least 84 Palestinian-owned structures,
resulting in the displacement of approximately 67
people and potentially affected the livelihoods of 4,500
others. I reiterate that all settlement activity is illegal
under international law. It continues to undermine the
practical prospects for establishing a viable Palestinian
State and erodes remaining hopes for peace. I also
reiterate the call by the United Nations Coordinator
for Humanitarian and Development Activities in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory to cancel plans to
demolish Khan Al Ahmar-Abu Al Helu. Not only is
the community at imminent risk of demolition, and
displacement, but it also sets a significant precedent
that may affect other Bedouin and herder communities
in Area C.

The reporting period was characterized by high
levels of violence, including rocket attacks from Gaza,
as made clear in my recent briefings to the Council
on 26 April (see S/PV.8244) and subsequently on 15
(see S/PV.8256), 23 (see S/PV.8265) and 30 May (see S/PV.8272). Since 30 March, during a series ofprotests
in Gaza, 135 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
security forces. Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad
have acknowledged that a number of their members
were among those killed. Two Israeli soldiers were
also injured during the protests, with at least five
other people lightly injured as a result of rockets and
mortars launched from Gaza. Under the cover of the
protests, Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other
militants have engaged in violent and provocative acts.
Hundreds have approached and attempted to breach
the fence, burned tires, thrown rocks and fire bombs
at Israeli forces, launched incendiary kites and laid
improvised explosive devices at the fence. Palestinian
protesters also have damaged and looted equipment
and installations on the Gaza side of the border at the
Kerem Shalom crossing.

We have extensively reported and underlined to
the Council the respective responsibilities of parties
involved in the latest round of violence. I want to again
reiterate the call by the Secretary-General on all to
unequivocally condemn in the strongest possible terms
all actions that have brought us to this dangerous place
and led to the loss of so many lives in Gaza. Israel has
a duty to protect its citizens, but it must do so while
exercising maximum restraint in the use oflive fire and
not use lethal force except as a last resort against the
imminent threat of death or serious injury. The actions
of Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other groups
in Gaza put at risk not only the lives of Israelis and
Palestinians alike, but also efforts to ensure a livable
future for the people of Gaza. They must prevent the
launching of rockets and breaching of the fence.

The prevailing lack of decisive steps towards the
return of the legitimate Palestinian Government to
Gaza, despite Egypt's best efforts to revive the process,
is detrimental to Palestinian aspirations to statehood,
contributes to the worsening of the humanitarian crisis
and risks escalation. Furthermore, the recommendation
by the Palestinian National Council to suspend key
elements of the Oslo Accords, if implemented, would
add to negative trends, thereby making a return to
meaningful negotiations even more difficult. Last week,
thousands of Palestinians demonstrated in Ramallah in
solidarity with Gaza and its residents, while demanding
an end to the measures imposed by the Palestinian
Authority on Gaza and to the political division and
lifting the debilitating closures. Palestinians have a
right to freely express themselves, and the Palestinian
Government has the responsibility to guarantee their
exercise of that right in accordance with the basic law
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, to which Palestine acceded in April 2014.
Unfortunately, on 13 June, Palestinian security forces
prevented media from covering the protests and used
tear gas and stun grenades to disperse protestors, while
injuring and arresting dozens of protestors.

The reporting period also included several notable
prosecutions by Israeli authorities of Palestinians and
Israelis for membership in so-called terrorist cells.
On 29 March, an Israeli court convicted an Israeli
national of membership in a terrorist organization and
participating in a price-tag attack against Palestinians.
On 1 May, three Palestinians were indicted for planning
shooting attacks in the West Bank under the guidance
and sponsorship of Hamas. On 27 May, indictments were
filed against Palestinians suspected of membership of
a cell planning attacks against high-level targets, and,
on 17 June, suspected Palestinian members of another
cell, reportedly operated by Hamas, were indicted
for preparing large bombing and suicide attacks in
Israeli cities.

Provocation, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric
continued during the reporting period. On 30 April,
during his opening speech at the Palestinian National
Council, President Abbas made a series of anti-Semitic
statements, which were widely condemned by the
international community. At the height of the Gaza
protests, a senior Hamas official called on protestors
to "take down the border and tear out their Israelis
hearts", which was one of several public calls by Hamas
leaders inciting protestors to violence, including on
social media. Meanwhile, Fatah's official social media
pages continued to glorify the perpetrators of past
terror attacks. Israeli officials also made provocative
statements, including calls for the annexation of
settlements, while denying that the Palestinian
territories were occupied and openly rejecting the
Palestinian right to statehood.

I continue to engage with all sides to advance
proposals previously outlined in the Council that
would consider prioritizing projects agreed for Gaza
over the past years by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, enhance project management capacity on
the ground, and strengthen coordination with Israeli,
Palestinian, and Egyptian authorities. I would like to
reiterate my appreciation to all counterparts for the
goodwill and cooperation demonstrated thus far. Gaza
remains an integral part of the future Palestinian State.
I welcome Egypt's decision to open the Rafah border
crossing, which has enabled approximately 14,000
Palestinians to enter Egypt, and over 3,300 to return to
Gaza, and I hope that the security situation in Sinai will
allow for the opening to be sustained. I also take this
opportunity to reiterate my call on Hamas to provide
comprehensive information pertaining to the Israeli
nationals who have been held in Gaza, as required by
international humanitarian law.

Facing an unprecedented shortfall of more than
$250 million, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is weeks away from painful cuts to its
emergency assistance for Gaza and elsewhere in the
region. In Gaza itself, that would include a deferral of
salaries to some members of its workforce in July and
initiating the suspension of core operations in August.
UNRWA and its stakeholders are making every effort
to ensure that essential operations continue. To that
end, a pledging conference will be held here in New
York on 25 June.
In closing, I remain greatly concerned by the state
of our collective efforts to advance peace, and I reaffirm
the commitment of the United Nations to the Middle
East Quartet, which remains the pre-eminent forum
for discussing perspectives for resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. Given the interconnected nature of
conflicts throughout the region and the iconic nature of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that can feed extremist
narratives, creating the conditions for the parties to
return to meaningful negotiations remains critical.

The Secretary-General has consistently spoken
out against unilateral measures, which jeopardize the
prospect ofpeace. In resolution 2334 (2016), the Security
Council also underlined that it will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties
through negotiations. The need to reverse, or at the very
least contain, the impact of negative trends, especially
illegal settlement activity, violence and incitement, is
critical not only to preserving hope for a meaningful
return to the negotiating table, but also to preventing
the escalation of broader regional tensions. I urge
key regional and international partners to re-engage
and remain steadfast in the pursuit of ending the
occupation and realizing the two-State solution in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions and
previous agreements.

