The President: In accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the
Security Council will now proceed to hold this ninth
meeting to elect a member of the International Court
of Justice by further ballot for the one seat that remains
to be filled.

I should like to inform Council members
that I have received a letter from Her Excellency
Mrs. Maria Cristina Perceval, Permanent Representative
of Argentina to the United Nations, dated 11 November
2014, communicating the decision to withdraw the
nomination of Ms. Susana Ruiz Cerutti for election to
the International Court of Justice.

I have also received a letter from the Legal Counsel
dated 14 November 2014, informing me on behalf of
the Secretary-General that the Permanent Mission
of Argentina to the United Nations communicated
to the Legal Counsel that the decision to withdraw
Ms. Cerutti's candidacy was conveyed to the national
groups that nominated this candidate through the
respective Missions, and no objections were received.
Accordingly, her name is not included on the ballot
papers.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to
proceed with the election of the one remaining member
of the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a new ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gombo
(Chad) and Mr. Cabezas (Chile) acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the one
candidate for whom they wish to vote.

***


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.
***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that, in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

*>l<*


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson 15

Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson has accordingly
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council. I have communicated the result of the vote to
the President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
53rd plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing the one
remaining member of the International Court of
Justice, Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson (Jamaica)
obtained an absolute majority of votes in the
General Assembly."

Accordingly, the same candidate has received the
required absolute majority of votes in the Council
and in the General Assembly. As both the Security
Council and the General Assembly have agreed on the
same candidates, the jurists Mr. Mohamed Bennouna,
Mr. James Richard Crawford, Ms. Joan E. Donoghue,
Mr. Kirill Gevorgian and Mr. Patrick Lipton Robinson
have been elected to the International Court of Justice
for a term of office of nine years, beginning on
6 February 2015.
I should like to congratulate them and wish them
every success in the high office to which they have
been elected.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank
the tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the
elections.

I would also like to thank all Council members for
the constructive manner in which they have engaged

in this election process. I should like to reiterate the
comments I made in the closed consultations of the
Council last week in respeet of the very positive and
commendable action on the part of Argentina in such a
unique set of circumstances.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.

