Mr. Store (Norway): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
critical situation in Gaza. As Norwegian Foreign
Minister, I add my voice tonight to all those who
demand an immediate, effective and verifiable
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. The launching of
rockets by Hamas targeting civilians inside Israel must
stop. The Israeli shelling of Gaza from the air, sea and
land must stop. Norway condemns the heavy ground
operations that are exposing thousands and thousands
of civilians and killing innocent women, men and
children.
That escalation does not lead to peace and
security for Israelis and Palestinians. It is a dreadful
road to death, destruction, hatred and more

desperation. It is a recipe for revenge and more terror.
Political goals, however legitimate, will not be reached
through war, military onslaught and destruction. After
this war will come the day when the people of Gaza
and Israel will still live next to each other. Palestinians
will still be deprived of their unity and of their State,
and Israelis will still be deprived of security.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has so far been incapable of making
any decision in the matter. That is a fact that I have a
hard time trying to explain to the people of my country,
who, together with hundreds of millions around the
world, see the flickering television images of great
human suffering day in and day out. Today, the news of
the shelling of the school where people had sought
refuge shocked us even more.

I therefore hope that the French-Egyptian
initiative for an immediate ceasefire will succeed. As
that initiative takes shape, I would hope that the details
will be confirmed by a Security Council resolution.

A ceasefire must not be a return to the status quo
ante, and therefore a ceasefire and the political process
must address the critical outstanding issues: a stop to
smuggling and the clandestine import of arms and their
accessories and the immediate opening of border
crossings for urgent humanitarian needs, followed by
the presence of international monitors. Then, and soon,
we need to address the challenge of new and urgent
human needs caused by the current violence.

That is also why I would like to take the
opportunity tonight to address the Security Council as
Chair of the donor support group to the Palestinian
Authority, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
(AHLC). As members will remember, just one year
ago, Norway and France, together with the European
Commission and Quarter Representative Tony Blair,
hosted the donor conference for the Palestinians in
Paris. That was a very successful undertaking thanks to
France. The donor community made significant
pledges both to the running of Palestinian Authority
institutions and to the projects that could help boost the
Palestinian economy.
In May last year in London, the AHLC reviewed
the progress made by both the donors and the
Palestinian Authority. Four months later, we noted
further progress as we convened the AHLC here in
New York with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
despite the numerous obstacles created by the
occupation, the limits to access and movement and the
growing number of settlements on Palestinian land.

Throughout recent years, Gaza has been a major
concern, not least as a result of internal Palestinian
strife and division, but also as a result of the Israeli
siege on the enclave. Before the outbreak of the war,
the isolation of Gaza had devastated the private sector,
increased poverty and malnutrition and undermined the
social and economic fabric of Gaza. The civilian
population has been caged and severely traumatized.

As this ongoing war escalates, the supplies of
water and energy, which were already insufficient,
have more or less completely stopped. The main
sewage plant in the north of Gaza is on the verge of
collapse. We urgently need to address this humanitarian
disaster. Two days ago, I received a letter from the
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad,
outlining the budgetary outlook of the Authority for
2009. Despite some limited progress, deplorably the
Palestinian economy will continue to depend on donors
for a long time to come. Now, we need to add the
consequences of the devastation in Gaza and the dire
consequences that the war is having for the people, for
the infrastructure and for the economy.

In consultation with Prime Minister Fayyad and
the co-Chairs of the AHLC, Norway had originally
planned to convene the AHLC some time during the
first half of 2009. Under the present circumstances, I
propose that the AHLC be convened as soon as
possible. The situation is new and requires urgent
action. The humanitarian needs demand relief. I ask for
the Council's support for the holding of a special donor
conference for Gaza, in conjunction with the AHLC
meeting, as soon as possible.

When the hostilities cease, we need to start
assessing both the immediate and the long-term needs.
Those will have to be determined by a fact-finding and
assessment mission led by the World Bank and the
United Nations. Before then, we must immediately
ease the suffering of the civilian population.
International humanitarian law is crystal clear.
Civilians should and must be protected. It is
unacceptable that Hamas exposes civilians by taking its
military arsenal and its fighting to densely populated
areas. We call on Israel to comply with its obligations
under the Geneva Conventions to allow the unhindered

access of humanitarian supplies to Gaza. We urgently
call on Israel to ensure that food, water and medicines
gain access and unhindered distribution to the civilian
population. We must empower the most effective
providers of humanitarian assistance to conduct their
activities; the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East is critical in
that context.

I should like to add one point. Since the
beginning of hostilities, independent reporters have
been denied access to the war zone. That is regrettable
and unacceptable. We demand of Israel that reporters
be allowed to do their regular work inside Gaza.

Finally, the division among Palestinians is a
tragedy. Let me commend President Mubarak and
Egypt for their steadfast efforts to heal that division,
for which the citizens of Gaza have already paid a high
price. The question of the governance of Gaza must be
addressed. The people of Gaza deserve stable,
democratic and peaceful governance. A power vacuum
in Gaza after the end of hostilities will further plunge
the civilian population into misery. In that context, I
welcome President Abbas's call for a national unity
Government and the holding of elections.

