Mr. Tidjani (spoke in French): Cameroon would
like to commend you, Sir, and to thank you for having
organized this meeting on the production and traffic of
drugs in Afghanistan. This is an important subject,
whose manifestations and consequences transcend the
specific situation of this country, which has been
battered by more than two decades of war.

Today Afghanistan produces more than 3,500
tons of opium annually. It is an enormous amount,
particularly when we know that only two years ago,
poppy cultivation in that country had fallen to a few
hundred tons. The connections among poppy
production, the lack of security, economic difficulties,
corruption and building a State based on the rule of law
is clearly established. Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa gave
excellent statements on this a while ago. Cameroon
would like to express to them our great appreciation for
the excellent quality of their introductory remarks this
morning.

The interconnections among cultivation, drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime, of which
the traffic in small arms is an illustrative outgrowth,
has been mentioned in a number of meetings organized
over the past few weeks on this matter in Tashkent,
Prague and Paris.

Cameroon would like to especially thank the
Government of France for having organized on 21 and
22 May 2003 a ministerial conference on drug routes
from Central Asia to Europe. The conclusions of that
meeting largely transcend the geopolitical framework
that was its foundation. The concerns raised by the
participants in the Paris meeting are basically identical
to those heard in the areas of cultivation or transit of
drugs in Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa and South-
East Asia. Moreover, Ambassador de La Sabliere spoke
in detail about this in the statement he made earlier
today.

Drug production and trafficking are among the
most significant challenges facing post-Taliban
Afghanistan, in addition to its reconstruction, security
and the strengthening of the rule of law. As we have
emphasized on several occasions, economic recovery,
and particularly poverty eradication, security and the
political process, are influenced directly or indirectly
by the crucial question of poppy cultivation.

Warlords now seem to be at the heart of the
economic and political dynamics of Afghanistan. These
very warlords, with their ties to international crime,
control the production and trafficking of opium coming
from that country.

The efforts of certain countries to control this
activity are praiseworthy, and Cameroon would like to
express its appreciation to the United Kingdom and
Germany for their interest in and determined efforts at
combating this scourge, which contributes to instability
in Afghanistan in social, economic and security terms,
and which has a destructive impact that extends beyond
the borders of Afghanistan. It must be acknowledged,
unfortunately, that those efforts have had mixed
success. Since the collapse of the Taliban, poppy
production has rather increased in Afghanistan.
Consumption has increased in transit and neighbouring
countries.

This is cause for concern, and without the
unprecedented mobilization of the international
community, the advances made by the Afghan people
are threatened. Such a mobilization surely suggests
robust action in production zones. That action should
involve diversifying production, especially agricultural
production, and improvements in crop yield,
particularly by means of substantial investment in
irrigation works.

Mr. Costa has provided relevant information on
the strategy to be implemented if we want to dissuade
farmers from poppy production and to reorient them
towards other profitable crops.

Aside from agriculture, Cameroon is convinced
that the promotion of a competitive private sector and
significant investment in productive sectors will help
meet the challenge of unemployment and rampant
crime. For Afghanistan to meet these challenges it will
need the support of the international community, which
should also promote access of its products to the major
markets, in particular in Western Europe.

An efficient campaign to combat opium
trafficking also entails removing the remaining
ambiguity towards the warlords, who not only control
the drug trade but are also increasingly present in all
sectors of economic activity and in building the
political process, directly or through their allies.

Strengthening institutional capacities and the
central Government's control over all of Afghan
territory, with a competent and honest army and police
force, are equally indispensable to stemming drug
trafficking.

On the international level, bolstering cooperation
among countries of production, transit and
consumption, strengthening instruments and certain
structures, in particular the Office on Drugs and Crime,
and the swift conclusion of negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on transnational crime are
also likely to promote the resolution of the thorny
problem of the production and trade of Afghan opium.

Finally, Cameroon would like to support the
presidential draft statement.

