Mr. Gomez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, and Bolivia for convening
this important meeting. Allow me to start by reiterating
the obvious. We must strengthen the collective response
through cooperation and international law in order to
address the increasing risk ofweapons capable ofwiping
out entire communities through cruel, indiscriminate
effects, as well as the risk that they may fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups.

Mexico categorically condemns the existence
of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons, and their use by any
actor under any circumstance. This meeting coincides
with the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty of Tlatelolco
and shows that a world free of nuclear weapons is a
goal within our reach. As the concept note prepared for
the previous Council meeting on this topic in December
indicates (S/2016/1013, annex), the extraordinary
advances in science and technology and the dynamism
of international trade should not threaten our security.
Our challenge is to find a balance that will enable us
to meet our non-proliferation commitments, while
avoiding obstacles to trade, technology and our own
industries.

Mexico is a responsible global actor and a country
that rejects weapons of mass destruction, as well as
being the world's leading recipient of foreign direct
investment in its aerospace industry. With one of
the largest chemical industries in the world, we have
developed a national export-control regime for dual-use
materials, based on coordinated efforts generating
firm, flexible and sophisticated responses, thereby
enabling us to fulfil our international obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), and those under our voluntary
memberships, including the Wassenaar Arrangement,
the Australia Group and the Nuclear Suppliers Group.

But such efforts are of little or no use if we do
not strengthen our national capacities and if we do
not engage in real-time information exchange and
continuous cooperation among States. In those efforts,
the leadership of the Security Council is essential, as
is the commitment of the five permanent members.
The review of the status of resolution 1540 (2004) by
the Council last year. under the leadership of Spain,
highlighted the urgent need to strengthen our collective
efforts.

Two weeks ago, in collaboration with Germany,
the 1540 Committee Group of Experts and the Office
for Disarmament Affairs, Mexico hosted a successful
meeting on the Wiesbaden process that enabled us
to share our experience and good practices with the
countries of the Pacific Ocean Alliance and with
Brazil. Industry representatives from those countries
participated in awareness-raising with regard to the
diversion of dual-use goods and technologies for
proliferation purposes. Important efforts that are
critical to ensuring a safer region are taking place in
Latin America.

Multilateralism and the United Nations remain key
in addressing the risks of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their materials and in forging
the secure world that we all desire.
