Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan, Mr. Tom Koenigs, for his briefing and
express our gratitude for his very important work.

Peru appreciates the will of the Government and
people of Afghanistan, as well as that of the
international community, in renewing their
commitment to attend to the difficult challenges that
Afghanistan faces in attaining peace and in
reconstructing the country and its institutions. In spite
of that will, we see that, with the exception of some
significant achievements in the areas of education,
public health and food security, the deterioration of the
internal, political and military situations, as well as in
the fight against drug trafficking, means that this
Council is facing a situation of great concern.

Afghanistan has evolved in an unexpected
direction over the last few months. This dangerous
trend means that we need to reassess the strategies and
tactics used and correct the activities of the Afghan
Government and the international community. In this
regard, we welcome the recent meetings of the member
States of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board.

We recognize that the entire country is not
equally affected by the same issues. In general, the
security situation, especially in the Southwest and the
East, is affected by a steady stream of terrorist attacks
and the activities of illegal armed groups. The situation
is increasingly complex because of the affliction of
drug-trafficking. After six years, the increase in suicide
attacks and terrorist attacks shows that Taliban,
Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups are resilient and are
acting increasingly in concert with criminal sectors, in
addition to adopting convergent strategies.

In this context, we believe that the Afghan State
should adjust its security and reconciliation strategy to
better respond to its adversary. Security in Afghanistan
must be taken up as a priority by its own citizens. We
need better coordination between the Afghan security
forces and the international security presence, as
suggested by the Secretary-General. Similarly, an in-
depth overhaul is needed regarding the situation of the
Afghan National Police.

On the other hand, we must avoid military
operations that incur Afghan civilian victims and
produce a negative impact on the legitimacy of the
cooperation with the Afghan Government. The
protection of civilians and their human rights, as well
as the respect for humanitarian obligations and
international law, must be at the very centre of all
security operations.

It is clear that the strategy to fight drug-
trafficking is not working in many parts of
Afghanistan. The international efforts of the last six
years have coincided with an exponential increase in
poppy, opium and morphine production in Afghanistan.
In 2007, Afghanistan produced a record amount of
opium never before attained. This leads to a grave
problem of credibility in the social, economic and
political efforts aimed at reconstruction in Afghanistan,
with repercussions related to security and democratic
governance. Regional and international cooperation are
more necessary than ever to counteract the increase of
power of the drug trade, even with democratic
structures and institutions.

Peru would stress the importance of supporting
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) in its fundamental assault on the serious
problem of drugs, using a policy of shared
responsibility under the leadership of the Government
of Afghanistan and in cooperation with the

international community. But it is necessary for there
to be effective results with immediate economic
benefits to the more than 3 million Afghans who live
off of the drug trade. The political system must also be
freed of the perverse affects of this plague.

The international community continues to
endorse the construction of a democratic, peaceful and
reconciled Afghanistan, free from terrorism and drug-
trafficking, prepared to return to the path of
development. There cannot be strong democracy
without multi-lateral dialogue and unity of action. The
Government needs to create synergies and provide
political and administrative direction to the country,
while fighting impunity and corruption.

It is necessary to recognize that Afghanistan
needs sustained and constant attention, not only to
strengthen security, but also to reconstruct a physical
infrastructure to promote development, reduce poverty
and create opportunities for well-being that will
contribute to peace and stability.

In closing, we feel that the financial support of
the international community, as well as donors, is
crucial to the international development strategy that
will be launched in March of 2008.

