Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important
briefing on strategic force-generation capability and
training for United Nations peacekeeping. That is
indeed a very important issue that needs to be seriously
considered by the Council as part of the efforts to
reform United Nations peacekeeping. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2378 (2017), which was adopted during the Ethiopian
presidency in September, and we appreciate the briefing
of Assistant Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita.

We all know that the United Nations does not have
its own army, and that it depends on Member States
to generate forces for its peacekeeping missions.
Nevertheless, securing sufficient personnel with
the necessary capabilities, adequate resources and
rapid-deployment capability has been one of the key
challenges that the Organization has been facing. The
speed, mobility and flexibility ofpersonnel deployment
in the field has also been slow and bureaucratically
rigid, which has imposed constraints on missions'
operational effectiveness on the ground.

The need to undertake considerable efforts to
enhance the way in which the United Nations mobilizes
and deploys its uniformed personnel is well recognized.
In that respect, we hope that some of the aforementioned
challenges will be addressed through the ongoing reform
that the Secretary-General is undertaking to make the
Organization more nimble, efficient and effective.
We express our full support for the recommendations
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-General
on force generation, training and capacity-building.
Of course, we recognize the important steps that
have already been taken by the Secretariat to improve
the United Nations force-generation processes and
capability-analysis system. The establishment and
operationalization of the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and the Strategic Force Generation
and Capability Planning Cell within the Secretariat is a
particular case in point.

As the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) rightly stated, force
generation is not simply a technical and operational
issue to be delegated to the Secretariat. Achieving
progress requires the mobilization and political support
of Member States. That is why greater consultation
with current and potential contributors is absolutely
imperative so as to provide them with timely, adequate
and relevant information, and help them make informed
decisions concerning their contributions of personnel.
Therefore, enhancing triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries is very crucial. We also
fully agree with the proposal made by the Secretary-
General to establish a light coordination mechanism,
which would, we believe, serve as an important platform
for matching the right capabilities and training with
the skill and equipment needs of potential troop- and
police-contributing countries.

Although the increase in the number and quality of
pledges by Member States continues to be significant,
it is equally important to ensure that the pledges and
commitments made thus far are honoured. That requires
following-up on recently made pledges, including those
made during the Vancouver ministerial conference last
month. We look forward to the Secretariat's update on

that issue in September 2018 pursuant to resolution
2378 (2017).

We believe that the United Nations strategic
force-generation processes should also support and
encourage regional capabilities, such as the African
Standby Force. Such regional forces certainly play an
important role as first responders in crisis situations,
and have demonstrated their ability to serve as bridging
forces until the United Nations is ready to deploy. It
is, therefore, our strong hope that the Secretariat will
develop innovative options and mechanisms that will
enhance the potential synergy between the United
Nations peacekeeping capability readiness system and
the African Standby Force.

Lastly, I would be remiss ifI were to conclude
without expressing our appreciation to Japan for its
commitment to this issue and for the capacity-building
and training support that it has been providing to
African troop-contributing countries through the
triangular partnership project.

