Mr. Moungara-Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): The delegation of Gabon, through me,
congratulates Benin on its initiative to convene this
debate on the sensitive topic of children and armed
conflict. Your presence, Sir, reflects in no uncertain
terms your country's commitment to the cause of
children.

I also take this opportunity to welcome the other
ministers who are present here at this debate and to
express my utmost appreciation to Ambassador Cesar
Mayoral of Argentina for the skill with which he
discharged his duties as President of the Council for
January.

I also join in the well-deserved tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for
his excellent briefing on the Secretary-General's
report. I must say that my delegation always follows
with great interest the briefings of Mr. Otunnu, whose
commitment to children in conflict situations is
abundantly clear. I therefore reaffirm my delegation's
full support for his effective action.

Today's debate on children and armed conflict
falls, in my opinion, within the logic of the meeting on
small arms and light weapons convened by your
delegation, Sir, on 17 February. Indeed, as is often
acknowledged and reiterated, many armed conflicts
throughout the world - but more often in developing
countries and especially in Africa - are exacerbated
by small arms and give rise to the enlistment of
children among the ranks of combatants.

Victims of physical abuse, children also have to
endure the beastly fantasies of warlords. They are
exploited in order to satisfy the selfish appetites of a
handful of irresponsible politicians who lust for power
and are sometimes in the pay of multinationals greedy
for sordid and disgraceful profits. Their innocence
deeply compromised, and used as sex slaves and
soldiers, sometimes under the destructive influence of
narcotics, children witness the most shocking atrocities
and may even be forced to take part in them.

Is it enough, however, to condemn the harm
wrought by war on the innocence, health and future of
boys and girls? The answer is that more dynamic,
coordinated and sustained action is necessary in
preventing armed conflict and the proliferation of small
arms, implementing national and international legal
norms on the protection of children, and making an
example of those who are guilty of crimes against
children. My delegation believes that the prevention of
armed conflict is essential to sparing children the
untold suffering that threatens their mental and
physical health and their future. Vigorous action to
stem the proliferation of and illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons also contributes to saving children
from the horrors of war. From the legal standpoint, it
must be acknowledged and recognized that the
international norms in force to protect children are
adequate and well adapted.

My delegation stresses the need for the
international community to ensure strict compliance by
the parties to a conflict with the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977, as well as of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, whereby
children affected by armed conflict must enjoy special
protection and care.
In that connection, we must put an end to the
impunity of those responsible for crimes against
children. The perpetrators of such crimes must be
prosecuted and punished. It is particularly alarming
that peacekeeping personnel - the very people who
are supposed to alleviate the suffering of children -
may contribute to the problem. The United Nations and
the countries of origin of those personnel must assume
their responsibilities for clamping down on such
behaviour.

Within the framework of peacekeeping operations
and post-conflict programmes, it seems pivotal to us to
take into account the special situation of children
affected by armed conflict, as this is crucial for their
rehabilitation and reintegration into an environment
that is conducive to their development and well-being.
Thus we invite the donor community to provide
sizeable financial support to activities related to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

My delegation would like also to welcome the
cooperation and the contribution made by United
Nations agencies such as the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as many
others who work to protect and ensure the well-being
of children. This cooperation is beneficial and will
prove to be even more useful in the context of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism that is advocated
by the Secretary-General in his report, which has been
submitted to us in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

