Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to see you, Sir,
presiding over the Security Council today as it meets on an
issue of serious concern to the international community.

Allow me to begin by expressing the deep regret and
concern of the Government and people of Pakistan over the
damage and destruction caused to the Chinese Embassy
during the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) air
strikes in Belgrade and the resultant deaths and injuries of
the Chinese nationals. We extend our sincerest condolences
to the Government and people of the People's Republic of
China and to the bereaved families.

The massive human tragedy which has unfolded in
Kosovo is a source of deep distress and anxiety for the
people of Pakistan, as it is for people all over the world.
The reign of terror let loose by the Serbian forces in
Kosovo has resulted in the killing of a large number of
civilians, including women, children and the elderly. As a
result of Belgrade's relentless, premeditated policy of ethnic
cleansing, over 1 million people have now fled Kosovo into
neighbouring countries, thousands are internally displaced,
and numerous women and children have been separated
from their menfolk. This mass exodus must be stopped and
the suffering of the refugees must be alleviated through
determined international efforts.

Pakistan has made a modest contribution to the relief
efforts and will continue to do so in whatever way possible.
The Government of Pakistan has made a contribution of $5
million to help the Kosovar refugees. In addition, four relief
flights carrying tents, food and medicine have been
dispatched to assist in the humanitarian efforts, in
coordination with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and non-governmental
organizations operating in the area. Some medical personnel
are also being dispatched to the region to support
international efforts.

It is shocking that, so soon after Bosnia, we are
witnessing yet another campaign of genocide and ethnic
cleansing being perpetrated by the same regime. The
Belgrade authorities are pursuing systematic and
deliberate policies of hatred and intolerance, aimed at
decimating and uprooting a whole community for its
ethnic origin and beliefs. Only four years ago, while
addressing the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
international community vowed not to allow the
recurrence of such a heinous crime against humanity
anywhere in the world. The perpetrators of such crimes
must not go unpunished.

Pakistan has been closely following the Kosovo
situation. The Prime Minister of Pakistan recently visited
the refugee camps in Tirana to have first-hand
information about the suffering of the innocent Kosovars.
As part of the visit to Tirana, he had stopovers in Baku,
Rome and Ankara, where he exchanged views with the
leaders on the Kosovo crisis. During an official visit to
Moscow last month, the Prime Minister held discussions
with the Russian leadership on the issue. Also at
Pakistan's initiative, a ministerial meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference Contact Group on
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosova was convened in
Geneva last month. This meeting adopted a
comprehensive declaration on the issue and was followed
up by visits to Moscow, Rome, Bonn and Tirana by a
ministerial delegation of the Contact Group.

In all these contacts and forums, Pakistan
emphasized the need for the Security Council to address
the crisis effectively and, in particular, stressed the
urgency of establishing a United Nations peacekeeping
force in Kosovo. The inability of the Security Council to
take effective action and to carry out its Charter
responsibility has been a matter of deep concern to us. Its
failure to address the issues of international peace and
security in the past has only aggravated conflicts and
human tragedies, as we in South Asia know well.

We hope that the Security Council will soon address
the Kosovo crisis comprehensively and facilitate an early
implementation of last week's decision by the Foreign
Ministers of the Group of Seven industrialized nations
and Russia to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Kosovo. The Security Council must endorse
the proposals which, among other things, would pave the
way for a verifiable end to violence and ethnic cleansing
in Kosovo, the withdrawal of Yugoslav military, police
and paramilitary forces, the establishment of an interim
administration in the province, the safe and free return of
refugees and a political settlement providing self-
government for Kosovo. Pakistan has already expressed
its willingness to contribute to the United Nations

 

peacekeeping efforts, as and when authorized by the
Security Council, in fulfilling its Charter responsibility.

As a sponsor of the resolution, Pakistan supports the
measures adopted by the Security Council on the
humanitarian crisis in Kosovo.

