Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to add the
United Kingdom's voice of welcome to those of
Security Council colleagues to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative, Mr. Zannier, to President Tadic'
of Serbia, and to the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni, over a year after Kosovo became
independent. I would also like to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
Kosovo over the period during which Kosovo passed
its first anniversary as an independent State
(S/2009/149).

As we have heard this morning, there have been
several positive developments over the period. The
Government of Kosovo has continued to establish the
legal and administrative apparatus of the State, in line
with Kosovo's Constitution. They are preparing to
devolve some government competencies to local
municipalities, including Kosovo Serb municipalities,
and to establish new municipalities. These will help to
protect the interests of all of Kosovo's minority
communities.

The European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) has taken up its mandate and is
progressing towards full operational capacity. It is
fulfilling its tasks of mentoring, monitoring and
advising Kosovo's Police, judiciary and Customs, and
that is helping to maintain law and order. That is
essential to allow all of Kosovo's citizens to pursue
their daily business. EULEX has also encouraged the
establishment of an ethnically mixed Kosovo Police
unit in northern Mitrovica. EULEX has helped to
ensure an effective response by the Police to the few
instances of criminal and inter-ethnic violence that
have occurred, ensuring their quick suppression.

We welcome the start of the technical dialogue
between EULEX and Belgrade over the transitional
arrangements set out in the Secretary-General's
November 2008 report to the Council (S/2008/692),
and we urge the Governments of Serbia and Kosovo to
engage constructively with EULEX over the
implementation of those arrangements and to promote
the benefits of positive engagement to all of Kosovo's
communities.

The Kosovo Security Force has been established
and the Kosovo Protection Corps has stood down, in
line with commitments made with the Kosovo
Government and the international community. The
Kosovo Security Force will provide Kosovo with an
appropriately sized, lightly armed, multi-ethnic and
civilian-led internal security and civil protection
capability. I would like to repeat once again that the
Kosovo Security Force does not constitute any sort of
threat to any of Kosovo's neighbours.

Progress on returns, property, adjudication and
reconstruction of cultural and religious heritage sites
has continued. The European Union (EU) remains
committed to fostering the European perspective of
Kosovo in the context of the Stabilization and
Association Process and to encouraging Kosovo's full
involvement in regional initiatives and international
forums in a constructive manner.

For anyone's European perspective to be
advanced, we need an even greater acceleration from
the Kosovo Government, especially with regard to the
rule of law and to returns, property and the
reconstruction of the religious and cultural heritage
sites. We need greater outreach to all communities. It
must be visibly clear and practically demonstrated that
all citizens of Kosovo will be treated equally. They
deserve access to its services on an equal basis, and we
look to the Kosovo Government to give us such
assurances.

We heard a number of statements this morning
from President Tadie with which my Government does
not agree. For example, we do not accept his
description of the remit of the EU mission in Kosovo.
With regard to the tenth anniversary of the NATO
bombing of Serbia, I think we should spend a moment
reflecting on why that was necessary. That NATO
action was an intervention to avert an overwhelming
humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo. When an attempt
was made at the United Nations to condemn NATO's
action, only three countries voted in favour of
condemnation. Serbia ignored several Chapter VII
Security Council resolutions to negotiate and to cease
its repression. That repression saw the Racak massacre,
800,000 people expelled and 10,000 people killed,
according to United Nations figures. It does Serbia no
credit to ignore those facts from 1998 and 1999.

That is not to belittle subsequent violence. The
United Kingdom unreservedly condemns what
happened to Kosovo's Serb communities in 2004. I
have been to Obilie and have seen the Kosovo Serbs
who were driven from their homes. But there is a world
of difference between those acts of violence in 2004
and the deliberate policies of the then Serbian
Government towards Kosovo Albanians in 1998 and
1999. We do not hold the present Government of
Serbia - still less President Tadie - responsible for
those events. But the Government does have a
responsibility to educate their citizens about the crimes
committed in Serbia's name by Milosevic and others
indicted by the Hague Tribunal.

My Government's position on the independence
of Kosovo is well known. Kosovo's independence is a
fact. It is irreversible, and recognitions are continuing.
We want to see both Kosovo and Serbia enter the
European Union as neighbours on good terms with
each other and with the rest of the European Union. We
welcome the statement by President Tadie today that
joining the EU is Serbia's strategic goal. We will do
everything we can to help Serbia realize that goal.

But it is worth recalling that the route to Europe
lies through reconciliation, not retribution. It lies in
acknowledging and overcoming the past and moving
on.

