Mr. Dimitrov (Bulgaria): I would like to express my
highest appreciation to you, Your Excellency, Mr. Abdus
Samad Azad, Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, for
conducting the present session of the Security Council in
such an efficient way. My appreciation also goes to
Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury and his co-writers for
their important role in the initiation of this open debate on
the humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security
Council.

I am grateful, too, to the Secretary-General for his
lucid introductory remarks and for his consistent efforts
to strengthen the response to humanitarian crises as an
essential element of the work of the United Nations. In
this regard, Bulgaria commends his timely initiative to
launch a major review of United Nations peace
operations, which we believe will cover certain important
aspects of humanitarian relief.

Bulgaria has aligned itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union. That is why I will confine my intervention to
some remarks which are of particular importance to my
delegation.

The issue of international cooperation in solving
problems of a humanitarian character are not new for the
United Nations. Ever since the entry into force of the
United Nations Charter and the first practical steps taken
by the Organization, humanitarian activities have been
among its primary purposes and responsibilities. A
number of provisions of the Charter, beginning with the
Preamble and Article 1, underline the will of the United
Nations to take effective, collective measures for facing
problems of a humanitarian nature.

From a legal viewpoint, therefore, humanitarian
action, when needed, very clearly represents one of the
major raisons d'etre of the United Nations. However,
seen from the historical perspective of the past 50 years,
the progress achieved so far in the development of
international humanitarian, refugee and human rights law,
as well as of the normative basis for the protection of
humanitarian and associated personnel, seems to be
insufficient to face the diverse challenges posed by the
increase in the number and complexity of humanitarian
crisis situations. It is our belief that the guidelines adopted
in this regard by the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, as well as the ongoing process for the
adoption of additional legal instruments, will significantly
contribute to filling the existing gap.

As the principal United Nations organ bearing the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council should evaluate
humanitarian crisis dimensions and related implications
for regional stability, while discussing and providing for
effective responses to conflicts. Furthermore, we must not
underestimate the important preventive and - in a way

 

- deterrent role of humanitarian actions if rendered in
time. In these cases, humanitarian assistance must be an
integral part of peace settlements and considered not only
as a means of reducing or alleviating human suffering, but,
in a broader sense, as a prerequisite for rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development. Otherwise, the
exacerbation of the humanitarian situation in a specific
country or region could have unpredictable consequences,
including the deterioration of the political situation and the
reopening of the conflict.

A case in point is the recent developments in Kosovo,
which proved the necessity of the full, persistent and
adequate engagement of the international community in
strengthening the transition from an urgent humanitarian
situation into a stable process of rehabilitation and
reconstruction. The Council must send a strong political
message to the parties involved in the conflict to respect the
rights of all persons, with special attention being paid to the
protection of minorities and other vulnerable groups.

Past decades have singled out problems of ineffective
coordination, selectivity in response, excessive caution,
donor fatigue and the phenomenon of forgotten
emergencies, among others. Taking this into account, and
given the complexity of humanitarian assistance, it is our
firm conviction that close cooperation and strengthened
coordination are indispensable among the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
specialized agencies and bodies, regional organizations and
international and national non-governmental organizations.
Of significant importance in this regard are the United
Nations guiding principles for the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance, adopted in 1991, as
well as the agreed conclusions of the Economic and Social
Council last year.

In conclusion, I would like to call on the Security
Council and its members to continue to build closer formal
and informal ties with the Economic and Social Council.
While reassessing and reviewing the Security Council's
working methods, my country is of the opinion that the
implementation of Article 65 of the United Nations Charter
can provide for concrete forms of effective cooperation
between the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Further interaction between these two principal
United Nations organs may also include regular joint
briefings and joint meetings.

