Mr. Konan Banny (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to express my thanks
for this opportunity to address the Security Council this
morning, in my capacity as Prime Minister of the
Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, at an important stage of the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. I would like to
congratulate China on the work accomplished during
its term as President of the Security Council.

I also wish to convey to the Council the greetings
and gratitude of the people of Cote d'Ivoire, of its head
of State, His Excellency Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, and of
the Transition Government, which I have the great
honour to lead, for the interest that the Council has
unfailingly showed regarding Cote d'Ivoire since the
crisis erupted on 19 September 2002. It is a particular
pleasure to express my gratitude to the Council for its
constant support to my Government and to myself
since we assumed our duties in December 2005. In this
respect I welcome the warm reception and the attention
the Council kindly gave my Minister for Foreign
Affairs during his visit on 29 March 2006.

This morning's meeting gives me the pleasant
opportunity to express the sincere thanks and gratitude
of the Ivorian people to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for everything he is doing to help
Cote d'Ivoire to regain peace and stability.

The Council is more familiar than anyone else
with the situation in C6te d'Ivoire and particularly with
the peace and reconciliation process undertaken since
the signing of the agreements of Linas-Marcoussis,
Accra and Pretoria before the adoption, on 21 October
2005, of Security Council resolution 1633 (2005).

Prior to that date, the process was in difficulty.
Moreover, resolution 1633 (2005) had to be adopted, at
the end of the term of office of the President of the
Republic, in order to continue the peace process that
was under way, but there had not been sufficient
progress to permit the holding of elections on
31 October. The various Ivorian protagonists had not
managed to undertake any significant actions in terms
of respecting the deadlines set by the agreements. The
lack of confidence was clear in political circles,
especially among the main Ivorian political leaders,
most of whom were out of the country. Some were
even afraid to be in Abidjan. The security situation was
at its lowest level, and the Government of National
Reconciliation was not functioning at its best.

It is in that context that the Security Council
adopted - at the proposal of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union - resolution 1633 (2005). Since that
resolution was adopted, and the hopes it raised, Cote
d'Ivoire, under the impetus of the Transition
Government, is learning to live in a new era. This new
context has allowed the peace and reconciliation
process to evolve significantly. Even if events are not
proceeding as quickly as we - I myself, the majority
of observers and the vast majority of Ivorians - would
wish, we can nevertheless say that the general situation
now is relatively satisfactory.

Several organizations, African statesmen and
statesmen from other countries have given their
support to the Ivorian political leaders and the people
of Cote d'Ivoire in order to permit the peace process to
make tangible progress. In that respect I wish to
express the gratitude of Cote d'Ivoire to ECOWAS and
to its Chairman, His Excellency Mr. Tandja Mamadou,
to the African Union and its Chairman, His Excellency
Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, not forgetting the outgoing
Chairman, His Excellency Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, and
the African Union Mediator, His Excellency President
Thabo Mbeki, and also the other heads of State for the
positive role they have been playing.

Of course, I wish to stress once again the leading
role played by Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by
his team based in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire. Of course I
include the French forces participating in Operation
Licorne.

Thanks to the efforts of all, and to those of what I
call "the tandem", which I have decided to form with
the head of State, Laurent Gbagbo, my Government has
taken several initiatives towards reconciliation and the
restoration of confidence. These include in particular
the two meetings in Yamoussoukro, about which
members have heard. The first was the governmental
seminar on the road map, held from 9 to 11 February
2006. Military dialogue was resumed, and
examinations were organized in the central, western
and northern occupied regions. The university in
Bouake was opened. There was a meeting on
25 February 2006 among the four main Ivorian
political leaders: Laurent Gbagbo, Henri Konan Bedie,
Alassane Ouattara and Guillaume Soro.

That latter meeting - held in Cote d'Ivoire for
the first time since the crisis began - made it possible
for the participants to tackle, in my presence, the main
questions of concern to them and whose resolution
should give fresh impetus to the peace process. They
first gave their views on key issues and took decisions
that lead to restoration of confidence among
themselves and within political circles. Thanks to that,
hope emerged among the Ivorian people, which in turn
led to significant progress in political, military,
administrative and economic areas. In the political
area, restoration of dialogue among the political
leaders made it possible to bring down the great wall of
distrust that was separating them and to remove
obstacles to the implementation of the agreements
signed and to open up the way to the implementation of
measures set out in resolution 1633 (2005) and the
International Working Group road map.

In the military area, and in accordance with the
decisions taken at the meeting of the political leaders,
the former belligerents, encouraged by the climate of
political detente, have themselves resumed the
exchanges that had been interrupted for more than a
year, with a View to implementing the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
This military-staff-level contact was well established
when, on 12 April 2006, we lost momentum. However,
that was not a definitive breakdown, because
everything is moving towards an early resumption of
the talks.

At the administrative level, the new spirit that
emerged from the Yamoussoukro summit has made it
possible to begin the process of redeploying State
administration in the national education and higher
education sectors in the regions controlled by the
Forces nouvelles. Thus, it was possible for the first
time in three years to hold school examinations under
satisfactory conditions in all the regions controlled by
the Forces nouvelles. The university in Bouake, a
stronghold of the Forces nouvelles, reopened its doors
on 28 March 2006.

The forced halt to education in those regions
greatly increased the desire of students - that is,
children - to learn. And it was with intense emotion
that, during my first trip to Bouake, at the beginning of
February, I read the messages written on the signs
carried by the children - messages addressed to us
adults: "We want to go to school"; "We want
examinations". That was the first time I had heard that
children like examinations. Now that has been
accomplished and, together with the United Nations
specialized agencies that called for a resumption of
classes, I welcome this. My gratitude goes to those
agencies.

At the economic level, the calming of the
political environment has given new hope to economic
leaders, whom I invited on 31 March 2006 to a forum
at which all problems related to their activities and the
conditions under which they are carried out were
frankly discussed. A true convergence of views
emerged at the end of our discussions. At the meetings,
all the partners in that sector emphasized, inter alia, the
security environment, for which the authority of the
State has primary responsibility. As Council members
know, the weakening of the State's authority following
the war is making it extremely difficult to carry out
that task.

The progress that I have just cited should, in my
View, be made irreversible. We must enhance the
climate of confidence that is gradually returning. The
peace and reconciliation process is now at a crossroads.
For me and for the international community - which
Council members represent - that means that the
process of emerging from the crisis is moving, slowly
but surely, in the right direction. Indeed, recent Council
statements attest to that.

While we should all welcome the generally
positive developments in the peace process - at which
we are pleased - we must recognize that some
resistance still exists, which prevents us from making
swifter progress in accordance with the timetable
established by the International Working Group road
map. Unfortunately, this is at a time when the
Government is working with resolve to resolve the
basic problems resulting from the crisis. Their
resolution should enable us to create ideal conditions
for the holding of open, fair, democratic and
transparent elections in October 2006. In that
connection, I should like to welcome the arrival in
Cote d'Ivoire on 19 April 2006 of Mr. Gerard
Stoudmann, new United Nations High Representative
for the elections in Cote d'Ivoire, and to assure him of
my Government's full and complete cooperation.

At this stage of the process, when important
decisions must be taken, I wish to call for vigilance
and a redoubling of efforts on the part of everyone to
resolve remaining problems. In that respect, I welcome
the contents of the Secretary-General's eighth report on
the situation in Cote d'Ivoire (S/2006/222), particularly
its paragraph 74, in which the Secretary-General
expresses his concern at the delays in the process and
at the consequences to which new deadlocks could lead
if the deadlines set by resolution 1633 (2005) are not
respected.

It is necessary to help consolidate the political
progress made by the Ivorian Government and achieve
a true pact of cohesion and political stability, which is
the cement for any process aimed at emerging from the
crisis. I believe that the time has come to transform
isolated efforts into collective action by the
international community. That is why my Government
shares the Secretary-General's desire to see a further
strengthening of UNOCI's human, material and
financial capabilities to ensure that the entire process
of emerging from the crisis is secure until it is
completed.

As members know, the various elements of that
process - such as the DDR programme, the security of
the electoral operations and the people's safety during
the elections - require a safe atmosphere of
confidence, which can be ensured only by a military
presence that is more significant but also acts as a
deterrent. Moreover, the importance of the October
2006 elections for Cote d'Ivoire and for the
international community argues in favour of the
implementation of measures that can make it possible
for everything to be done in transparency and justice so
as to avoid the slightest inclination to contest the
outcome of the elections.

With specific regard to the strengthening of
security throughout the Ivorian national territory, I
should like to stress in particular that that is the main
concern of all Ivorians and thus of the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire. Indeed, we must guarantee security not
only in Abidjan, but also in the interior, particularly in
the western region and in Bouake. The western region,
as members know, borders the Republic of Liberia,
whose people have many ethnic and cultural
similarities to the people of western Cote d'Ivoire. I
believe that ensuring good security in that part of Cote
d'Ivoire would also ensure greater security in Liberia
and would strengthen the nascent democratic process
in that brotherly country.

If it occurred, any uncontrolled spillover that
would destabilize western Cote d'Ivoire would
inevitably have detrimental consequences in Liberia
and even beyond, in Sierra Leone. In this respect, my
Government welcomes the return of the Blue Helmets
of UNOCI to this region of the country. My
Government undertakes to assure them, and all the
impartial forces, that they will have freedom of
movement and freedom to work.

I know that a draft resolution on increasing the
number of UNOCI troops is being prepared within the
Council. While my Government welcomes this
initiative, it would be desirable that the number of
additional Blue Helmets being made available to
UNOCI should be as close as possible to that requested
by the Secretary-General. UNOCI would thus be able
to give dynamic and effective support to the
Government in the implementation of the International
Working Group road map.

For all of these reasons, I would like to urge the
members of the Council to support the Secretary-
General's proposal and to consider it very favourably.
However, members should know that I remain
convinced that without the firm political will of the
main actors in the crisis and of all Ivorians to bring
Cote d'Ivoire out of the current conflict, no military
presence, and no international pressure, can resolve the
crisis that the country is going through. But it is also
true that, without the support of the international
community, Ivorians will not be able, alone, to resolve
all of the major problems of the Ivorian conflict.

Thus, let us all work together to restore peace in
Cote d'Ivoire so that nothing and no one can make us
turn back. It is in this spirit that I invite all of our
international partners, and particularly those in the
development sector, to respect their commitments in
accordance with paragraph 3 of Chapter VIII of the
annex to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement relating to
economic recovery and the need for social cohesion. It
stipulates in fact that the Linas-Marcoussis Round
Table recommends to international institutions and
international development partners that they provide
support for the process of rebuilding Cote d'Ivoire.

I am extremely grateful for the welcome and the
attention which Council members have kindly given
me.

