Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Armenia, align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2015/422) and Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing. I would also
like to assure Mr. Haysom of our continued strong
support for his important mission, and to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

At the outset, let me reiterate how strongly we
condemn today's horrendous terrorist attack in Kabul.
We offer our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of Afghanistan and to the families of the
Victims. I would also like to reiterate the European
Union's full support for the continuing role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and all United Nations agencies in
supporting the Afghan people and coordinating the
international community's assistance. The role of
the United Nations in helping the National Unity
Government to implement its priorities remains vitally
important, not least by ensuring that Afghans across
the country are able to benefit from the Government's
programmes and the international assistance to them.

The Secretary-General's report highlights the
continued callous disregard by the Taliban and other
insurgent groups for Afghan lives, of which the tragic
and dramatic events of this day are only the most recent
horrendous example. Despite empty protestations to the
contrary, the insurgency continues to plan and target
attacks against Afghan civilians. That has unfortunately
led to record numbers of Afghan civilians being killed.
The European Union continues to support the initiation
of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
But it must be a peace that leads to a cessation of
violence, as well as ending any links with terrorism
and, importantly, respecting the rights of Afghans set
out in the Constitution, notably the rights of women and
girls.

The vision for reform set out by the National Unity
Government in its "Realizing self-reliance" paper at
the London Conference in December 2014 offers a
comprehensive programme that the European Union is
pleased to endorse and support. The European Union
welcomes the near-completion of the formation of the
National Unity Government, which must now urgently
develop a prioritized plan for undertaking the critical
reforms that Afghanistan needs in order to consolidate
the progress made to date and provide a foundation for
future gains. In particular, the Government must look
at immediate measures that can increase economic
confidence, generate revenue and enable the Special
Commission on Electoral Reform to really begin
its work, which is to study how the current electoral
system can be reformed. Those measures are Vital for
the political and economic stability that Afghanistan
needs in order to make progress in addressing long-
standing societal issues. They include the prevalence of
corruption and the threats posed by drugs and organized
crime, the lack of the rule of law, as exemplified by the
dysfunctionality of the justice system, and the continued
shame of the mistreatment of women and children.

The European Union calls for those issues to
serve as the basis for a refreshed Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework (TMAF), to which both
the Government and the international community
committed at the London Conference. The upcoming
senior officials' meeting in Kabul will provide a clear
opportunity for the Government to substantiate and
prioritize the vision that President Ghani Ahmadzai
outlined in London, generating a specific programme
for reform set out in a refreshed TMAF with which
all Afghans can identify. That Framework can be the
basis for the continued exceptional levels of assistance
provided by the international community, including the
European Union and its member States. The European
Union encourages Afghanistan to continue the active
engagement with its regional partners shown during
the past three months, given that regional cooperation
is a driver of stability and prosperity not only for
Afghanistan but also for the region at large.

In conclusion, the legitimate aspirations ofAfghans
for greater prosperity and stability in Afghanistan
cannot be beholden to the whims of insurgent groups.
The EU will work with and support the National Unity
Government in establishing a reform programme that
addresses the critical issues that continue to be barriers
to progress in Afghanistan. This remains a situation in
which the United Nations will continue to be vitally
important in supporting the Government's plans, and I
reiterate the European Union's ongoing support for the
role of UNAMA.

