Mr. Cosme (Economic Community of Central African States) (spoke in French): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS).

At the outset, let me express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on the exemplary and competent way
in which you have guided the work of the Security
Council during November - a month full of
symbolism for the Republic of Angola and for you, its
worthy representative.

I also wish to thank Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-
General, for his prompt decision to send a
multidisciplinary mission to Central Africa to look into
ways and means of implementing a comprehensive,
integrated, resolute and agreed-upon approach to the
problems of peace, security and development in the
subregion. At the same time, I wish also to sincerely
thank the Security Council for all the support it has
given that initiative. ECCAS, the beneficiary of the
mission, is fully prepared to provide any other
additional contribution it can within the context of
implementing decisions that will be taken by the
Council in that regard.

Much positive work has been accomplished
through the joint efforts of ECCAS and the United
Nations, thanks to the tireless efforts that the United
Nations system continues to make in our subregion, so
afflicted by the many conflicts experienced by many of
our countries, whose consequences are still being felt
today.

I have said that progress is being made in the
subregion regarding the collective security mechanism;
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
has become operational.

In that regard, it can never be said too often that
ECCAS - working with the United Nations, of course,
and other organizations and interested countries - was
promptly seized of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe at the time of the
attempted overturning of the constitutional order on 16
July 2003. ECCAS clearly welcomes the rapid and
concerted progress that has resulted.

Aware of the importance of conflict prevention
and, if need be, conflict management and settlement in
the subregion, the member States of the Community
organized, at the end of July this year at Franceville in
Gabon, a joint military exercise of simulated
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance operations
called "Biyongho 2003", in which seven member
countries participated. As a first step, we believe that
that exercise was a success, and we want to hold that
type of exercise regularly, every two years.

A meeting of the Chiefs of Staff of member
countries was held in October in Brazzaville to set up a
regional brigade in the framework of the Central
African Multinational Force and its staff, in accordance
with the wishes and the guidelines of the African
Union. In this case, the Council's support will be
required, and the secretariat is certain that the Council
will accord it all due diligence once it has expressed to
the Council the relevant priorities and needs.

In order to ensure better prevention of potential
conflicts, the ECCAS secretariat, with the European
Union's assistance, is working on a study on the best
prevention strategy. Therefore, the request in the
Secretary-General's report might also find a response
here, as was said so eloquently by the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Cameroon. The
consultant carrying out this study is now visiting
Community member States. That will make it possible,
among other things, to make the Early-Warning
Mechanism for Central Africa operational.

All these measures attest to the increasing
importance of the peace and security dimension in
Central Africa and are encouraging to all our partners.

This year will have seen many joint activities by
the two secretariats of the United Nations and ECCAS
and in most of our member States, if we consider the
many positive initiatives here and there within the
member States of Central Africa.

Who could fail to notice the real progress made in
consolidating peace, reconciliation and reconstruction
in Angola? Who could ignore the extremely helpful
measures taken in the Central African Republic,
particularly marked by a national dialogue in which the
contrition and requests for forgiveness on the part of
former leaders could be a pillar of a new era for a
single vision and concerted socio-economic
development? Who could fail to welcome the giant
steps taken by the great country of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards new horizons, where all
the Congolese seem to be moving forward together,
particularly in quickly establishing political and
military structures? Who could fail to welcome the
progress made in the reconciliation and reconstruction
process in the Republic of Congo, and, above all, the
political will demonstrated by the protagonists of the
Sao Tome and Principe crisis, during which ECCAS
played an important role of mediation.

The peaceful change of Government on 30 April
2002 in Burundi and the conclusion of a
comprehensive agreement in Pretoria between the
Burundi Government of Transition and the Forces pour
la de'fense de la democratie are more good news
coming from the Central African subregion.

Rwanda, which suffered so much from the 1994
genocide, has now resumed its rightful seat within the
concert of nations, having organized presidential and
legislative elections.

All these developments testify to efforts of the
subregion on behalf of the dynamic now under way in
this part of Africa and to the growing importance of the
dimension of peace and security in Central Africa.

Members will recall the large ministerial
delegation from Central African Member States,
mandated by our heads of State, who participated in the
Security Council debate on 22 October 2002 and who
called for greater and closer cooperation between the
United Nations and Central Africa. The Council
responded favourably to that call, and we are grateful
for that. The mission led by Mr. Kalomoh, whom we
congratulate and who visited all the ECCAS members,
had talks at the highest level. At that time, all member
States and their authorities and the political and civil
society leaders of the subregion called for a standing
presence of the United Nations through the opening of
a regional United Nations office. A regional office
capable of helping establish a regional framework
should strengthen stability, security, cooperation and
sustainable development. Such an office must be able
to support not only ECCAS and its collective security
mechanisms, but also the regional mechanisms for
economic integration. It is in that context that we
support the statement by Ambassador Basile Ikouebe,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Congo, speaking on behalf of the current Chairman of
ECCAS, who reaffirmed our member States' resolve to
make ECCAS a pillar of regional integration in Central
Africa. As he said, Central Africa is not asking for just
one more office; rather, it is calling for a structure,
which - in keeping with the wishes of the Security
Council - would take an integrated and global
approach to the problems of the subregion. The
Ambassador of Cameroon reiterated that point. That is,
indeed, the wish of the States members of ECCAS.

ECCAS is aware of the importance of strategic
partnership with the United Nations. We reaffirm our
faith in the wisdom of the Security Council with regard
to action to implement this global and integrated
approach, in accordance with the wishes has already
expressed by the Council on this matter.

