Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First ofall, I would like to convey the apologies
of His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to the
Security Council, as despite his desire to be here he
was unable to participate in today's important meeting,
owing to previous State-related obligations. He has
instructed me to convey to the Security Council his
greetings ofpeace as well as his hopes for the meeting's
success.

We also want to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December
and on convening today's meeting to discuss a very
important issue with regard to peace and security in
the world - that of post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability. We have every confidence
in your ability to carry out this important work. We
also commend and express our gratitude to Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and his entire team for their
excellent and comprehensive briefing, which once
again reflects the commitment of the United Nations to
achieving peace, security and stability throughout the
world. And we welcome His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat to the meeting.

In recent times the African continent has been
one of the world's main victims of armed conflicts.
It continues to be so, and it knows better than anyone
its devastating consequences, in the form of political
instability, poverty, human rights violations, damage
to infrastructure and weakened institutions. Many
African countries emerging from conflicts and wars
have to face multiple challenges in the areas of the
economy, infrastructure, reconstruction, poverty
elimination, employment, education, public health and
social security. In such situations, the international
community should focus its efforts on providing
genuine assistance to the countries affected with the
goal of enabling them to achieve an economic recovery
that prioritizes industrialization, the modernization of
agriculture and the development of human rights, and
in which the establishment of education programmes
takes precedence. Education is an essential component
in every country's search for economic emergence. It is
also important to recognize that peacebuilding is a long-
term, complex and difficult endeavour that in today's
environment is encountering many new obstacles and
challenges, and that demands serious consideration
aimed at eliciting an appropriate response on the part
of the international community.

We have said before that no conflict can be settled
easily and that peace can never be achievable or
sustainable without the kind of measures that promote
inclusive and balanced development for the benefit of
all. The effort expended to resolve a given conflict
must continue at the same level if development is to
be achieved once the conflict has ended. That must
be the absolute priority and inalterable policy goal in
seeking definitive solutions to the world's problems.
There can be no peace without justice, and in order
to consolidate peace processes and resolve conflicts,
it is important that victims feel that justice has been
done, since policies that permit impunity can engender
vengefulness and hatred. That is why it is important to
properly manage the relationship between maintaining
peace and seeking justice. Humankind has always
longed for the goals of peace and justice, two concepts
that complement and mutually reinforce one another.
Achieving justice is not simply a legal problem. It is
closely linked to other political, economic and cultural
factors. The ultimate goal of justice is stability and
reconciliation, which are indispensable concepts in
the quest for peace and stability, especially in post-
conflict environments. That process must include the
rehabilitation of our most vulnerable citizens, who are
women and children.

It is crucial to help countries emerging from conflict
to design comprehensive strategies for reconstruction
and sustainable development, tailored to the specific
circumstances of their individual situations. There is no
one-size-fits-all model for peacebuilding. In providing
assistance, the international community must respect
the particular idiosyncrasies of every country, and their
specific points of view must be taken into account, as
they have the greatest interest in their own stability and
reconstruction. The international community must take
that into consideration.

Sustainable socioeconomic development should
be the principal route to building peace and should
also be its ultimate goal. Other important aspects,
such as human rights or the rule of law, must not be
unnecessarily prioritized to the detriment of economic
and social development. The United Nations system
should play a coordinating role so as to promote the
effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and give priority to ending
poverty and hunger.

We call on the international community to focus
more intently on the socioeconomic development of
States in post-conflict situations. The security situation
in several West African countries has stabilized in
recent years and is returning to normal. Equatorial
Guinea welcomes those success stories and is confident
that under the impetus of the Governments and peoples
of the region, they will achieve even greater success
on the road to rebuilding and developing the region.
The positive experiences of C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone deserve recognition, as they represent
tangible practical examples of lessons learned and
good practices. Countries in other African regions are
embarking on similar processes. We are hopeful for
their success and call on the stakeholders involved in
the various conflicts to put the overall interests of their
nations first and do their best to achieve stability and
peace for their countries. The consolidation and success
of those processes involve multisectoral actions,
including the reform of armed forces, the promotion
of justice, realistic economic programmes, successful
political leadership and frank and inclusive dialogue,
among other things.

The desire for peace, stability and development
is a common goal and shared aspiration of the States
Members of the United Nations, especially on the
African continent, where wars and conflicts persist.
The need to put an end to those conflicts as quickly
as possible in order to create a secure environment
for socioeconomic development has become the main
priority of the international community, thereby
requiring the significant support and assistance of
the United Nations. The primary responsibility of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace
and security is both irrefutable and irreplaceable.
In that regard, cooperation with the African Union
and regional economic communities is essential to
achieving satisfactory results.

Equatorial Guinea is actively participating in
the intense round of negotiations under way towards
adopting - if possible this month and under Cote
d'Ivoire's presidency ofthe Council - a draft resolution
aimed at providing predictable and sustainable funding
through United Nations contributions to African Union
peacekeeping and peace support operations. I wish to
reiterate in this forum the request for the support of all
here present to help make the aspirations of the African
continent a reality.

The equation is simple and clear: we Africans
understand our own environment, which is where
many of the conflicts taking place are bleeding us
and destabilizing international peace and security,
obstructing not only our full development but also
preventing us from harnessing our undeniable potential.
Our partners, on the other hand, have the means that
could generate the necessary impetus to efforts seeking
to bring peace and stability to our continent. That
model of pioneering cooperation promises success and
has every chance of being successful, and we should
not waste this opportunity. Any endeavour to that end
is fully justified.

We also encourage Member States to ensure
the full participation of women and young people in
peacebuilding processes. It is widely recognized that
the participation of women is crucial to the success
of economic recovery, political legitimacy and social
cohesion. National and international actors must
recognize the potential of young people as agents of
positive change. In order to achieve that, educational
systems must be rebuilt and young people must
participate and have a voice in the rebuilding of their
societies.

To conclude, we would like to remind Member
States that, while partnerships and other forms of
support, such as funding, are of the utmost importance
in post-conflict reconstruction, one of the preconditions
for successful foreign assistance is that those that
provide it should resist the temptation to impose their
preferred solutions upon the receiving country. It is
essential that the countries receiving support determine
their own goals and priorities and establish policies
that are most likely to realize them. A successful
strategy can therefore be developed and implemented
only through realistic and active cooperation between
donors and recipient countries. It is imperative that
donors and partners do not impose upon host countries
the nature, timing and sequence of economic policies,
each of which could result in unacceptable social costs
and the risk of conflict. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea reiterates its continued support for the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
in general.

