Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): In Russia we are greatly concerned by the
complex military, political and humanitarian situation in
which Liberia finds itself. We share the assessment and
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General's report
of 6 January 1995, which in our view adequately reflects
the situation in Liberia.

The draft resolution that the Council has adopted today
provides for the optimum period for which in present
conditions the mandate of the United Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) can be extended. It sends all the
Liberian sides a clear signal that they must strictly
implement all the provisions of the peace agreement
relating to the timetable for their implementation. To
judge by the latest information from Accra, the sides have
not yet fully realized the importance of consistent actions
in that specific direction. We therefore call upon them, as
a first step and without delay, to set up the Council of
State and to resume negotiations to that end.

In this context, and taking into account the
experience of the past few years, we consider appropriate
the linkage in the resolution of the establishment of the
former level of UNOMIL personnel with the existence,
first and foremost, of a stable cease-fire in Liberia.

Russia has always considered that the active
participation of African countries in the achievement of a
settlement in Liberia is important in principle for that
country's return to the path of peaceful, democratic
development. We wish to single out the constructive role
of the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Rawlings, President
of Ghana. We consider that the countries that are
participating in ECOWAS and in the ECOWAS Military
Observer Group (ECOMOG) are playing a key role in
preventing Liberia from sliding into complete military and
political anarchy and in preventing the breakup of the
country - which, without any doubt, would have serious
negative consequences for the entire region.

For that reason we view as most important the
provisions in the resolution for strengthening the potential
of ECOMOG, including through the help of the
international community, and the provisions on convening
a summit of the leaders of the ECOWAS States with a
View to harmonizing their policies on Liberia and
promoting the implementation of the Accra Agreement,
through, among other things, tightening the embargo on
the supply of arms to Liberia. If this agreement is carried
out, then the crisis in Liberia can be overcome, and this,
in our opinion, can serve as an example of the successful
settlement of a conflict situation on the African continent
by forces of the Africans themselves and as an example
of the effective interaction of the international community,
as represented by the United Nations, and regional
peacemaking mechanisms.

