Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia): First, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May and
also to extend a special thanks to the Pakistani
presidency for convening this meeting. As well, we are
very fortunate to have three eminent experts and
personalities with us this morning and this afternoon.

The issue we are discussing today is of vital
importance to the United Nations and to the
international community in general. Under the Charter,
the pacific settlement of disputes is one of the major
functions of the United Nations. It has always been so,
and I hope it will remain so, at least for the foreseeable
future. Hence, the discussion of this topic today is of
absolute necessity and very timely.

As we all know, the Secretary-General is given
the responsibility, under Article 99 of the Charter, to
bring to the attention of the Council issues pertaining
to international peace and security. Of course, the
Council remains the guardian of international peace
and security.

Over the last decade alone, we have witnessed
all-out wars consuming tens of thousands of lives. We
have witnessed acts of genocide. We have seen minor
misunderstandings degenerate into large-scale wars. I
know I am not raising new questions. But some
questions need to be raised again and again until we
find suitable answers for them.

What went wrong? Have we fared any better
since the establishment of the United Nations, in terms
of preventing conflicts? Could we not have done
better? Could we not have prevented, for example, the
genocide in Rwanda? Could we prevent the continuing,
I would say, slaughter of civilians that is going on right
now in the Democratic Republic of the Congo? The list
is long. No one can deny that the United Nations
system has made a significant contribution in all areas
that fall under its mandate. But it is difficult to give an
affirmative answer to the aforementioned questions.
Neither can one fully defend the suggestion that the
United Nations and the Security Council have found it
to be beyond their capacity to contain or help contain
those situations that sometimes shamed humanity.

I do not want to repeat what has been eloquently

stated by those who spoke before me. That is why I do
not have a printed statement. I had to rewrite my
statement here. There is a Somali saying in the Horn of
Africa: you do not speak because you have not spoken,
but only because there is something that has been left
unsaid. I hope that what I have to say now is something
that was not said. If it has been said, then I may have
not been listening, which I hope is not the case.

I would like to raise a few points. Many speakers
before me have cited the importance of settling
disputes by peaceful means, as is stipulated under
Chapter VI. There is nothing more desirable than the
peaceful settlement of disputes. My country, as a
founding Member of the United Nations, subscribes to
that very strongly. But what happens when States and
organizations in inter-State conflict ignore what is in
Chapter VI? Moreover, in disputes within States, a
party to a conflict may also act other than as it should.
What should be done in such cases? The Brahimi
report responded to that when it recommended calling a
spade a spade. I am sure that at least two of our
distinguished personalities here have also spoken about
this. We should therefore point our finger at the culprit
or culprits and take appropriate action.

We in Ethiopia know only too well that the
international institutions charged with maintaining
peace and security have not always acted to maintain
collective security. In the mid-1930s the predecessor to
the United Nations, the League of Nations, failed to
take action against Mussolini when he invaded my
country. It is on record that the Emperor at that time
said in Geneva: Today it is Ethiopia, tomorrow it will
be you if you do not take action. What happened? We
were a member of the League of Nations, too. Justice
was not done. Sanctions were imposed on both
Ethiopia and Mussolini's Italy at that time. Ethiopia
was again subject to a similar - I would say-
invasion more recently. I will not go into the details of
that.

In 1990, Kuwait was invaded. Although the
aggressors were booted out by the international
community under United Nations leadership, the Iraqi
leadership that perpetrated that aggression was never
made accountable until recently, under different
circumstances.

I am citing the above cases to underline the fact
that the international community, in particular the
Security Council, must act in time, in unison and
resolutely to ensure that the pacific settlement of those
disputes prevails. If those who prefer the peaceful and
legal route and those who flout international law and
legality are treated in the same way, no matter how
great our desire for peace, disputes in those
circumstances will not be settled peacefully, despite
our wishes and despite all the resolutions we may
adopt. But peace would be enhanced if the Security
Council took appropriate and timely measures against
those who flout international legality and the peaceful
route.

Peace will also be enhanced if the Security
Council continues to vigorously encourage and support
regional organizations, which can play an important
role in the pacific settlement of disputes because of
their geographical and political proximity to particular
conflicts. For example, in the case of Africa, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, under
the African Union, has been working to settle the
dispute in the Sudan. There are very good prospects
that, hopefully by early next year at the latest, there
will be a settlement of that long dispute, which has
resulted in the death of more than 2 million civilians.

With respect to the conflict in Somalia, peace
would be enhanced if the Security Council encouraged
the role of grass-roots civic organizations in keeping
with the multi-track approach to the peaceful
settlement of disputes in both inter-State and intra-
State conflicts.

There is also the growing and expanding role of
media and communication technologies - which, if
used in a balanced way, would also facilitate early
efforts at peacemaking. We know that, in cases where
that is not done, the media sometimes can in fact
contribute to lengthening, and giving a wrong picture
of, conflicts. In fact, by not talking about conflicts at
all the media can also contribute to obscuring the fact
that conflicts are arising in some parts of the world.
That is also particularly the case in Africa, as well as,
of course, in cases where the interests of big countries
and Powers are not directly involved.

As we know, those who are, for example,
perpetuating the conflicts in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi could be very easily dealt
with. We could also have easily dealt with those who
were perpetuating the conflict in Angola when we
knew that there was a party to that conflict that refused
to accept what was agreed upon. Because the Security
Council and the international community did not act,
that conflict was lengthened, and hence the problems in
that part of Africa.

Finally, I would like to speak about the role of the
Secretary-General, who is perceived as neutral, in
carrying out personal mediation efforts or in
dispatching, as he sometimes does, his special
representatives, envoys and so-called friends of the
Secretary-General. That practice should continue to be
strengthened and supported by the Council, which is
not the case in some situations. We must mention -
and this is a matter of record - that the Council does
not in fact support the Secretary-General in this area.

My delegation is a firm believer in strengthening
the world body that is the United Nations. It is for that
reason that we will also not shy away from pointing out
weaknesses and from sometimes making what we
believe to be constructive criticisms.

