Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to thank Mr. Jenca and
Mr. Al Hussein for their briefings on the situation in
North Korea.

We cannot but deplore once again this year the
disastrous human rights situation in the country, which
has hardly changed since the publication, in February
2014, of the report of the Commission of Inquiry on
Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The report concluded:

"The Commission finds that crimes against
humanity have been committed in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, pursuant to policies
established at the highest level of the State.
These crimes against humanity are ongoing".
(A/HRC/25/CRP. 1, para. 1160)

France condemns the massive Violations of
human rights carried out by the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and calls for
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Commission of Inquiry, which, unfortunately, are
still applicable.

I wish to welcome the Council's decision to hold
this meeting on a specific agenda item. This seems all
the more necessary given the developments in recent
months. While Pyongyang, in violation of its obligations
under international law and Council resolutions,
continues its illegal nuclear-weapons and ballistic-
missile programmes, the situation of its population
remains one of the most tragic in the world. More than
half of its people, as has been noted, suffer from serious

food and medical insecurity owing to the fact that the
resources of the country are being drained and diverted
for military programmes, at the expense of the well-
being of the people and their most fundamental rights.

That is why it is crucial for the Council to
maintain its full focus on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as it is
inextricably linked with global peace and security. The
development of its military arsenal, on the one hand, and
the restrictions placed on basic freedoms, on the other,
have largely the same goal. And this goal, let us be clear,
is to control the people through fear and to perpetuate
a beleaguered totalitarian regime. To achieve that goal,
the regime uses a wide array of methods that violate
international law. It is that logic, unmatched in the world,
that threatens us as a collective. Having just celebrated
Human Rights Day yesterday, opening celebrations of
the seventieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, our responsibility is to denounce the
actions of the North Korean regime, which is locked in
a totalitarian logic that clashes directly with the spirit
of the Charter and the three pillars that form the basis
of the United Nations and international peace.

Despite some progress intended to bring about
change in the area ofthe rights ofwomen or persons with
disabilities, human rights violations in North Korea are
serious and systematic and their perpetrators continue
to enjoy intolerable impunity. The list of abuses is far too
long to be exhaustive here: torture, arbitrary detentions,
public executions, forced labour, rape, displacement
of people, trafficking in human beings - and women
in particular. The Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has received reports of the generalized fear
in the camps for political prisoners, the camps which
the regime calls "rehabilitation institutes". According
to the report of the Special Rapporteur (A/72/394),
the apprehension is so fierce that people assume that
anyone who disappears must be detained in one of the
camps, often for the mere possession ofa mobile phone.

I should like to highlight three points of particular
concern with implications for third countries. First, we
must continue to mobilize for the victims of enforced
disappearance, numerous inNorth Korea, but also among
the nationals of neighbouring countries, in particular
South Korea and Japan. Those kidnappings, both local

and international, destroy the lives of the Victims and
their families, who remain ignorant of the fate of their
loved ones for years. France reiterates its commitment
to combatting this scourge, and encourages all States to
ratify the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

I would also like to mention the issue of North
Korean workers abroad, who are exploited and
sometimes condemned to forced labour and deprived of
their freedom of movement. That is akin to trafficking
in human beings. Most of their income, in foreign
currency, is diverted by the North Korean regime to
the benefit of nuclear weapons programmes. We are
also concerned by the wave of forced repatriations over
the past two years. Together, and with all the countries
concerned, we must shed light on these practices so that
they finally cease.

Thirdly, the fundamental right offreedom ofopinion
and expression remains undermined by censorship
and overshadowed by propaganda. The systematic,
illicit and arbitrary surveillance by fellow citizens, the
persecution of dissenting or even differing voices are
revolting means used by the regime to stifle freedom of
opinion and expression and equal access to information.
The absolute totalitarianism of Pyongyang maintains a
stubborn cloak of darkness around its internal affairs,
which allows it to violate the rights of its citizens with
complete impunity.

The Council must remain seized of the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in all its
aspects and maintain its Vigilance. We hope that the
Council will be united in calling on the authorities of
North Korea to allow access to human rights monitoring
bodies, including the Special Rapporteur, and to work
with them to put an end to the violations and to fight
against the impunity of their perpetrators.

It is essential to maintain strong pressure on the
North Korean authorities so as to bring them to assume
their responsibility to protect and promote the human
rights of their citizens, and to move away from this
terrible way of thinking and find their way back to the
rule of law.

