Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: It is my honour to present
my third briefing to the Security Council on the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court on the situation in Libya
in furtherance of resolution 1970 (2011).

At the meeting when I first briefed the Council
(see S/PV.6528), I emphasized the importance of the
Council's consensus adoption of resolution 1970
(2011) and announced that we would request arrest
warrants in subsequent weeks. That significant
consensus greatly enhanced the cooperation my Office
has received and allowed it to present a first case in the
space of a few months.

When I briefed the Council for the second time
(see S/PV.6647), we explained that the arrest warrants
issued by the judges on 27 June detailed the crimes
committed against civilians in Tripoli and other areas
under the control of Al-Qadhafi. The judges concluded
that in order to stop the crimes and protect civilians it
was necessary to arrest the three individuals identified
as the most responsible: Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The
Office informed the Libyan authorities that, should
they decide to prosecute the same individuals for the
same crimes under investigation by the International
Criminal Court (ICC), they should submit an
admissibility challenge that would be decided by the
ICC judges.

Today, I inform the Council that the Libyan
authorities have arrested Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
2

presented such a challenge. The application was filed
on 1 May and notes that, on 8 January 2012, the Libyan
Prosecutor-General commenced an investigation of
serious crimes, which include murder and rape,
allegedly committed by Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
during the 2011 revolution, including in the period
between 15 and 28 February 2011. The filing also states
that the Libyan Government is committed to attaining
the highest international standards both for the conduct
of its investigations and any eventual trials.

Libyan authorities also said that Saif Al-Islam has
been kept in adequate conditions of detention, provided
with sufficient and good quality food, and given access
to the ICC and the option of retaining a domestic
lawyer of his choosing. He has also received visits
from the International Committee of the Red Cross,
non-governmental organizations and family members,
been provided with proper medical and dental care, and
not been subject to physical abuse. That is what the
Libyan Government presented to the judges.

Following the submission of the Libyan
admissibility challenge, the Pre-Trial Chamber
requested observations from different parties to the
proceedings, as well as from the Security Council.
Rule 59 of the ICC rules of procedure and evidence
provides that those who have referred a situation, in
this case the Security Council, must be notified of the
challenge and may in response make representation on
the jurisdictional challenges. The Registry has
transmitted the notification through a note verbale to
the Secretary-General.

This is the first time in the brief history of the
International Criminal Court that a State has requested
jurisdiction to conduct a national investigation against
the same individual and for the same incidents under
investigation by the International Criminal Court. The
challenge goes to the heart of the system of justice
established in 1998 by the Rome Statute. National
States have the primary obligation to conduct
proceedings and the International Criminal Court
intervention shall be complementary. The Prosecution
will present its observations on this admissibility
challenge, as requested by the Pre-Trial Chamber, on
4 June.

Let me be clear. There are no doubts on the legal
principles. The Rome Statute is based on the primacy
of national proceedings. As mentioned on numerous
occasions in relation to Darfur and other situations, the
12-34157
Office will not evaluate the Libyan judicial system as a
whole. The Office will check the factual situation in
accordance with the Statute's requirements, which
include the intervention of an independent and
impartial judiciary. The Security Council may decide to
present observations, but this is a judicial issue that
will be decided by the judges of the Pre-Trial Chamber.

Abdullah Al-Senussi was also arrested on
17 March 2012 by Mauritanian authorities. He is
subject to extradition requests from France and Libya,
as well as a request for surrender from the International
Criminal Court. Mauritania shall decide.

My Office continues to collect evidence in
relation to a second case in Libya on gender crimes
committed against men and women alike. The United
Nations Commission of Inquiry's findings confirmed
the commission of those crimes. My Office is mindful
of the sensitivity surrounding rape in Libya and has
adopted a strategy to limit the exposure of victims by
focusing on obtaining evidence from doctors and
soldiers. The investigation is progressing.

The report of the Commission of Inquiry issued
on 2 March 2012 (A/HRC/ 17/44) presents a
comprehensive view of the crimes committed in Libya.
There are thousands of allegations of crimes committed
by Al-Qadhafi forces and thousands of individuals
allegedly involved in such crimes who are in detention.
Many of them are still not under the jurisdiction of the
national authorities and allegedly subjected to
mistreatment or torture by rebel forces. There are also
allegations of crimes committed against civilians in
Tawergha, and questions remain to be answered about
the circumstances of the death of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi.

Additionally, the United Nations Commission of
Inquiry found that NATO did not deliberately target
civilians in Libya. Of a total of 25,944 air strikes and
7,642 air-to-surface weapons employed, the
Commission cited evidence with respect to five air
strikes that reportedly produced civilian casualties. The
Office of the Prosecutor takes due note of the
Commission of Inquiry's findings. The Office has no
jurisdiction to evaluate the proper scope of the NATO
mandate in relation with resolution 1973 (2011), but
the Office is requesting further information about those
five incidents identified by the Commission of Inquiry.

The Government of Libya has committed to a
comprehensive strategy to address all crimes and end
12-34157

impunity in Libya. While the Government faces
challenges on many fronts, that comprehensive strategy
must remain a priority if the Government is to show
that impunity will no longer be tolerated. The strategy
must address as a priority the transfer to the central
authorities and the screening of thousands of detainees,
the investigation of whether allegations of crimes by
those detainees where warranted, measures to ensure
justice for the victims and the release of those against
whom there is no basis for investigation.

Allow me to share with the Council a personal
experience I had when I visited Tripoli. I was in the
lobby of my hotel and a man approached me and
showed me his nine-year-old son. He said that he had
been exposed on television holding a flag of the
rebellion, and then the Al-Qadhafi forces targeted him,
captured him and raped him in a tank. He was able to
trace the perpetrator, who was arrested. That is why I
find it relevant to tell this story. It was one of the many
thousands of cases that the authorities had to deal with.
But the authorities released the man, because there was
no evidence and no witnesses against him. The father
asked me what he should do. He had weapons; should
he kill the man? But he said he did not want to be a
killer. He only wanted justice for his son. This was just
one example of the thousands of similar problems that
Libya will have to face in the coming months.

At the same time, all unofficial and
unacknowledged detention centres should be
dismantled and all possible steps taken to curb
mistreatment or torture. The Government of Libya has
expressed its commitment to conducting investigations
and prosecutions to address the most serious crimes
committed by all sides. The Government of Libya has
adopted a transitional justice law creating a fact-
finding and a reconciliation commission that could
contribute to strengthening the rule of law in the
country.

My Office will fulfil its mandate to investigate
those who bear the greatest responsibility for the most
serious crimes under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, while respecting genuine
national proceedings. The Office will monitor Libya's
national proceedings closely. My Office is also
gathering information about the activities outside
Libya of high-level Al-Qadhafi officials who were
allegedly involved in Rome Statute crimes and who
reportedly continue to seek to destabilize the situation
in Libya.
3

I would like to conclude by emphasizing again

the importance of the adoption by consensus of

resolution 1970 (2011), which defined the need to do

justice in Libya to ensure peace and security. Such

consensus was also expressed during my previous

briefings and in the recently adopted resolution 2040
(2012), which states that the Council is

"[l]ooking forward to a future for Libya based on
national reconciliation, justice, respect for human
rights and the rule of law" (resolution 2040 (2012), fourth preambnlar paragraph).

This commitment to justice and the rule of law
plays a crucial role in the current post-conflict
situation; it provides a framework for the national
authorities to act. Recently, during my April visit to
Tripoli and Misrata, members of the National
Transitional Council and of the Libyan public
expressed their deep appreciation for the decisive
intervention of the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court. They started the
rebellion, requesting justice for the crimes committed
in Abu Salim prison on 29 June 1996, because they
believed that, under the Al-Qadhafi regime, there
would be no justice in Libya. Now, the Government
has expressed both its gratitude and its conviction that
it should seize this historical moment to provide justice
for all Libyan victims. They believe in that possibility.

My Office remains committed to working with
the Government of Libya and with the Council to
maintain this common effort and to ensure that justice
for all of the victims of Libya is achieved.

