Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is gravely
concerned about the dangerously deteriorating situation
in eastern Ukraine and its severe impact on the local
civilian population, which results in death and injuries
and many humanitarian problems. We extend our sincere
and deep condolences following the civilian casualties,
which we consider to be unacceptable. We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General Feltman and
O'Brien and to Ambassador Apakan for their updates,
as well as their efforts to resolve the crisis.

My delegation would like to refer to some key
points. We are very much interested in the stability of
Ukraine, taking into account all that has transpired and
the current situation on the ground. We express sincere
concerns about the fate of young people, women and
all vulnerable groups in the crisis zone, as well as the
effect on future generations. Last March, my President,
who contributed to the launch of the Normandy
format, mentioned at the Nuclear Security Summit
that was held in Washington, DC, that bringing an
end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine should be of
utmost common priority. Conflicts should be resolved
through negotiations.

Kazakhstan is firmly convinced that there is no
alternative to resolving the crisis in Ukraine other than
through peaceful means based on the observance by all
participants of their obligations, in accordance with the
norms and values of international law and key principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We therefore call
for strict compliance with resolution 2202 (2015), on
the Minsk agreements.

Kazakhstan fully endorses the activities of the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups on
implementing confidence-building measures in the
four areas they cover. We welcome the results of the
Contact Group meeting held in Minsk on 1 February.
We also believe that any further escalation of tensions
should be prevented in order to avoid a worsening of the
situation. Any aggravation of the current circumstances
could have unpredictable consequences both regionally
and globally. We call upon the parties to withdraw their
heavy weapons from the contact line. We stand ready to
assist the population, support international mediation
efforts and facilitate the negotiation process among all
the parties and their leaders, with a View to resolving
this situation as soon as possible.

Kazakhstan continues to provide both bilateral and
multilateral aid. All parties must follow their obligations
to provide free access to humanitarian assistance in
the conflict zone. We believe that the full-fledged
normalization of the country's situation can be achieved
only with the economic recovery of Ukraine, which
should be our primary and requisite consideration.
We therefore call for economic confidence-building
measures to be established. Kazakhstan intends to
work in a balanced and unbiased manner, on an equal
basis, with all Security Council members to promote
compromise and consensus in order to help achieve an
early solutiontothe crisis,keepinginmindtheparamount
importance of maintaining and strengthening peace
and security. We call upon all parties to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and political will to ensure an
immediate return to a ceasefire regime.

