Mr. Guehenno: I am grateful for the privilege of
addressing the Security Council on one of the
fundamental challenges facing peacekeeping today.
The problem of sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel is an abhorrent
one. It represents a violation of the duty of care owed
by peacekeepers to the local population that they have
gone to serve.

Sexual exploitation and abuse threatens to tarnish
the very name of the United Nations and to undermine
our ability to implement Security Council mandates.
Indeed, it is precisely our image and reputation that
give us the credibility to work so effectively in war-
torn countries and bring peace and stability to millions
throughout the world. Eliminating such misconduct is
therefore integral to the success of peacekeeping.

Stopping sexual exploitation and abuse will not
happen overnight, but I take courage from the shared
sense of urgency and determination to address it that
exists within the Secretariat and Member States. I
welcome the importance given to this issue by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
year. As a result of the Committee's request, the report
(A/59/710) of the Secretary-General's Adviser on
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations
Peacekeeping Personnel, Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-
Hussein, was released - a report which must be
commended. It provides a candid account of the
problem, as well as a clear framework for effective
action by both the Secretariat and Member States.

I also strongly welcome the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on sexual
exploitation and abuse which, once approved by the
General Assembly, will provide my Department with a
clear and comprehensive strategy for moving forward.
This will enable us to put in place a policy that meets
the highest standards of behaviour. This should be
accompanied, as is the case with all well-organized
armies, by adequate welfare and recreation measures
for all peacekeeping personnel, who are often deployed
in some of the most difficult and austere environments.

We have come a long way since the allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse against United Nations
peacekeepers surfaced in May of last year in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Department
treated this as an issue of the highest priority, and I am
pleased to report that we have made significant
progress in investigating allegations and putting in
place wide-ranging measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Since 1 December 2004, investigations have been
completed into allegations of sexual exploitation and
abuse involving 152 peacekeeping personnel - 32
civilians, three civilian police and 117 military
personnel. So far, five United Nations staff members
have been summarily dismissed, nine more are
undergoing the disciplinary process and four have been
cleared. On the side of uniformed personnel, two
members of formed police units and 77 military
personnel have been repatriated or rotated home on
disciplinary grounds, including six military
commanders.

Over the past year, field missions have put in
place a wide array of measures to prevent misconduct
and to enforce United Nations standards of conduct.
For instance, on the prevention side, missions in Cote
d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia provide induction
training on United Nations standards of conduct
relating to sexual exploitation and abuse. My
department intends to make such training mandatory
for all members of peacekeeping operations on arrival
in a mission.

Late last year, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations issued a policy on human trafficking. This
is now accompanied by a resource manual on the issue,
which includes a training module and practical
guidance for peacekeeping operations on how best to
combat human trafficking. In early 2005, awareness-
raising posters on sexual exploitation and abuse and
brochures on human trafficking were distributed to all
missions, and they are displayed in offices in capitals
and in the field, as well as military barracks.

With regard to enforcement of United Nations
standards of conduct, field missions in Cote d'Ivoire,
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Kosovo and Timor-Leste have established lists
of premises and areas frequented by prostitutes, which
are now out-of-bounds to all personnel. We have a
network of focal points on sexual exploitation and
abuse in all missions to facilitate receipt of allegations,
as well as telephone hotlines in Sierra Leone and
Liberia.

As was mentioned in the Secretary-General's
letter to the Council of 9 February 2005 on the United
Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, this mission has put in place a number of
mission-specific measures to minimize misconduct,
such as a requirement that contingent members wear
their uniforms at all times. Our Congo mission is also
strengthening managerial accountability by requiring
regional heads of office to come up with concrete
workplans on how they will prevent sexual exploitation
and abuse.

At Headquarters, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has established a task force aimed at
developing guidance and tools for peacekeeping
operations to address sexual exploitation and abuse
effectively. For instance, we are developing a database,
in coordination with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS), to track and monitor allegations and
investigations, as well as follow-up action. The
Department is also developing internal communication
messages to remind peacekeeping personnel of our
duty to care, and why we serve.

In addition, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is co-chairing with the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
an inter-agency task force aimed at creating an
organizational culture throughout the United Nations
system that prevents sexual exploitation and abuse. It
is also developing common policies and guidance, for
instance on victim assistance.

The Department is cooperating closely with
OIOS, which, under General Assembly resolution
59/287, is in charge of investigating allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping
operations. This collaboration involves developing
suggestions, for discussion with troop-contributing
countries, on how to facilitate their participation in
OIOS investigations involving military peacekeeping
personnel.

The problem of sexual exploitation and abuse is
likely to look worse before it looks better. In other
words, as we improve our complaints mechanisms in
the field, and as people start to trust that action will be
taken against those who violate United Nations
standards of conduct, the number of allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse will probably increase,
not decrease.

The various measures that my department has
undertaken over the past year at Headquarters and in
the field have opened our eyes to the enormity of the
task that lies ahead of us. We need deep, systemic
change. I will do my utmost to implement such
recommendations with due haste, as will managers and
commanders in peacekeeping operations.

I commend the resolve that Council members are
showing through the presidential statement under
consideration today. I also welcome the reference in
the statement, to be read out by the President at the
Close of this meeting, to the need for specific
provisions to be included in Security Council mandates
for peacekeeping operations to address misconduct by
peacekeeping personnel. Indeed, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations hopes to establish a dedicated
capacity to address conduct issues in the form of
personnel conduct units at Headquarters and in the
field. Those units will be an essential tool for
preventing misconduct, monitoring compliance with
United Nations standards and ensuring swift follow-up
on disciplinary cases. In an organization that aims
towards professional standards of the highest calibre,
this is no longer a luxury but a must.

Sexual exploitation and abuse do not occur in a
vacuum. Those acts take place where there is a general
breakdown in good conduct and discipline. My
department is ready to address the problem in a
comprehensive manner. However, my department
cannot solve this problem alone. We need to create a
culture and environment in peacekeeping operations
that does not permit sexual exploitation and abuse.
That requires joint action by both DPKO and Member
States. I look forward to our continued collaboration.

