Mr. Van den Akker: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

I would first like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate, as well as to congratulate
Poland on taking up the presidency of the Security
Council. I must also pay particular tribute to our
two civil society briefers, Ms. Mariatu Kamara and
Mr. Majok Peter Awan. I would also like to thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Executive Director Henrietta Fore, both for their
briefings today and for their continued leadership.

We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2019/509), which identifies some positive
developments. But it is troubling to note that the total
number of grave violations, which was already quite
significant, has further increased. That includes over
12,000 cases of killing and maiming. It is clear that we
must do more to address this particular violation in a
context where the use of indiscriminate and excessive
force, notably in urban areas, is leading to increased
numbers of child casualties. Many of those children
suffer long-term disabilities, and we welcome the
adoption in June of resolution 2475 (2019), co-authored
by Poland and the United Kingdom, which addresses the
specific needs of children with disabilities in situations
of armed conflict.

We also welcome the adoption in April of
resolution 2467 (2019), at the initiative of Germany,
which acknowledges that women and girls are
disproportionately affected by sexual violence in armed
conflicts and includes important new commitments on
the protection of girls and boys from sexual violence, as
well as children born of sexual violence.

The United Nations system is equipped with a range
of tools to protect children in conflict situations. We
salute the work of UNICEF and other United Nations
child-protection staff working in countries affected
by conflict. We are carefully monitoring the so-called
consolidation process of protection functions in peace
operations and would welcome a Secretariat briefing
on it at a later time. We welcome the signing of new
action plans, as well as the Special Representative's
continued efforts in that regard. Of course, the signing
of an action plan is not an end in itself. We must remain
focused on implementation.

The annual report on children and armed conflict
plays a crucial role by providing us with verified and
impartial information collected through the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, and the lists in its annexes
are an essential tool in holding parties accountable.
It is vital that the integrity and objectivity of both
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the
listing process be maintained. The EU hopes that
the subdivision into two sections within each of the
annexes will be a basis for maintaining the high level
of requirements for delisting and will create incentives
for listed parties to swiftly take effective measures to
protect children.

The Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, currently chaired by Belgium,
continues to make a vital contribution. We welcome the
recent adoption of conclusions on Syria and the clear
condemnation of the Syrian regime for its actions, as
well as the adoption of conclusions on Myanmar. The
ACT to Protect campaign launched by the Special
Representative in April, should make a valuable
contribution to awareness-raising and strengthening
efforts to end and prevent all six grave violations
against children.

Accountability is an essential element of
prevention, and those responsible for grave violations
must be brought to justice. The EU reiterates its
continued support for the International Criminal Court.
In resolution 2427 (2018), the Security Council stated
that children formerly recruited by armed groups
should be treated primarily as victims of violations
of international law. That includes children formerly
associated with violent extremist groups, whose human
rights must be fully respected in line with international
law. Unfortunately, in some areas of the world, we see
the prosecution of minors and their parents taking place
without the required due process and safeguards. This
is an issue of grave concern for the European Union.

The children and armed conflict agenda remains
a high priority for the European Union. We support
efforts to prevent the recruitment and use of children,
secure their release and ensure their comprehensive
and successful reintegration through long-term
interventions that follow a rights-based approach and
incorporate a gender perspective.

A full version this statement has been submitted to
the Secretariat.

