The President: I thank Minister Madeira for his
comments and responses.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its
Presidential Statement of 24 April 1997
(S/PRST/1997/22) and its other relevant
statements and resolutions calling for the holding
at an appropriate time of an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region of Africa,
with the participation of all Governments of the
region of the Great Lakes and Central Africa and
all others concerned, to be organized under the
aegis of the United Nations and the African
Union, with a view to achieving a sustainable
peace, security and stability for all countries in
the region, in particular through the full
normalization of their relations and the
establishment of confidence-building measures
and mechanisms.

"The Security Council considers that the
holding of the proposed conference will help
build on the progress made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi peace
processes to achieve lasting peace and promote
the national reconciliation processes in all
countries concerned in the region.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made towards the convening of the
proposed conference, expresses satisfaction at the
fact that the countries of the region have launched
the preparatory process of the conference with the
first meeting of their national coordinators, held
in June 2003 in Nairobi, and considers it now
crucial to follow up this initial step with
intensified efforts. It takes note with appreciation
of the briefing by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, and welcomes the offer made
by the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania to host a summit during the year 2004.

"The Security Council encourages the
Governments concerned, with the support of their
civil societies, their neighbours and development
partners, to continue their efforts to bring about a
successful conference, based on a regional, all-
inclusive and action-oriented approach. It stresses
the importance of the participation in this
conference of all States concerned, in particular
those neighbouring the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, and encourages the

States in the region to reach early agreement on
participation in the conference.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
relevance to the proposed conference of the
Solemn Declaration of the Conference on
Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation
in Africa (CSSDCA) adopted by the Organization
of African Unity Lome Summit in July 2000, of
the Maputo Decision adopted by the Executive
Council of the African Union in July 2003 and of
the Declaration of Principles on Good-
Neighbourly Relations and Cooperation adopted
by the Governments of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda in
New York on 25 September 2003, as well as of
the framework of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD).

"The Security Council appeals to the
countries of the region and to the international
community to provide sustained political and
diplomatic support as well as adequate technical
and financial assistance so that the conference is
well prepared and timely, and so that effective
follow-up actions are taken. It commends the
active partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in all aspects relating to
the preparation of the proposed conference, and
welcomes the appointment of Mr. Keli Walubita
as Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for the Great Lakes
region.

"The Security Council calls on the countries
of the region and the members of the international
community to support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region and the Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for the Great Lakes region, and expresses its
gratitude to the Secretary-General for keeping it
informed of developments in the region and
requests him to continue to do so on a regular
basis."

The Council has thus concluded its present
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.
