The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 12 April 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting the text of "The Cairo
Declaration", adopted on the occasion of the signature of
the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (The Treaty of Pelindaba) by the Foreign Ministers and Heads of
Delegation attending the signing ceremony of the Treaty
held in Cairo, Egypt, on 11 April 1996, which will be
issued as document S/1996/276.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes with deep
satisfaction the signature of the African Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (The Treaty of Pelindaba)
on 11 April 1996 in Cairo, Egypt, and notes further
the adoption of 'The Cairo Declaration' on that
occasion.

"This historic event marks a successful
formalization of the commitment undertaken 32 years
ago when the leaders of Africa adopted in July 1964
at Cairo the pioneering resolution of the First
Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity, which declared Africa a
denuclearized zone.

"The Security Council considers that the
signing of the Treaty by more than 40 African
countries, as well as the signing of the relevant
protocols to the Treaty by the majority of the
nuclear-weapons States, constitute important steps
towards the effective and early implementation of
the Treaty. To that end it emphasizes the importance
of early ratification of the Treaty with a view to
securing its rapid entry into force.

"The Security Council, reaffirming the
statement made by its President on behalf of
members of the Council at the meeting held at the
level of Heads of State and Government on
31 January 1992 (S/23500) that the proliferation of
all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat
to international peace and security, considers that the
signature of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
Treaty constitutes an important contribution by the
African countries to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council seizes this occasion to
encourage such regional efforts, and stands ready to
support efforts on the international and regional level
aimed at achieving the universality of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/ 17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
