Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, the Chinese delegation wishes to express its
gratitude to you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting
and its appreciation of the efforts made by the
delegation of Singapore for its convening.

With a history of more than 50 years, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have developed into a
comprehensive and complex integrated project. From
the United Nations point of view, as the authorizer of
peacekeeping operations and the central organ for
making decisions on their establishment and
deployment and on the development of relevant
policies and guidelines, the Security Council is at the
heart of all such operations from start to finish. The
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
shoulder the important task of implementing the
mandates of the Security Council.

For many years, the troop-contributing countries'
cooperation in and support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been an effective
guarantee of the Security Council's ability to perform
its function of maintaining international peace and
security. Their contributions are evident to all. At the
same time, there is much room for improvement in
terms of coordination with troop-contributing
countries. In the case of Sierra Leone in particular, the
peacekeeping operation faced more difficulties because
of the lack of sufficient consultation and coordination
with the troop contributors when the Council changed
and adjusted the mandate of the peacekeeping Mission
there. This lesson should be learned and remembered
well in order better to prevent the recurrence of similar
problems in the future.

The success of a peacekeeping operation depends
not only on the clear and sound division of work, but
also on good communication and cooperation between
the decision maker and the task performer. Therefore,
the Chinese delegation actively supports the
strengthening of cooperation between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries, as well as
between the Secretariat and the troop-contributing
countries. It maintains that importance should be
attached to maintaining regular consultations with
troop-contributing countries and to listening to their
pertinent views at all stages of the creation and
implementation of a peacekeeping operation.

In recent years, Council members have held close
consultations with troop-contributing countries in the
form of TCC meetings on questions related to
peacekeeping operations, which have played a role in
ensuring the smooth implementation of peacekeeping
operations. We believe that such a mechanism should
continue and be improved upon and that, without
prejudice to the efficiency of the work of the Security
Council, more flexible forms of exchange and
communication with troop-contributing countries
should be considered in order to inspire free exchanges
of views. Troop-contributing countries should also be
encouraged to express their concerns to the Council in
a more timely and flexible manner. All this should
become an important component of the effort to
improve the working methods and increase the
transparency of the Security Council.

This morning, representatives of the troop-
contributing countries raised many questions that
deserve the Security Council's consideration. They also
made many good suggestions. We hope that there will
be follow-up action in this regard.

As to strengthening cooperation between the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries, we
support the establishment of closer partnerships
between the Secretariat and troop contributors and the
Secretariat should do its utmost to provide
conveniences to the latter. We would recommend that
the Secretariat continue to give timely and accurate
briefings to troop-contributing countries, which should
be in line with those given to the Security Council. I
would emphasize that the Secretariat, in dispatching
and deploying peacekeeping operations, has done a
great deal of work over the years and that its
contribution deserves our commendation.

The Chinese delegation endorses the proposal to
establish a Security Council working group on
peacekeeping operations. In our view, one of the
primary tasks of that working group should be to
explore ways to strengthen cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries while learning from the successes and
failures of recent peacekeeping operations. The scope
of the tasks to be dealt with by the working group
should include how to improve the content and form of
meetings with troop contributors, additional ways to
strengthen cooperation between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, and how to encourage and give
full play to the initiatives of troop-contributing
countries.

The working group should also listen to the views
of non-members, and to those of troop-contributing
countries in particular - and this should be done in a
flexible way. The Chinese delegation will take an
active part in the endeavours of the working group and
will join hands with all Member States- especially
troop-contributing countries - to strengthen
cooperation between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries so as to make United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective and successful.

