Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): After its
long struggle for independence, Sir, your country is
presiding over the Security Council this month and you
yourself will serve as President of the General Assembly at
its fifty-fourth session. France welcomes this, and welcomes
your country's very effective and active guidance of the
Council's work during this particularly busy month of
August. We are grateful to you for this.

I thank you too for convening this open debate on the
question of children and armed conflict, which again
demonstrates the determination of the Security Council to
do all it can to protect civilian populations and to ensure
respect for international law and the maintenance of peace.
It is peace that is desired by the children that Mr. Otunnu
has met everywhere he has gone in Africa, Europe, Asia
and the Americas.
Today's debate provides a timely opportunity for the
Council to adopt a draft resolution, a text which is most
welcome and which my delegation entirely supports.

The tragic events that have been described by
Mr. Otunnu and others, such as the situation of children in
Sierra Leone, compel us to act to ensure respect for and the
strengthening of the minimal protections that must be
provided to children.

Let me emphasize a number of elements of this
debate. The first is the need for truly universal ratification
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and for
strengthening it with respect to the age of participation in
armed conflict; it is sad to note that it does not now enable
us to combat the scourge under which thousands of children
throughout the world suffer. We hope that the ongoing
negotiations on this matter will lead in the year 2000 to the
adoption of an additional protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child that will end the use of child soldiers
and will raise the minimum age of participation in
hostilities to 18.

The definition of international norms is not
sufficient, of course, but it is a necessary first step. Thus,
we welcome and support the action undertaken by the
Special Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to convince
parties to a conflict to commit themselves explicitly to
respecting the rights established by the conventions. Not
only the United Nations system as a whole, but also
States and other actors must contribute to raising
awareness and to working together. At lO-years old, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child is a relatively
recent instrument, but we must continue to advance along
the path to improved protection.

In this regard, we welcome the adoption, since our
debate last year on the protection of children, of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. The entry into
force of the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the
Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
personnel Mines and on Their Destruction is another
positive development.

France hopes to continue to work actively to protect
children. It has already done so through its commitment
to providing financial support of one of Mr. Otunnu's
projects. In the context of our activities in the Security
Council, we shall see to it that our concern for the
protection of children be duly and systematically taken
into account in all of our decisions, including in the
implementation of sanctions regimes.

In this regard, the draft resolution we will shortly
adopt provides us with a "road map" for honouring these
commitments. We must ensure their follow-up, especially
when we receive reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians, as well as in the specific case of
every operation approved by the Security Council.

Moreover, the uncontrolled and destabilizing
distribution of small arms and light weapons turns
children into victims and executioners alike. That is why
France, along with its partners in the European Union -
as was just pointed out by the representative of the United
Kingdom - has undertaken joint action and follows with
interest the efforts of other countries and regional groups
to control this phenomenon.

We should mobilize every means at our disposal to
allow children to enjoy their right to peace. I welcome the
valuable contribution of Mr. Otunnu, which he will
continue to make in the context of his mission. I also
welcome the tireless work in the field of the agencies and
other bodies of the United Nations, in particular the

 

United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Children represent humanity's future. Protecting them
is an essential objective for all of us.

