Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ali, Prime Minister of Somalia, and
thank him for his presentation. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for briefing us on the latest developments in
Somalia, and I wish to express our appreciation to him
for his work, in particular for his pivotal role in
facilitating dialogue among Somali stakeholders with
such positive results. I also thank Mr. Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, for his contribution to our
debate.

The consultative meeting on ending the transition
held in Mogadishu this month represents a very
encouraging step forward. We are pleased at the high
turnout at the meeting, and we welcome the adoption
of a road map for the implementation of the transitional
tasks. We are encouraged by the fact that the key tasks
of improving security, working towards the new
constitution, achieving reconciliation and improving
governance have been given high priority. Adherence
by the Somali authorities to the timeline set out in
Mogadishu will be of the utmost importance. The
support of the international community will remain
crucial.

The fact that the meeting was held in the capital
is very meaningful. We congratulate the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) on the improvement of
the security situation in the capital. That important
development signals tangible progress in the security
sector. We are also pleased that the United Nations
presence in Mogadishu has also increased. In order to
build on that positive momentum, it is important that
the TFG and AMISOM. advance further into areas in
central and southern Somalia.

As we discuss the renewal of the AMISOM
mandate, we must be mindful of the need to grant the
Mission the necessary conditions to fulfil its tasks.
Expanding AMISOM. and enhancing its capability is
critical to enabling the Mission to maintain and build
upon the recent security gains. Once again, we thank
Burundi and Uganda for their continued commitment
to the improvement of the situation in Somalia.

We are all touched by the tragic humanitarian
crisis in Somalia, in particular the widespread famine.
The number of children dying of causes related to
malnourishment has reached alarming levels. Internally
displaced persons and refugees have put an increasing
strain on Somalia's neighbouring countries. Addressing
the humanitarian crisis in Somalia must continue to be
a priority for the international community. Ending the
current famine should be at the top of our agenda. We
welcome the fact that humanitarian agencies have
stepped up assistance to Somalia. Ways of improving
assistance to the populations in areas under the control
ofAl-Shabaab must be devised.

Brazil's humanitarian assistance to the Horn of
Africa has included food donations and financial
support estimated at $27 million. To Somalia alone, we

have donated 38,000 tons of food. We agree with the
Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos that there is a need to address not only
the immediate crisis but also its underlying causes.
Sustainable solutions must be found, taking into
account in particular the vulnerable segments of the
population. Brazil will continue to work with the
Council and the broader United Nations in helping
Somalia to overcome its current challenges.

