Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I, in turn,
would like to convey the heartfelt condolences of
France to the people and Government of India and of
Pakistan on the occasion of the tragic earthquake that
has afflicted both countries.

I am particularly pleased to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in East Timor, our friend Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello. We appreciate the remarkable work done by the
Special Representative and his team and their resolve
in carrying out UNTAET's mandate.

I should like also to thank the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme, Mr.
Malloch Brown; Mr. Klaus Rohland, Country Director
ofthe World Bank; and Mr. Luis Valdivieso, Adviser of
the International Monetary Fund, for their statements.

For the second time this week, following the open
debate on the situation in the Central African Republic,
the Council has the opportunity to work with eminent
representatives of international financial institutions
and of United Nations funds and programmes. This is
an example we must follow. It is indeed essential to
promote concertation, including during the
consideration of complex peacekeeping operations,
among the major institutions with responsibilities in
the area of peace-building.

I should like also to pay tribute to President
Holkeri, who led a mission to East Timor with the
determination and resolve with which we all are
familiar.

I should like finally warmly to welcome Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta, member of the Transitional Cabinet
responsible for foreign affairs. He told us that Sergio
had aged rapidly after coming to East Timor; I would
like to say to Jose' that he himself never changes, and I
have known him for 20 years.

We have heard his statement - the statement of a
man of Vision and wisdom. He has given us a realistic
and ambitious vision of an independent, democratic
East Timor. Let us thank him for that.
There is no doubt that the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
will go down in the annals of the United Nations as an
exemplary success. The report accurately describes the
impressive progress achieved in the past few months,
particularly as regards the setting up of a Timorese
administration, the functioning of public services and
the reconstruction of infrastructures.

But that is not the end of the story of East Timor.
Yet another success remains to be achieved: the post-
independence era. For the Timorese people,
independence remains, most understandably, a growing
aspiration. Not to respond to these expectations could
only provoke uncertainty and frustration. We must send
the Timorese an unambiguous signal of our trust in the
future of their country. The political class in Timor has
developed a partnership with UNTAET that deserves to
be encouraged.

It is up to the international community to help the
Timorese to achieve their goal. A clear Vision must be
provided to them. France is gratified that the Secretary-
General, in paragraphs 4 and 50 of his report, confirms
that independence by 31 December 2001 is the goal.
The speedy transition is a positive factor; it avoids the
risk of getting bogged down. Several examples of
successful transitional authorities bear witness to this
fact. The United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia lasted 18 months, and the United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium lasted just under two
years.

It is indispensable to accelerate as much as
possible the progressive emergence of Timorese
political and administrative power. Some notable
efforts have been made. The figures speak for
themselves: over 7,000 Timorese officials have been
recruited; there is a majority of Timorese in the
Transitional Cabinet; and the Timorese budget has been
endowed with $124 million.

But more progress remains to be achieved. Less
than a year before the date planned for independence,
UNTAET's budget, the largest of all United Nations
peacekeeping operation budgets, still represents more
than 10 times the budget of East Timor. The
recruitment of upper-echelon and mid-level Timorese
public officials remains too slow. More attractive
training programmes and salaries must be proposed.
Communications remain a serious obstacle to
development in the country's interior, and health
services are provided almost exclusively by
international non-governmental organizations. The
education sector still operates to far too great a degree
on a basis of emergency aid. The viability of many
enterprises set up in the last few months still depends
too much on the international presence. These are some
ofthe many challenges that will have to be faced for an
independent Timor to be viable.

In dealing with these challenges, we will have to
appeal increasingly to bilateral and multilateral donors,
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and other funds and programmes,
particularly those of the United Nations. The pledges
made at the Brussels donor conference last December
must be honoured, and disbursements should be
accelerated.

East Timor should be a test, but it must be a
successful test of the effectiveness, suitability and
celerity of actions and funding for peace-building.

Independence will bring about a profound change
in the part played by the international community in
East Timor. Its action will have to be complementary to
that of the Timorese authorities and must no longer
replace them in any way. Independence will mean the
definitive transition from peacekeeping to peace-
building.

It is up to the Council to see to it that the
transition progresses as smoothly as possible. The
Council must make sure that the transition is prepared
upstream. Our debate last November on the item "No
exit without strategy" can be applied perfectly to East
Timor. Thus, in the coming months, the Council should
frequently examine the mandate and the means of
UNTAET in order to make sure they are optimally
consonant with the rapidly evolving needs of East
Timor.

France supports the Secretary-General's proposal
to renew the mandate of UNTAET to 31 December.
This exceptionally long period for a peacekeeping
operation should enable UNTAET to calmly traverse
the hectic political transitional period.

Such a mandate, however, should not prevent
more frequent consideration of the means and
objectives of UNTAET. It might be useful for the
Council to have more frequent updates on the situation.
France hopes that a thorough consideration of the
appropriateness of the means available to UNTAET, in
terms ofthe situation on the ground, will be carried out
within three months, on the basis of detailed
recommendations from the Secretariat. In the draft
resolution currently under discussion, France will make
proposals regarding such a consideration. For instance,
we should consider the suitability of the operation in
the eastern parts of East Timor, where security seems
easier to ensure and where risks linked to militia
infiltration are not so great. Such a capacity to adapt to
a rapidly evolving situation is an indispensable
prerequisite for success in our international effort in
East Timor.

As for the form of the international presence after
independence, France will examine with care the
recommendations to be made by the Secretary-General.
We will have to think carefully about the distribution
oftasks among the various actors concerned.

In conclusion, I would like to put a few questions
to the Special Representative concerning preparations
for the elections to the Constituent Assembly. How, in
the post-election period, does he see the part to be
played by UNTAET, side by side with an elected
Constituent Assembly? What changes in the mandate
will be required - or, at least, what changes to
UNTAET's mode of operation? Will return operations
be accelerated to enable the refugees to participate in
the elections? Failing this, should we provide for
voting by mail? These are some of the questions we
wanted to ask the Special Representative.

