Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and all
the members of the Security Council for the expression
of solidarity made on behalf of the people of Macoa, a
very harsh jungle region that has suffered a tragedy that
none of us could have anticipated to befall them.

I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
and your country on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council, and I wish you great success in
conducting the work of the Council this month. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Jean Arnault, and his entire team, because as
members of the Council have indicated and have seen
first-hand, we have established a level of coordination
that, I believe, is very valuable and essential for the
work being done.

I would like to read out something of great interest
to us Colombians that the Secretary-General indicated
in his report,

"Colombia's remarkable journey towards peace
has continued. The images witnessed in February
of thousands of FARC-EP members making their
final march into the zones where they will begin
their reintegration into civilian life and FARC-EP
will transform into a political organization were
images of peace that many Colombians thought
they would never see. These historic steps forward,
as part of a comprehensive peace agreement, are
testament to the resilience of the peace process and
the commitment of the parties." ( S/2017/252, para. 75)

And the numbers are proof of this. The past
seven months have seen violence de-escalating at
unprecedented rates in a nation that for more than
50 years dealt with a brutal internal conflict with
enormous human costs. Those numbers include 1,546
days without any attacks on communities, 580 without
kidnappings, 375 without assaults on public law
enforcement and 307 without any incidents attributed
to the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC). The homicide rate for the first quarter of this
year is 12 per cent below last year's.

There is no question that there have been some
worrying events, which we will have to address going
forward, but as of today, we have fully registered 8,345
FARC-Ejercito del Pueblo guerrillas and militias and
more than 7,000 weapons that have been registered by the
United Nations. Fifty-seven minors have been separated
from the FARC so far, and the process is continuing. As
the Special Representative said, on the legislative front
we have also made progress on transitional justice, and
yesterday President Santos Calderon signed decrees on
the establishment of the Truth Commission and a special
unit to search for persons who have disappeared, as
part of the development of an integral system ofjustice,
truth and reparation.

I would like to highlight two elements that I
believe are important for the United Nations Mission
in Colombia, because they could serve as examples for
other missions in future. The first is that it has achieved
a 20 per cent rate of participation of women, both
military and civilian - currently the highest of any
mission. That, together with the presence of a woman
as Deputy Special Representative, Ms. Tania Patriota
of Brazil, reinforces the strong gender dimension that
has been present throughout the peace process and
now in its implementation, where women are a strong
presence in the ex-combatant component. The second
is the regional component, where the members of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
have shown the extraordinarily important part that the
presence of regional mechanisms has played in settling
the last remaining conflict in the American hemisphere.

I should like to highlight the confidence of the
national authorities and the international community in
the ceasefire and disarmament process, thanks in large
part to the work of the highly innovative Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism, composed of the Government,
the FARC and the United Nations. My Government
believes that, in order to guarantee the legitimacy and

credibility of the Mechanism, permanent and effective
coordination among its members is indispensable, in
compliance with the protocols governing the ceasefire,
the laying down of arms and the preparatory activities
of the reintegration and transition to legality, which
we hope will be swift. It will also be necessary, in
conformity with the scheduled programme, for the
Mission to expedite the procedures for registration,
identification and collection of weapons, as well
as procedures for locating and destroying unstable
weapons and explosives, concerning which Mr. Arnault
spoke earlier. The Government is ready to provide
logistical and legal means to contribute to this work.

Lastly, with respect to the killings of recent months
that are referred to in the report and have been cited
by a number of Council members, the Colombian
Government wishes to reiterate that it is premature to
affirm that all such killings are associated with the work
of defending human rights or the handiwork of criminal
organizations that have succeeded paramilitary groups.
The authorities have been able to observe that, although
in some cases this is so, it is not possible at this time to
generalize about the origin of these criminal actions,
which shall not prevent our Government, aware of the
harmful presence of outlaw actors, to move forward
with relevant public safety actions.

I conclude by reiterating our appreciation and
by saying that the commitment of Colombia to
implementing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission is producing concrete results, which the
Council will have the opportunity to see first-hand
on its trip in May. We strongly hope and trust that the
progress will be obvious.

