Ms. Coninsx: It is my great honour and pleasure
to address the Security Council today alongside
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq. It was indeed a joint and historic
visit, and I can only agree with what was said by
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov in his briefing to
the Council.

I wish to begin by conveying my deepest respect
for the Government and the people of Iraq for their
continued determination to overcome the challenge of
terrorism and for their true resilience. I also wish to
express my continued and unwavering support for all
the victims ofterrorism in Iraq, as well as their families.
The Under-Secretary-General and I were able to
witness at first-hand the remarkable determination
of the Iraqi people, in both Baghdad and Fallujah,
during our recent high-level consultations with the
Iraqi Government. As Mr. Voronkov just mentioned,
in Fallujah there was a moment where we had to stand
still, look at the class of young students ,with their one
female teacher, in a newly built school in the middle
of rubble and debris. That was the best sign of the
resilience of the population of that small town. It also
demonstrated the need to give those children what they
deserve: the right to development, education, hope and
perspective. It motivated us greatly.

The consultations were conducted in accordance
with the respective mandates of the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and within the
framework of the strengthened coordination between
the two Offices called for by the Council in resolution
2395 (2017). Our discussions focused in part on the
facilitation and provision of tailored capacity-building
assistance to Iraq, on the basis of the priority needs
identified by the Committee in accordance with the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I would also like to thank the Iraqi authorities,
especially the Permanent Representative of Iraq to
the United Nations for his instrumental role. I thank
the Iraqi authorities for the hospitality extended
to us during our visit, as well as for their continued
willingness to engage in constructive dialogue with us
on a broad range of issues.

I now wish to inform the Council about the recent
efforts of CTED to assist Iraq in the area of counter-
terrorism. Acting on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), CTED conducted an assessment
visit to Iraq in September 2015. The visit report was
endorsed by the Iraqi Government in March 2016, and
subsequently adopted by the Committee. At that time,
Iraq's response to the terrorist threat was primarily
military in nature.

In an effort to assist Iraq to combat terrorism in
non-military areas as well, particularly in the post-
conflict phase, CTED identified - as was mentioned
previously - 33 key recommendations on ways to
strengthen an overall response. While recognizing
that Iraq had the capacity to implement several of
those recommendations, the Committee nonetheless
noted that Iraq would benefit from receiving technical
assistance in half of the recommendations, 16 priority
areas. Those areas included legal and judicial matters,
counter-financing of terrorism, law enforcement and
border control, and countering radicalization and
incitement to commit terrorist acts.

The 16 priority needs were identified on the basis
of CTED's long-term dialogue and partnership with
Iraqi counter-terrorism officials. They were formulated
in accordance with the international best codes and
practices of our partner organizations, including
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
and others.

In follow-up to the visit, we have endeavoured to
make the findings of the visit accessible to as many
donors and implementing partners as possible. In
that context, we might say that our approach has been
unique. For the first time since its establishment, the
Committee held two informal meetings on Iraq for
donors and partners, in March 2016 and May 2017,
respectively. The meetings enabled the Committee to
follow up on progress achieved since the 2015 visit and
to take stock of recent developments and continued
challenges. That approach has also since been emulated
with regard to Afghanistan.

Since the two informal meetings, CTED has
returned to Iraq on several occasions in an effort
to ensure that the discussions held at Headquarters
continued to reflect the situation on the ground.
The various activities have been organized in close
cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and have involved Iraqi Government
officials, representatives of the donor community,
international and regional organizations and various
United Nations entities.

The focus of our efforts has been on facilitating the
integration of the Committee's recommendations into
the existing planned programmes of our implementing
partners. We are determined to ensure that our
partnership with the Iraqi Government is complemented
by close cooperation with UNAMI and that our work
on counter-terrorism is fully complementary with
UNAMI's overall mandate. I wish to thank the Iraqi
Government for its continued commitment to the
process. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative and his entire team for
their invaluable cooperation.
Throughout our engagement with Iraq, whether
in New York, Baghdad or Fallujah, Iraq has retained
full ownership - I think it is really important to
underline this point - of the assistance, facilitation
and delivery process and has continued to endorse
the 16 identified priority areas. Our implementing
partners and organizations have also continued to share
and update information concerning their current and
planned efforts, areas in which they continue to require
financial support and areas in which they might be
able to partner with other implementing agencies and
stakeholders. All this information is entered into a
matrix that is designed to ensure full transparency for
our partners in Iraq, New York and the relevant capitals.
The process helps us not only to avoid duplication and
overlap, but also to develop new partnerships.

An example in that regard was our recent
facilitation ofa legislative drafting workshop organized
by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC. The
workshop led to the development of draft counter-
terrorism legislation that has been submitted to the Iraqi
National Counter-Terrorism Committee for subsequent
consideration and adoption by the Parliament. I wish
to reiterate the need for Iraq to actively manage the
adoption of counter-terrorism legislation in accordance
with the relevant international standards, in order to
ensure that the perpetrators of terrorist acts are brought
to justice in accordance with human rights and the rule
of law.

The Counter-terrorism Committee is currently
considering ways to strengthen its assessment process
and follow-up mechanisms, pursuant to paragraph 9 of
resolution 2395 (2017). I firmly believe that the example
of CTED's engagement with Iraq will be very useful
to the Committee's work in that area. I am absolutely
convinced that this historic joint visit and the follow-up
that was recently organized by the Office of Counter-
Terrorism,with the participation of CTED, will be a
good example to follow.

We are grateful for the continued efforts of all
implementing partners that have helped Iraq to achieve
such encouraging progress in implementing some of
the Committee's priority recommendations. We urge
them to continue their efforts and to encourage other
partners to join with the Committee, CTED and the
Iraqi Government in their efforts to strengthen Iraq's
counter-terrorism capacities in the areas identified by
the Committee.

I wish to assure the Council that CTED will
continue, in close cooperation with the Under-
Secretary-General's Office, the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and UNAMI, to engage closely with its
implementing partners to determine the most effective
ways to support Iraq. At the end of the day, it is only
a question of transparency, accountability and impact.
Thejoint visit was certainly historic in its approach, and
I firmly hope that it will also be historic in its results
and impact and that we finally honour all of the victims
of the past in Iraq and that we avoid future victims there
and in the rest of the world.

