The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Japan.

Japan welcomes the resolution just adopted as
one of the most important decisions the Security
Council has taken in recent times on an issue of the
gravest concern to the international community. It was
essential that such an important decision be taken by a
unanimous vote, and this is a welcome outcome. The
resolution strongly condemns the irresponsible act on
the part of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which announced its intention and then proceeded to
conduct a nuclear test in total defiance of the calls to
refrain from doing so by all its immediate neighbours,
and indeed by the entire world. That was unacceptable
behaviour, which deserved to be met not only with
strong admonishment but also with necessary measures
prescribed in Chapter VII of the Charter. In the
circumstances, the Security Council acted in the
discharge of its responsibilities by responding to this
grave situation created by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, swiftly and in unity. This we also
welcome.

The situation created by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea on the Korean peninsula has caused
widespread and deep concern in East Asia and beyond.
The danger presented by Pyongyang's total disregard
of the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction is clear and
present. Last July, when the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea resorted to the launching of ballistic
missiles, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1695 (2006), condemning the action.

Responding to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's announcement of an impending nuclear test,
the international community unequivocally urged the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to exercise
maximum restraint, including through the issuance by
the Security Council of a strong presidential statement
(S/PRST/2006/4l) advising the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea not to go forward with the test. Only
two days after the call from the Security Council,
however, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
claimed that it had conducted a nuclear test. The
combination of ballistic missile capability and, now,
the claim of nuclear capability in the hands of a regime
with a known and proven record of reckless and
irresponsible acts and behaviour, including as a
proliferator, creates a situation which is nothing less
than a grave threat to peace and security.

Japan also regrets that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's actions are in contravention of the
Japan-Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Pyongyang Declaration, the Joint Statement of the Six-
Party Talks and several other agreements to which the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has committed
itself.

Japan, along with other concerned countries in
the region and beyond, expects that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea will act as a responsible
Member of the United Nations by implementing this
and other relevant Security Council resolutions and
decisions, including resolution 1695 (2006), in good
faith and sincerely addressing the voices of concern
raised by the international community.

At the same time, it is important to note that the
security issue is not the only point of contention
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the international community. This resolution
underlines the importance of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea responding to humanitarian
concerns of the international community, which
naturally include the abduction issue. We demand that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea resolve this
issue as early as possible.

Prior to the adoption of this resolution, on
11 October 2006, my Government announced that it
would take a set of national measures in strong protest
against the claimed nuclear test, recognizing the need
to take firm measures in response to such an action.
These measures included denial of permission to enter
Japanese ports to all Democratic People's Republic of
Korea vessels, denial of import of all items from the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and denial in
principle of entry by Democratic People's Republic of
Korea nationals into Japanese territory.

Japan will also implement in good faith the
measures that Member States are obligated to take
under this resolution. We urge other Member States to
swiftly implement the resolution's provisions as well.

This resolution contains strong measures, but
sanctions are not invoked for the sake of sanctions. The
goal of this resolution is to remove the threat to
international peace and security by ensuring the
discontinuation of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's nuclear testing and ballistic missile launchings
as well as the abandonment of its nuclear and missile
programmes. It is up to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea whether this opportunity will be
seized and utilized. Japan wishes to stress that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's compliance
with this resolution and its addressing the concerns of
the international community will open the way for the
Security Council to consider actions for the benefit of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as made
clear in paragraph 15 of the resolution. Japan has not
closed the door on dialogue and urges the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to respond sincerely for a
diplomatic solution to the issues outstanding between
the two countries.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

