Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
would just like to draw the attention of Council
members to the statement issued yesterday by the
leaders of the Group of Eight, in which they warmly
welcomed the 26 May signing by the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement of protocols on power-sharing, on Abyei,
and on the two areas of the Southern Blue Nile and the
Nuba Mountains. They urged the parties to reach a
final and comprehensive agreement that includes a
timetable and security arrangements as quickly as
possible, and hoped that that agreement and its faithful
implementation will end one of the world's most
painful conflicts and begin a new era of Sudanese
peace and prosperity.

They also expressed their grave concern over the
humanitarian, human rights and political crisis in
Darfur. They welcomed the N'Djamena ceasefire
agreement of 8 April and the announcement on 20 May
by the Government of the Sudan that restrictions on
humanitarian access will be eased. However, there are
continuing reports of gross violations of human rights,
many with an ethnic dimension. They called on parties
to the conflict to immediately and fully respect the
ceasefire, allow unimpeded humanitarian access to all
those in need and create the conditions for the
displaced to return safely to their homes. They called
especially on the Sudanese Government to disarm
immediately the Janjaweed and other armed groups
which are responsible for massive human rights
violations in Darfur. They called on the conflict parties
to address the roots of the Darfur conflict and to seek a
political solution.

They also supported the African Union as it
assumes the leading role in the monitoring mission
which is now being sent to the Darfur region to
supervise the ceasefire agreement. They pledged their
countries' assistance in ending the conflicts in Sudan
and in providing humanitarian aid to those in need, and
called on all parties to the conflicts in Sudan to commit
themselves to respecting the right of all Sudanese to
live in peace and dignity. They concluded by looking to
the United Nations to lead the international effort to
avert a major disaster and to work together to achieve
that end.

