Mr. Lavrov (spoke in Russian): At the 24 March
Security Council meeting the Russian delegation set forth
its principled assessment of the unilateral use of force
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the
member countries of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). The continuing military action,
undertaken under the pretext of preventing a humanitarian
catastrophe, has already caused severe humanitarian
consequences and done serious damage to the efforts to
find a political settlement in Kosovo. This again confirms
how justified we were in stating the absolute need for
scrupulous compliance by all States with international
law.

The attempts, repeated today, to justify this
lawlessness cannot be taken seriously, just as one cannot
take seriously the statements, bordering on blackmail, that
those who vote in favour of the draft resolution will place
themselves outside of the consensus. To the contrary:
those who vote against it will place themselves in a
situation of lawlessness.

With regard to attempts to distort Russia's position,
I would like to recall here that today it was precisely
Russia that was in favour of convening an urgent meeting
of the ministers of the Contact Group if the military
action were to cease.

The aggressive military action unleashed by NATO
against a sovereign State without the authorization and in
circumvention of the Security Council is a real threat to
international peace and security and a gross violation of
the United Nations Charter and other basic norms of
international law. Key provisions of the Charter are being
violated, in particular Article 2, paragraph 4, which
requires all Members of the United Nations to refrain
from the threat or use of force in their international
relations, including against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State; Article 24, which
entrusts the Security Council with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; Article 53, on the inadmissibility of any
enforcement action under regional arrangements or by
regional agencies without the authorization of the Security
Council; as well as others.

The illegal use of force by NATO not only
destabilizes significantly the situation in the Balkans and
in Europe as a whole, but it also directly undermines the
fundamental bases of the entire modern system of
international relations, which is based on the primacy of
the United Nations Charter. One's worst fears are now

 

being fulfilled. The virus of lawlessness is spreading to ever
more spheres of international relations. The latest example
was the ban declared by NATO on any civil aviation flights
in the airspace of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia and Croatia. In
undertaking this ban, NATO decided to control the fate of
other States. That is a gross violation of the principle of the
exclusive sovereignty of a State over the airspace above its
territory, which is enshrined in the article 1 of the Chicago
Convention.

The Security Council cannot and should not remain
passive in this situation, which, we are profoundly
convinced, runs counter to the fundamental interests of the
overwhelming majority of States. Accordingly, the Russian
Federation submitted, together with the Republic of Belarus
and India, a draft resolution for the consideration of the
Security Council that contains a demand for the immediate
cessation of the use of force against the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and that calls for an urgent resumption of
talks. A solution of precisely this kind should be urgently
sought by the international community if it is really
interested in preventing unilateral approaches and the
prevalence of force in world affairs.
We know that many members of the Security Council
are racked with doubts over this vote. What is in the
balance now is the question of law and lawlessness. It is a
question of either reaffirming the commitment of one's
country and people to the basic principles and values of the
United Nations Charter, or of tolerating a situation in which
gross force dictates realpolitik. Doubts can also been seen
on the part of NATO countries. In an editorial dated 25
March, the Financial Times says,

"So far, Governments of NATO countries are
apparently united on bombing, but their publics and
parliaments are not." ("NATO politics", 1). 15)

We do not want to moralize here, but we cannot forget
the fact that members of the Security Council bear a special
responsibility not only to their peoples but to all Members
of the United Nations, upon which decisions of the Council
are binding under the Charter. Today's vote is not just on
the problem of Kosovo. It goes directly to the authority of
the Security Council in the eyes of the world community.
Members of the Council cannot ignore the demands that we
are now hearing in various parts of the world - made by,
among others, the Rio Group, the Council of Defence
Ministers of the member countries of the Commonwealth
of Independent States and members of the Non-Aligned
Movement - to stop the military aggression and to
respect international legality.

The capacity of the Security Council to defend the
United Nations Charter is key for the future of the United
Nations. If the Council cannot do this, then no
negotiations or talks about reforming the Council will
help.

I will not be asking for the floor after the voting. As
I have said, law and lawlessness are in the balance today.
It is up to the members of the Security Council to make
their choice, which they will do at this public meeting,
before the eyes of all the members of the international
community, in conditions of full transparency.

