Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. We
are particularly pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this informative meeting and I take this opportunity to
acknowledge the leadership of your country at the head
of the Security Council.

I want to also extend my appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and to the Secretary-General
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, for their briefings. They
have both provided important contributions in assessing

the ongoing cooperation between the two organizations
and how to continue strengthening it.

Finally, we recognize the presence of the Secretary-
General-elect of the OIC, Mr. Iyad Madani, and the
Minister Delegate for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Kingdom of Morocco, Ms. M'Barka Bouaida.

The role of regional organizations is key today in an
international system that has evolved since the creation
ofthe United Nations from an Organization comprising
51 countries to one with 193 countries. It is therefore
not surprising that the weight of and the differences
between different regional realities are reflected
in the creation and increasing participation of new
organizations. In that sense, the focus on integration
is an effective way to build regional consensus in this
globalized world.

On 6 August, during the Argentina's presidency
of the Security Council, we addressed the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security (see S/PV.7015). We agreed to ask
the Secretary-General to include recommendations
on ways to strengthen such cooperation in his next
biennial report to the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

That opportunity allowed us to share recent
developments in different regions of the world. In
the context of Latin America and the Caribbean, the
pro tempore Chair of the Union of South American
Nations clearly illustrated the constructive willingness
of South American societies, which is reflected in the
primary role that the young organization assumed in
successfully carrying out various mediation exercises,
enabling the peaceful resolution of disputes that have
arisen between our peoples as a result of circumstance.
We were also able to hear the President pro tempore
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States expound upon his work to reach a solution to one
of the most serious bilateral crises in recent years in
Latin America and the Caribbean.

It became clear that each regional or subregional
organization had its own level of development and
reflected different realities and needs. We therefore
consider it important that the United Nations establish
the forms and extent of cooperation with each of those
regional organizations in accordance with that diversity.

In that regard, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which has members on four continents, is
destined to have a major role in the peaceful settlement
of disputes. That is clear in the developments in recent
years with regard to peace and safety, as reflected
in the 10-year programme of action through 2015
adopted by the Extraordinary Session of the Islamic
Summit Conference in 2005 and the new Charter
of the organization in 2008. It is also clear that the
organization of Islamic Cooperation can play a role
as facilitator in promoting the peace process in the
Middle East, so that the parties and the countries of
the region can reach the ultimate goal of establishing
a just and lasting peace - the goal long sought by the
international community.

Therefore, as expressed in resolution 67/264,
adopted by consensus in the General Assembly and by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, we strongly
support the continuing cooperation between those bodies
with the common goal of seeking solutions to global
problems. This includes areas such as disarmament,
self-determination, the promotion of a culture of peace
through dialogue and cooperation, decolonization,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, the fight
against international terrorism, capacity-building,
the fight against pandemics and endemic diseases,
environmental protection, climate change, emergency
relief and rehabilitation, and technical cooperation.

The President of my country, Mrs. Cristina
Fernandez de Kirchner, stated at that same meeting
of 6 August that peace and security are not simply a
military concept. There are many examples throughout
the history of humankind that assure us that what really
builds societies and builds stability are the values and
ideals that a society and its millions of global partners
uphold. We understand that these values are shared by
all. Therefore, strengthening the cooperation between
the United Nations and the other entities of the United
Nations system and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and its organs and institutions contributes
to promoting the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. Therefore we call on the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to strengthen
the cooperative ties and channels between them and
with other regional organizations.

