Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico would like to express its
appreciation for the timely organization of this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
given the increasing number of civilian casualties in
various regions of the world as a result of either
collateral damage or deliberate military targeting by
groups or other actors in conflict.

As we hold this debate, hundreds of civilians are
dying in conflicts as diverse as those in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Gaza Strip,
Iraq, Somalia and the Sudan - to mention just a few
of the most obvious examples widely covered by the
mass media.

In the context of such countless human losses, it
is the most vulnerable groups, including women and
children, who suffer the effects of armed conflicts.
Gender-based violence continues to be an issue of
particular concern, as is the fact that women are
victims of sexual abuse and that a large percentage of
the children recruited by militias are girls, who are also
victims of violence and forced labour.

Impunity prevails for those responsible for the
many atrocities committed against the civilian
population in the vast majority of armed conflicts,
given that all too frequently the perpetrators are never
brought to justice.

Not only does our Organization have a moral
responsibility to eradicate such practices, but, over the
past few years, it has also given itself the necessary
tools to do so. It is vital that the organized international
community send a clear message that it will not
tolerate disregard of the basic norms of international
humanitarian law or of human rights. My delegation
therefore believes that a comprehensive strategy should
be put in place to address the most important aspects so
as to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, on the basis of the following principles.

First, there must be respect for humanitarian law.
It is imperative that the Security Council and the
relevant regional organizations require the parties to
conflict to abide by the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols, in particular the provisions of common
article 3, which already constitute customary law.

Secondly, with regard to strengthening the rule of
law and the fight against impunity, the creation of the
International Criminal Court represents an
unprecedented development because it complements
the efforts of national jurisdictions to bring to justice
those who commit crimes against humanity. The
Court's success is intrinsically linked to the need to
prevent the recurrence of deliberate attacks against
civilian populations and to prevent that practice in
other conflicts. The strengthening of the Court has
been reflected in the increasing number of cases under
its consideration. We encourage the Security Council to
appeal to the Court whenever the particular conditions
of a conflict so justify.

Thirdly, with regard to the protection of
humanitarian personnel, violence against humanitarian
personnel constitutes a war crime and directly affects
civilians as it deprives them of the necessary assistance
for their survival and consequently increases their
suffering. In that regard, it is imperative that the
Council ensure that deliberate attacks against
humanitarian personnel in the field do not go
unpunished and that all parties to a conflict guarantee
the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel to affected civilian populations.

Fourthly, concerning the strengthening of
coordination and clear mandates, we must encourage
broader coordination within the United Nations
between the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, and between those parts of the Secretariat and
regional organizations, in order to make the protection
of civilians in armed conflict a central objective of the
respective mandates. That also requires the provision
of the necessary resources and staff appropriately
trained to respond to the needs on the ground. In the
same way, the provisions of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1502 (2003), on women, peace and security and on
the protection of humanitarian personnel, respectively,
must be systematically integrated into all relevant
mandates provided for in resolutions on armed conflict
adopted by the Council.
Fifthly, concerning the full implementation of the
10-point action plan, the plan was introduced by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and offers a comprehensive strategy to support the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, its
provisions constitute for the most part a declaration of
good intentions, given the few commitments by States
towards its implementation. Subjects such as the
international protection of internally displaced persons
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in conflicts have not been sufficiently addressed by the
international community. Therefore, Mexico considers
it important that Member States carefully consider the
practical and tangible measures associated with the
implementation of the Action Plan.

One of the practical outcomes of the 2005
Summit was the adoption in the Outcome Document of
the principle of the responsibility of the international
community to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Almost two years later, we have witnessed enormous
difficulties in the application of that principle in
concrete situations and in translating the spirit that led
to its adoption into actions that have a genuine impact
on the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. The
resolutions adopted on the situation in Darfur illustrate
the difficulties encountered in that respect and the
diplomatic inertia to which the Secretary-General
recently alluded in a press article.

We all know that the debate about the
responsibility to protect involves fundamental
principles of international law. Despite the consensus
reached in 2005, we cannot deny that an atmosphere of
mistrust prevails over that subject. While some States
see in the new principle the mere continuance of
interventionist policies aimed at destabilizing political
regimes, others promote its application in a selective
manner, limiting its scope to cases significant for their
foreign policy interests. For that reason, it is essential
that States commit to reaching new agreements that
give true content to such an important principle in an
objective and impartial manner.
One of the lessons learned from the atrocities of
the past decade in the Balkans and Rwanda, among
other conflicts, is that the United Nations must not
remain passive and indifferent when faced with
situations that threaten to become new humanitarian
tragedies - hence, the importance of strengthening the
response mechanisms of the United Nations in order to
combat genocide and other crimes against humanity.
Clear rules must be defined, according to which the
Security Council would be able to authorize relevant
resolutions under Chapters VI or VII to act against
such crimes, while guaranteeing respect for
international law. That is a task of primary importance
for the General Assembly, in which the Mexican
delegation is ready to play an active role.

