Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Salame and Ambassador Skoog for their
comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya and on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

Despite some positive steps undertaken by the
Libyans, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the international community, the
violence and confrontations between the rival armed
groups continue to grow. We are very concerned about
the recent escalation in violence in and around Tripoli,
which has resulted in many casualties among civilians,
including children. In that regard, we would like to
commend the successful mediation efforts of Special
Representative Salame and UNSMIL in facilitating a
ceasefire agreement between the armed groups.

Such actions not only threaten the lives of hundreds
of civilians, they also undermine the progress that has
been made so far in implementing the United Nations
action plan. The latest escalation of the situation once
again proved how vital it is to immediately focus on the
country's largely unaddressed structural political issues
and on the multiplicity of armed actors on the ground
with conflicting agendas, the most alarming of which
is Libya's conversion into a centre for the activities of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as the Special
Representative said today. Every effort must therefore
be made to build and strengthen State structures, the
armed forces and the security sector, which in turn can
enhance political stability. There is an urgent need to
implement measures to improve the socioeconomic
conditions that can have a positive impact on the
political process and stability in the country.

My delegation fully supports the Secretary-
General's observation in his latest report (S/2018/780)
that while elections must be held in order to renew the
mandates of Libyan institutions and establish a new
executive authority, it is equally important that the
proper conditions be in place. Establishing a secure
atmosphere conducive to the successful holding of
elections and enacting appropriate electoral legislation
will ensure that the right conditions are created.

We call on all Libyan parties and stakeholders to
maintain a strong commitment to the common goal
of seeking a political settlement to the crisis. It will
be vital to ensure that the authorities in Tripoli and
Tobruk continue their engagement in order to resolve
their differences through an inclusive dialogue and
political means.

Lastly, the international efforts to advance political
reconciliation in Libya should be consolidated under the
umbrella of United Nations leadership. In that regard,
Kazakhstan commends the Special Representative's
efforts and encourages him to continue his engagement
with a wide range of actors with a view to broadening
their support and commitment to the political process.
We in the Security Council should remain united and
support his efforts to achieve a sustainable solution on
the ground.

