Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first extend a
particular word of thanks to Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing today, and to his
colleagues in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedicated and
outstanding work in fulfilment of the Council's mandate
and in support of the Afghan Government and people.
Staffan de Mistura and UNAMA are working under
extremely complex and challenging circumstances. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
very timely report (S/20ll/l20*). My delegation is
gratefiil to Ambassador Tanin for his welcome remarks
and for the close cooperation we enjoy with him and his
team.

Before I offer some remarks from my national
perspective, let me underline that my Government
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later by
the representative of the European Union. The
European Union is one of the major supporters of
stabilization in Afghanistan and the region.

Afghanistan is a national foreign policy priority
for the German Government. We consider it an honour

11-2662]
to be holding the pen on this important Security
Council dossier for the next two years and we look
forward to working with the Council in support of
Afghanistan. We thank our Turkish predecessors for
their valuable work and their continuous commitment,
in particular in the field of regional cooperation.

My Government will continue to support our
Afghan friends as we enter into a phase of concrete
transition. The Kabul process is essentially an
ambitious agenda for transition towards increasingly
Afghan-led processes. It corresponds to the need for
real Afghan empowerment, based on the rule of law
and national capacities.

Speaking for one of the major donor countries, let
me make on point crystal clear: transition does not
mean reduced international engagement, but rather a
change in our support in and for Afghanistan.
Transition will be gradual and conditions-based. The
character of the international engagement will focus
increasingly on training and capacity-building. Here,
UNAMA will continue to be in a unique position to
contribute to the empowerment of the Afghan people.

My Government shares the view of the Secretary-
General that, wherever we have achieved progress,
sustainability must be our key concern. This is of
particular relevance in the areas of good governance,
the rule of law and human rights and freedoms,
including the role of women. We commend the Afghan
Government's achievements to date and encourage it to
continue to give priority to these policy areas.

In the light of the transition, Germany is
concerned by the fact that the technical capacity for the
successful implementation of the Government's
national priority programmes is not yet in place
throughout the country. Especially in regions and areas
where early transition is planned, we call on UNAMA
and other partners to redouble their efforts in support
of the Afghan Government.

Sustainability and a successful transition will not
be possible without an inclusive political process.
Germany puts great hopes in the evolving
reconciliation process. We encourage UNAMA to
continue to support the Afghan Government in this
field.

We hope that the ongoing tensions around the
status of the parliament will be resolved soon, as they
are preventing it from effectively discharging its

functions as set out in the Constitution. The continued
support of the United Nations will also be essential for
further improving the sustainability of the electoral
system.

In a couple of days from now, at Nowruz on
21 March, President Karzai will announce the first
tranche of areas selected for transition to an Afghan
lead in security responsibilities.

Although the overall number of security incidents
remains alarming, Germany is encouraged by the
recent progress in building the necessary strength of
the Afghan security institutions. We are also pleased to
note that, despite regional disparities, the latest police
survey by the United Nations Development Programme
notes the significantly improved confidence of the
local population when compared to 2009.

The increasing number of civilian casualties is
intolerable. Germany notes with serious concern the
latest trends. At the same time, we also note and
welcome the continued progress made by Afghan and
international forces in avoiding civilian casualties.

Germany firmly supports the extension of the
Mission's mandate for 12 months, as recommended by
the Secretary-General and requested by the
Government of Afghanistan. I am glad to report that we
have been observing great unity in the Council's
ongoing negotiations on the UNAMA mandate. My
delegation wishes to underline, however, that the
Afghan Government is right in reminding the Council,
in the recent letter from its Foreign Minister (see S/2011/118), of our responsibility and commitment to
empowering the Afghan institutions, and that
sometimes the amount of goodwill of development
partners can also contribute to undermining Afghan
solutions to Afghan problems.

In this context, Germany supports a review of
United Nations support in the perspective of the next
mandate renewal in March 2012, as soon as we are in a
position to evaluate, on an informed basis, our first
experiences with transition and reconciliation. The
Bonn Conference in December, in response to a request
from our Afghan friends, was been timed to contribute
to such a process.

Let me end by emphasizing that it is the quality
of the cooperation between the United Nations and the
people of Afghanistan that will ultimately decide our
success. Given what we have achieved and invested,
my delegation is convinced that there is every reason to
continue to work together for a prosperous and secure
Afghanistan.

