The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Rwanda.

I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on the current crisis in the
Middle East, especially the situation in Gaza. I also
thank Ambassador Ryad Mansour, Permanent Observer
of the Observer State of Palestine, and Ambassador
Ron Prosor, Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, for their respective statements.

Since the beginning of this month, the Security
Council has issued three press statements on the situation
in the region, starting with the condemnation of the
kidnapping and killing of three Israeli teenagers and
of a Palestinian teenager. Last Thursday, the Security
Council convened an emergency meeting to discuss
this tragedy (see S/PV.7214), which was followed by
the third press statement of the month on the situation
in Israel and Palestine, issued on Saturday (SC/11472).
In that statement, Council members called for the
de-escalation of the situation, the restoration of calm,
the reinstitution of the November 2012 ceasefire, and
respect for international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians.

Unfortunately, the situation today in Gaza shows
that parties on the ground did not heed this call.
Hostilities have further escalated, leading to dire
humanitarian consequences. The conflict has now
claimed over 260 lives and left over 48,000 displaced.
We welcomed the short humanitarian pause in Gaza,
which had allowed the United Nations and partners to
deliver humanitarian assistance to thousands of people
in dire need. We call for more humanitarian pauses to
allow more deliveries to flow without hindrance.

We express our strong support for the ceasefire
agreement that was brokered by Egypt, as was that
of November 2012. We note that this proposal was
accepted by Israel, the Palestinian Authority and the
League of Arab States, but rejected by Hamas. We
call upon Hamas to immediately cease fire and stop
its indiscriminate rocket fire into Israel. Furthermore,
while we recognize the right of Israel to defend itself,
we call on the Israel Defense Forces to exercise
maximum restraint and ensure that civilians in Gaza
are protected.

To conclude, let me reaffirm that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict - the longest conflict on the
agenda of the Security Council - will end only with
the creation of a viable Palestinian State, living side
by side in peace and security with a secured State of
Israel. In this regard, we call on the Quartet, countries
ofthe region, the United States and other countries with
influence on the parties to redouble their efforts in order
to reach a political settlement and help the Palestinians
and Israelis to fulfil their legitimate aspirations to
peace, security and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10pm.
