Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe): Allow me first to
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are
confident that your wide experience and well-known
diplomatic skills will guide the work of the Council to a
successful conclusion. I also express our thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Salim Bin Mohammed
Al-Khussaiby of Oman, for his able stewardship of the
Council during the month of November.

We appreciate the efforts Argentina and other
interested delegations have made in spearheading
discussions on the important topic of consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries. These discussions are a continuation of the
1994 initiative by New Zealand and Argentina on the
same subject. It is our understanding that consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries are aimed at enhancing the effectiveness,
efficiency and credibility of the Security Council. They
complement the work of the Council.

Zimbabwe, as one of the troop contributors, finds the
current system of consultations between the Council and
troop contributors unsatisfactory; there is certainly room
for improvement. Current contacts between the Security
Council and troop contributors are more briefings by the
Council than consultations on substantive issues
pertaining to international peace and security in order to
enhance the decision-making process of the Council.

My delegation's position on this and other issues
was clearly enunciated in our statement at a plenary
meeting of the General Assembly during the debate on
reform and restructuring of the Security Council. It is,
however, important to observe that, under current
practice, it is the Council that decides to launch a peace-
keeping operation and that therefore determines the
mandate of that peace-keeping operation. Troop
contributors emerge only after the mandate has been has
been given. Member States thus are not able to influence
decisions of the Council during the informal consultations
which have become the hallmark of the Council's
decision-making mechanism in the post-cold-war period.
It is logical therefore to conclude that the general
membership, on whose behalf the Council acts, has no
role in determining the mandate. This style of decision-
making excludes the entire membership in an era in
which the virtues of democracy and transparency are
being preached. It is time we implemented Article 44 of
the Charter.

My delegation supports the proposal to
institutionalize the mechanism of consultations. This
would allow Member States to be involved in the
decision-making process by providing inputs to help the
Security Council make the decision to launch a peace-
keeping operation. The involvement of Member States
would assist the general membership to understand the

 

nature of the problems in all their aspects, determine the
risks involved and assess the duration of a given peace-
keeping operation. It would foster the spirit of
accountability of the Security Council to the general
membership, on whose behalf it acts, as called for in
General Assembly resolution 48/264. In our View, the
involvement of Member States would enhance the moral
authority, prestige and credibility of the Council at a time
when it appears that decisions to launch new operations are
being made elsewhere.

Having sat on this Council a few years ago, we realize
the pressure upon the Council to respond to emergency
situations. We are, however, convinced that meaningful
consultations by the Security Council would increase the
international community's confidence in the Council's
capacity to execute, in a judicious and objective manner, its
mandate as provided for in the Charter.

