Mr. Mielus (Poland): At the outset, I would like to
thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando for his briefing.

Noting the adoption of the new Constitution through
a referendum on 17 May, as well as the concerns about
the compatibility of some of its provisions with the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, Poland
welcomes the announcement by President Nkurunziza
that he does not intend to seek a fourth term in 2020,
thereby reaffirming the promise that he made to the
Burundian people in 2015.

At the same time, we are concerned over the
political situation in the country and the slow progress
of the intra-Burundian dialogue. Poland believes that
the President's announcement will need to be followed
by tangible steps to achieve political reconciliation. It
is the role of the authorities to ensure that the electoral
process in 2020 is free, fair, transparent and truly
inclusive, with the participation of all political parties
and the equal participation of women.

We recognize the Arusha Peace Agreement and its
provisions with regard to the need for a broad political
consensus and preventing the concentration of power
in a single institution or unit as the main instrument
for peace and stability in Burundi and in the whole
region. The intra-Burundian dialogue needs to be
continued with the active participation of all Burundian
stakeholders, since only an inclusive political dialogue
can ensure a sustainable and widely acceptable solution.

In that context, Poland would like to emphasize the
special role of the leaders of neighbouring countries
and the guarantors of the Arusha Agreement in order to
overcome the causes that are generating instability in
the region. We welcome the commitment of the African
Union and the East African Community (EAC) to a
peaceful resolution of the political situation in Burundi
and affirm our support for the facilitation led by the
EAC representative, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa.

Poland remains seriously concerned over the
human rights situation in the country. We are worried
about the reported intimidation of members of the
opposition as well as the limitations on political space,
an independent media and civil society. We strongly
condemn all violations and abuses in that regard by
whomsoever. Poland calls for the authorities to restore
effective cooperation with international institutions in
that regard. We urge the Government of Burundi to take
transparent steps to improve governance and respect
for human rights, to open up the public and democratic
space and to ensure the freedom of the media ahead of
the elections in 2020.

The situation in Burundi must be seen in the
broader regional context of the Great Lakes region. It
threatens to exacerbate the humanitarian and refugee
crisis in Burundi and in its neighbourhood.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the fact that
the Arusha Agreement gives hope not only to Burundi
but also to the entire region. It is now urgent to return to
the spirit of that Agreement and to preserve the country
as an inclusive and safe home for all its people.

