Mr. Kyslytsa (Ukraine): Before going into the
subject matter of today's discussion, I would like to
draw the attention of my colleagues around this table
that today, 17 July, the world commemorates World Day
for International Justice. Also, it was three years ago
today that the world learned of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7. Today our thoughts and prayers
are with the families and loved ones of every victim
of that tragedy. We also appreciate the attention the
Secretary-General gave to the matter in his statement
today on this sad anniversary. To ensure justice for
its victims and accountability for its perpetrators,
important steps have been taken recently. On 5 July, the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General were informed, through document S/2017/580,
about the joint decision of the joint investigation
team countries that the prosecution and trial of those
responsible for this atrocious crime would take
place in the Netherlands. On 7 July, Ukraine and the
Netherlands signed a bilateral treaty on international
legal cooperation in relation to the downing of Flight
MH-17. In that regard, we urge all States to take steps
to ensure full compliance with Council resolution 2166
(2014), which demands that all States cooperate fully
with efforts to establish accountability.
Turning to the subject under consideration today,
we note with great satisfaction that a significant
milestone was reached in stabilizing Iraq with the
recent liberation of Mosul. It is a welcome and much-
anticipated development that the Government of Iraq,
together with the coalition forces, succeeded in its
military operation. We hope that this victory over
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) will
accelerate its final elimination from the region.

However, those gains have come at a very high price,
since the operation has had severe effects on civilians
in the area. The humanitarian situation in the liberated
city remains dire, since much of Mosul lies in ruins
and a considerable number of people are still trapped in
the old city. Beyond that, in the city's general vicinity,
there is another serious challenge represented by the
700,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) who want
to return to their homes but who in some cases have
nothing left to return to. In that regard, we encourage
the Government of Iraq to work with its partners on
post-liberation initiatives aimed at rebuilding vital
infrastructure, ensuring respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, focusing on national
reconciliation and facilitating IDPs' safe and voluntary
return to their homes. We realize the extent of the
difficulties associated with such a momentous task
and hope that the Iraqi Government will receive the
assistance and support it so badly needs in mobilizing
the resources it requires to address those challenges.

Ukraine is encouraged by the commitment of Iraqi
stakeholders, who have been working tirelessly on a
national reconciliation process aimed at uniting the
people of Iraq, regardless of their ethnicity or religion.
Only an inclusive national reconciliation effort can heal
the wounds that the country has sustained and help to
achieve a lasting national settlement. In addition, proper
attention must be given to the issue of accountability
for all those who committed crimes against the
civilian population during the conflict. There can be
no place for Victor's justice, which would undermine
the national reconciliation process. We also emphasize
how important it is for the Government of Iraq, with
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and its international partners, to conduct
comprehensive security-sector reform, with the goal of
establishing trained, professional defence and security
forces committed to carrying out their duties on a basis
of human rights and humanitarian principles. That
aspect is critical, since it will help to prevent sectarian
Violence in the area and avoid any repetition of the
events that occurred in Ramadi and Fallujah after they
were liberated.

Lastly, I would like to say that I believe that in the
near future the Government of Iraq will announce ISIL's
final defeat on Iraqi soil in this Chamber, something
that we will all gladly welcome.

