The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer ofthe Observer State ofPalestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.

"The Security Council expresses grave concern
regarding the deterioration in the situation as a
result of the crisis related to Gaza and the loss of
civilian lives and casualties.

"The Security Council calls for full respect
of international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilian populations, and reiterates the
need to take appropriate steps to ensure the safety
and well-being of civilians and their protection.

"The Security Council expresses strong
support for the call by international partners and
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for
an immediate and unconditional humanitarian
ceasefire, allowing for the delivery of urgently
needed assistance, and they urge all parties to accept
and fully implement the humanitarian ceasefire
into the Bid period and beyond. The Security
Council commends the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the United States Secretary of
State John Kerry for their efforts in this regard.

"The Security Council also calls on parties
to engage in efforts to achieve a durable and
fully respected ceasefire, based on the Egyptian
initiative. In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the efforts of international partners
and the convening of the international meeting to
support the ceasefire held in Paris on 26 July 2014
and urges all concerned regional and international
parties to vigorously support efforts to consolidate
an agreement between the parties.

"The Security Council emphasizes that civilian
and humanitarian facilities, including those of the
United Nations, must be respected and protected,
and calls on all parties to act consistently with this
principle.

"The Security Council calls for the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and
stresses the need for immediate provision of
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip, including through
urgent additional contributions to the United
Nations Relief Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. The Security Council
recognizes and commends the vital role played
by the Agency, along with other United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations, in
addressing the critical humanitarian needs in Gaza.

"The Security Council urges the parties
and the international community to achieve a
comprehensive peace based on the vision of a
region where two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side in peace with secure
and recognized borders as envisioned in Security
Council resolution 1850 (2008)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/l3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 a.m.
