Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting and allowing us
to take this vote.

The images from space of North-East Asia at night
Show brightness and prosperity surrounding a dark,
lonely space that is North Korea. Those images are a
good illustration of where the North Korean regime is
today. It is alone. It is dark. And it is getting darker.

North Korea's neighbours, its trading partners and
the entire international community are united against its
dangerous and illegal actions. Today's resolution 2375
(2017) builds on what were already the deepest-cutting
sanctions ever imposed on North Korea. We have
been down this road before. The Security Council has
expressed its condemnation and has imposed sanctions.
But today is different. We are acting in response to a
dangerous new development - North Korea's test on
3 September of what it claims was a hydrogen bomb.
Today we are saying that the world will never accept
a nuclear-armed North Korea. And today the Security
Council is saying that if the North Korean regime does
not halt its nuclear programme, we will act to stop
it ourselves.

Over the years, we have learned many things about
the North Korean regime. We have learned that it does
not care about being a part of the community of decent,
law-abiding nations. It has violated every United
Nations resolution against it. We have learned that
the North Korean regime does not care about its own
people. It has denied them the most basic necessities in
order to finance its weapons programme. And we have
learned that half-measures against the regime have
not worked.

Previous efforts to bring North Korea to the
negotiating table have failed. It has repeatedly walked
back every commitment it has made. Today the
Security Council has acted in a different way. Today we
are attempting to take the future of the North Korean
nuclear programme out of the hands of its outlaw
regime. We are done trying to prod the regime to do the
right thing. We are now acting to stop it from having the
ability to continue to do the wrong thing. We are doing
that by hitting North Korea's ability to fuel and fund
its weapons programme. Oil is the lifeblood of North
Korea's effort to build and deliver a nuclear weapon.
Today's resolution reduces the oil provided to North
Korea by almost 30 per cent, by cutting off more than
55 per cent of the supply of its gas, diesel and heavy
fuel oil. Furthermore, today's resolution completely
bans supplies to North Korea of natural gas and other
oil by-products that could be used as substitutes for the
reduced petroleum. That will cut deep.

Moreover, a large portion of North Korea's revenues
comes from exports - revenues that it uses to fund its
nuclear programme. Last month, we adopted resolution
2371 (2017), which bans its coal and iron exports.
Today's resolution bans all of its textile exports. That
is an almost $800 million hit to its revenues. With these
new, stronger sanctions added to those adopted last
month, more than 90 per cent of North Korea's publicly
reported exports are now fully banned. Moreover, the
resolution also puts an end to the regime's ability to
make money from the 93,000 North Korean citizens it
sends to work overseas and whom it taxes heavily. This
ban will eventually starve the regime of an additional
$500 million or more in annual revenues. And beyond
the $1.3 billion in annual revenues that we will cut from
North Korea, new maritime authorities will help us
stop it from obtaining funds by using ships to smuggle
coal and other prohibited materials around the world.
Furthermore, the resolution prohibits all joint ventures
with the regime, resulting in a significant amount of
lost revenue. But more important, the regime can no
longer obtain the foreign investments, technology
and know-how that are critically needed for its
commercial industries.

Finally, today's resolution imposes asset freezes on
the most crucial entities of the North Korean regime,
affecting both the military and the Government itself.
In short, these are by far the strongest measures ever
imposed on North Korea. They give us a much better
chance ofhalting the regime's ability to fuel and finance
its nuclear and missile programmes. But we all know
that those steps will work only if all nations implement
them completely and aggressively.

Today's resolution would not have happened
without the strong relationship that has developed
between President Trump and Chinese President Xi
Jinping, and we greatly appreciate the fact that both
teams are working with us. We have seen additional
encouraging signs that other nations in Asia have
stepped up to the plate. The Philippines has cut off all
trade with Pyongyang. Thailand has drastically cut
its economic ties to North Korea. And States much
farther away are also doing their part. Mexico recently
declared the North Korean Ambassador to its country
persona non grata. Along with the strict enforcement of
sanctions, those are important steps towards complete
international unity. They make it clear that all nations
can act to deny North Korea the funds to build its
nuclear arsenal.

Today is a solemn day in the United States. It is
the sixteenth anniversary of the terrorist attacks that
killed nearly 3,000 innocent people, most of them in
this very city. It hurts as much today as it did 16 years
ago. We will never forget the victims of 11 September.
And we will never forget the lesson that people who
have evil intentions must be confronted. That day, the
United States saw that mass murder could come from
a clear blue sky, on a beautiful Tuesday morning. But
today the threat to the United States and the world is
not coming out of the blue. The North Korean regime
has demonstrated that it will not act on its own to end
its nuclear programme. The civilized world must do
what the regime refuses to do. We must stop its march
towards a nuclear arsenal with the ability to deliver it
anywhere in the world. We must do that by cutting off
the fuel and the funding that support it.

We do not take pleasure in further strengthening
sanctions today. We are not looking for war. The North
Korean regime has not yet passed the point of no return.
Ifit agrees to stop its nuclear programme, it can reclaim
its future. If it proves that it can live in peace, the world
will live in peace with it. On the other hand, if North
Korea continues its dangerous path, we will continue
with further pressure. The choice is theirs.

