Mr. Lovald (Norway): Norway aligns itself with
the statement made by the presidency of the European
Union. In addition, we would like to emphasize the
following elements.

Consistent with our principled position on
extrajudicial killings, Norway condemns the
assassination of Hamas leader Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi.
We do recognize Israel's right to defend herself against
terror. However, that does not justify actions such as
that carried out by the Israeli Defense Forces in Gaza
last Saturday. Not only is the use of extrajudicial
killings contrary to international law, it is also
counterproductive in that it only contributes to further
raising the level of violence in the Middle East. The
vicious circle of violence and counter-violence must be
broken. We call on all parties to refrain from further
acts of aggression. We urgently appeal to the parties to
return to the road map for peace. Only a negotiated
solution can be a valid basis for peace.

Norway would welcome a withdrawal of all
settlers and the Israeli Defence Force from the Gaza
Strip. If implemented in an appropriate manner
consistent with the road map, the withdrawal plan
announced by Prime Minister Sharon can be an
important step forward.

Final status issues can be resolved only through
negotiations between the parties concerned. Their
outcome can in no manner be prejudged by unilateral
steps, nor do unilateral measures multiply Israel's
responsibilities deriving from Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and other relevant
Council resolutions. Provided certain conditions are
met, however, a withdrawal from Gaza and other
settlements, as announced by Prime Minister Sharon,
will be supported by the international community. If
the result is that the implementation of the road map is
given new impetus, that will inspire international
donors to make further contributions aimed at
alleviating the plight of the Palestinians and promoting
the reform of the Palestinian Authority.

It will be vital to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority is fully capable of taking on the
responsibility of governing the territories from which
Israel withdraws. The international community must do
its share to make sure that the necessary capabilities
are created. However, Israel must also contribute to
ensuring a smooth transition, including through the
necessary coordination with the Palestinian Authority.

Only a negotiated, two-State solution based on
relevant Security Council resolutions can ensure lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East.

