Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Madam President, I
join previous speakers in thanking you for presiding
over this important debate. It is commendable that
the Council has continued its practice of holding
open debates on the protection of civilians, featuring
briefings by the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-
General Amos, High Commissioner for Human
Rights Pillay, and Director for International Law and
Cooperation Spoerri of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC).

Today's debate offers the Council an opportunity
to evaluate progress on key issues, such as on the
implementation of previously adopted resolutions on
this matter, and to indicate areas where additional
focus is necessary, including enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and strengthened
accountability for violations. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by parties in conflict
should be viewed as key elements in the Council's
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security.

We acknowledge the usefulness of discussing in
the Council, on a regular basis, issues relevant to the
protection of civilians and note with appreciation the
continuing efforts ofthe ICRC. We commend the latter's
role in the promotion of international humanitarian law
and monitoring compliance with it. In recent years,
Member States and civil society groups have increased
their efforts to address the protection of civilians in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In its previous
resolutions and presidential statements, the Council has
recognized that respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of protection. We affirm
that the protection of civilian populations should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflicts.

The Secretary-General's reports have also
contributed to the consideration of this critical issue
and have highlighted the need to translate normative
commitments into concrete improvements in order to
enhance compliance with international humanitarian
law. Therefore, we share the views expressed by some
participants in this debate, who have called for more
systematic attention to be paid to the protection of
civilians.

We remain alarmed by the worsening of the
humanitarian situation of the civilian population in
Syria and condemn all attacks, kidnappings and terrorist
acts that indiscriminately target civilians, including
minority groups. For Armenia, the situation in Syria is
not just another news headline. We continue to receive
refugees that are deeply worried about the escalation
of violence. Over 100,000 Armenians remain in that
multiconfessional and multi-ethnic country, among
growing violence and an escalating humanitarian crisis.
We have seen their homes and churches destroyed or
damaged, their safety and security taken away from
them. As the conflict continues, the humanitarian
situation worsens. A great number of Armenians in
Aleppo and Damascus are struggling to survive amid
unbearable conditions together with many Syrian
citizens.

We are convinced that to address that kind of
situation, we must abandon selective approaches to
violations of international humanitarian law. There
must also be strict adherence to human rights standards.

Armenia believes that the international community
must effectively seek thorough compliance by
all parties to armed conflict with the norms of
international humanitarian law and recommend that
the parties take all necessary measures to ensure rapid
and unimpeded access by humanitarian actors. We also
believe that increased efforts are essential to strengthen
accountability for mass atrocities. It is commendable
that for the last two decades the Council has continued
to focus on the responsibility of States to end impunity
and to thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for grave violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law to avoid the
recurrence of such violations and to seek justice.

As the Secretary-General notes in his latest report
(S/2012/376), the issue of reparations also should be
addressed, as victims often require assistance and
justice.

This March, the Human Rights Council adopted a
resolution on the prevention of genocide that, inter alia,
stresses the importance of the promotion of truth, justice
and reparations and that perpetrators should be held
criminally accountable at the national and international
levels. The resolution also affirms the primary
responsibility of States to protect their populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, which is part of our common
responsibility to protect. Strengthening accountability
based on truth and justice therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.

In the presidential statement adopted two weeks
ago (S/PRST/2013/12), the Council emphasized that
ending impunity is essential in a conflict and post-
conflict society's efforts to come to terms with past
serious crimes, and in preventing future crimes,
under international law. Armenia strongly shares
that approach in working to address the peaceful and
political resolution of disputes in different parts of the
world.

In conclusion, let me mention that Armenia
supports the implementation of resolutions previously
adopted by the Council, in particular resolution
1894 (2009), which provides important guidance
to ensure the effective protection of populations in
armed conflicts. We therefore welcome Argentina's
initiative to hold this open debate. It offers a valuable
opportunity to translate advancement at the normative
level into tangible progress on the ground and renew
our commitment to the protection of civilians.

