Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I feel it is my duty to convey to you,

Mr. President, the condolences of the Government and
people of the Sudan for the Chinese who were killed in
cold-blood in a barbaric and heinous terrorist crime
that reflects the destructive approach of the Justice and
Equality Movement and its goals. The crime followed
through on the Movement's previous well-known
threats against the Chinese presence in the region and
deserves strong condemnation. In May this year, in its
notorious efforts to spread the crisis from Darfur to
other areas, it attacked the Sudanese capital itself.
Through you, Mr. President, I should like to convey
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims,
to wish a swift recovery to the wounded and to express
the hope that those still being held captive will be
released.

In addition, I should like to congratulate you once
again, Mr. President, on your assumption of the post of
Permanent Representative of China, a country that has
strong relations with our mother continent, Africa, and
is linked to the Sudan by strong ties of friendship and
communication. I am also pleased and proud to see you
presiding over the Security Council for the current
month, as you and your friendly country are well
known for your principles and for upholding norms and
values based on the rich history, culture and
civilization of China, with its ancient historical roots.

Furthermore, I should like to commend Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-
Secretary-General for Field Support, for their tireless
and fruitful efforts since they assumed their posts. I
wish both of them every success in establishing
constructive and transparent working relations with
Member States.

The crime of murdering the five Chinese citizens
occurred in the context of several other considerations
and actions and as a reaction to the momentum for
peace that is being felt throughout the Sudan as a result
of the launching of the Sudan People's Initiative. It was
further proof of the anti-peace posture of that
movement. But the Government of the Sudan remains
the first to attend all forums and negotiations without
any hesitation or conditions, regardless of time or
place. It is the Government that has unilaterally and
repeatedly renewed the ceasefire out of its conviction
that there is no alternative to peace. Peace is the sole
strategic option of the Government and the people of
the Sudan in all their political diversity - hence, the
Sudan People's Initiative to achieve a political
settlement to the Darfur crisis on the basis of an
unprecedented national consensus regarding national
objectives and their priority at this stage.

As all Council members are aware, the Sudan
People's Initiative is neither an isolated effort nor
parallel to regional and international efforts, but it rather
supplements the efforts of Mr. Djibril Bassole', African
Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur,
and other efforts being made within the framework of
the African-Arab initiative led by Qatar. In particular,
peace will be built by the sons and daughters of the
Sudan, and the international and regional communities
should help the Sudanese people to attain that objective
by supporting and enhancing their efforts. We therefore
hope, now more than ever before, that those promising
efforts will succeed within the national movement
represented by the Sudan People's Initiative, which is
being led by all Sudanese political parties, both the
Government and the opposition.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the
committees that were mandated to discuss and submit
proposals on various aspects of the Darfur crisis have
accomplished their task. They are: the committee on
development and services; the committee on internally
displaced persons, refugees and voluntary returns; the
committee on peace and justice; the committee on
reconciliation and social peace; the committee on
foreign aspects; the committee on information; the
committee on security; and the Committee on the
choice of solutions.

Only yesterday, the Presidential Council began to
consider the committees' proposals for submission to a
general conference of the participants so that they can
be adopted as an official document of the people of the
Sudan that reflects their views and ideas and that
constitutes a framework for producing a Sudanese
resolution of the problems in Darfur. Perhaps the only
absent factor will be the Security Council, which we
expect to take positive measures vis-a-vis the leaders
of the non-signatory movements to cause them to join
the national consensus rather than relying on the
military option to attain their objectives.

If the peace process is experiencing obvious
momentum, the deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is also making reasonable progress, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of UNAMID (S/2008/659). Those who

follow all developments related to the Operation's
deployment will realize that the Government of the
Sudan, having reaffirmed its commitment to resolution
1769 (2007), is backing up its words with deeds to
honour that commitment. The Government was fully
prepared to carry out its strategy to deploy 80 per cent
of the Operation by the end of this year instead of the
end of March 2009. The report, in its paragraphs 10 to
14, lists various reasons for delaying the attainment of
that objective until the end of March 2009.

Those reasons are mere justifications, and are not
the fault of the Government of the Sudan. The
Government has been striving to remove all obstacles
and has been building channels of communication,
coordination and positive action with the United
Nations and the African Union. The most recent
example was the meeting of the tripartite mechanism -
which includes the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations - on 7 October
in Khartoum, in which Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra participated. As members can see from the
report, the Government of the Sudan responded to all
the concerns and requests made by the United Nations,
which were addressed in the agreement signed at the
end of the meeting. For example, the UNAMID Liaison
Office at El Fasher, led by a senior officer, includes
various State institutions and organs in Darfur in order
to ensure the synergy necessary for all its procedures
and processes. Other liaison offices have been
established in the various sectors of the three states of
Darfur.

The agreement also addressed all aspects of the
use of airports, including travel authorizations, customs
clearances, the best ways to use local and regional
construction and transport capacities and the
mobilization of resources. In this forum, I should like
to reaffirm my country's full commitment to implement
the agreement, which will be followed up during the
forthcoming visit of Ms. Susanna Malcorra to the
Sudan, on 16 November 2008.

The facts and events described in the report
regarding security and humanitarian conditions clearly
reflect the destructive acts and practices of sabotage,
banditry and targeting of humanitarian workers carried
out by armed groups and the incidents in which
European tourists were kidnapped and cars were
attacked. The politicization, militarization and arming
of camps for internally displaced persons can easily
been seen in the Kalma camp in Southern Darfur,

which has become a threat to UNAMID's operations
from Nyala airport at a time when the Government of
the Sudan, mindful of its responsibilities, is attempting
to implement the humanitarian protocol it signed
together with the United Nations through a high-level
mechanism that includes the Government of the Sudan,
the United Nations and the representatives of relevant
humanitarian agencies and organizations.

It is also important that I refer to the fact that the
agreement signed in the context of the last meeting of
the Tripartite Mechanism also included several
paragraphs on facilitating humanitarian operations, in
particular to provide protection to humanitarian
convoys. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that my country continues to be fully
committed to facilitating humanitarian operations and
to providing all the assistance necessary to achieve
their objectives.

We appreciate the fact that the new report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/659) includes a full
paragraph on the Sudan's efforts with regard to justice
and accountability. Paragraph 65 of the report refers to
the appointment of a Special Prosecutor, who is
currently carrying out his duties in all the States of
Darfur in total impartiality and with the high level of
professionalism characteristic of the Sudan's judiciary.
That neatly complements previous efforts to amend
criminal procedures to establish special courts for the
States of Darfur.

Paragraph 79 of the report states that

"It is unclear what impact the 14 July
application by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court for an arrest warrant against
President Omar Al-Bashir will have on peace and
security in Darfur and in the Sudan".

I do not think that anyone should underestimate
the real threats that may emanate from that shameful
procedure. Suffice it to say that most members of the
international community - as represented by the
African Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of
Arab States and the African, Caribbean and Pacific
States - have warned of the tragic consequences of
that measure and the direct threat it poses to peace in
the Sudan and the entire region.

With regard to relations between the Sudan and
Chad, I am very pleased to inform the Council that the

good offices being deployed to normalize and
strengthen relations between our two fraternal
countries are making good progress. We have already
agreed to return ambassadors to the two capitals
between 7 and 10 November 2008.

The Government of the Sudan once again calls on
the United Nations to fulfil its obligations with regard
to the full implementation of the heavy support
package, which is the basis for the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Once that is complete, everything necessary for
the Operation will be in place. We also call on the
international community to provide for the remaining
logistical needs of the mission, which have been talked
about for a long time.

In conveying to the Council all the positive
developments on all tracks, my country's Government
hopes that the international community will support
and strengthen those efforts in order to safeguard peace
from the risks posed by sabotage and irresponsible
undertakings and the harmful mixed messages being
sent.

In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community to work effectively and promptly with
armed groups to convince them to lay down their arms
and to respond positively to the calls for peace.

