Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, for your initiative of
organizing this meeting as an opportunity to continue
our analysis of the state of peacekeeping operations.
I would also like to thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his statement and for his efforts. I would also like
to express my gratitude for the statements delivered by
the Force Commanders. I also welcome the presence
of the other generals who are joining us today. Their
perspectives and experience on the ground contribute
greatly to today's debate.

Colombia is encouraged by the progress made by
the United Nations system towards attainable goals for
the peaceful coexistence of peoples, through judicious
cooperation of United Nations peacekeeping operations
with regional organizations to build national and
regional capacities and to develop strategies to increase
peacekeeping operations' effectiveness in attaining
sustainable results. In our view, it is crucial to build on
work already done towards setting common goals and
taking systematic steps towards them.
The Security Council, the General Assembly,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat must
increase their cooperation in defining clear and realistic
mandates, providing sufficient resources and planning
in the long term. It is critical for the General Assembly
and the Security Council to enhance dialogue and
cooperation so that decisions taken will enjoy broad
support and mandates will be in line with available
resources.

The challenges facedbypeacekeeping missions-and
the expectations of them - are ever greater, and security
conditions on the ground are ever more complex,
even as resources are limited. Mandates should be
devised with the political context and particularities
of each specific situation in mind, and with a View
to the available resources. We welcome initiatives to
improve communication among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. We
stress the importance of triangular cooperation, as a
mechanism to promote cooperation and trust, in facing
peacekeeping challenges. More meetings should be held
with troop-contributing countries prior to renewing
mandates in order to discuss substantive issues with
practical implications for the conduct of missions.

It is important to increase the number of troop-
and police-contributing countries, because developing
nations currently provide the majority of uniformed
peacekeepers. We reiterate the importance of building
the capacities necessary to effectively carry out
mandated tasks. We commend the progress made by
the Secretariat in promoting capacities in order to
improve effectiveness on the ground in matters of the
intelligence, personnel in the field, capacity-building,
human resources and equipment necessary to ensure
smooth and timely deployments. The necessary
measures should be taken to increase security for
troops on the ground and to provide them with adequate
equipment. We recognize and commend the progress
made in monitoring and intelligence technology.

Stabilization and reconstruction require strategic
plans to strengthen national capacities in affected or
host countries, as well as social, political and sustainable
development programmes. No strategy for lasting peace
can overlook the important role that peacekeeping
operations play in stabilizing host countries by
supporting institutions and laying the groundwork
necessary for peacebuilding. The troops, police and
civil personnel who make up peacekeeping operations
do support work that is closely tied to peacebuilding.
In that regard, a coordinated approach, with improved
communication and dialogue with the Peacebuilding
Commission, would be very helpful in identifying gaps
in international assistance and support. The Commission
should be invited to contribute its knowledge and
experience to Security Council debates. It could also
be instrumental in helping the United Nations broker
ties with international financial institutions, which are
critical to countries' revitalization.

Colombia continues to stand ready to contribute to
peacekeeping operations to the extent it can and to take
an active part in discussions about how to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping efforts.

