Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing
and her commitment.

I associate myself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

Everyone knows that there are major challenges
in Haiti. This country, which we hold dear, has not
been spared by the scourges of poverty, insecurity and
natural disasters during its recent history. The structural
difficulties it faces call for a sustained and long-term
commitment by the international community. France
fully plays its role through its general contributions to
United Nations operations, funds and programmes, but
also bilaterally, as demonstrated by the recent visit of
the President of the Republic to Port-au-Prince, in May.
As Council members know, during this important visit,
President Hollande announced a pledge of €50 million
for the education sector over the next five years.

It would not be fair to depict only the dark and
negative side of Haiti. It is also a country where many
dynamic forms of progress are at work at various levels,
which are as many reasons to hope, and which we
should appreciate and wholeheartedly encourage.

The first and foremost reason for hope is democratic
progress. The organization of the long-awaited and
desired elections is finally here. The first round of the
legislative and senatorial elections were held and the
results were published. While we naturally deplore the
few cases of violence in which there was an unacceptable

loss of life and some irregularities, those incidents were
contained and duly noted. Most important, the security
of the electoral process as a whole was ensured. The
Provisional Electoral Council took up its responsibilities
and announced, in particular, the organization of new
voting in one quarter of the polling stations and the
removal of the candidates involved in the unrest.

France expresses the hope that the presidential
elections, whose first round will be held in a few
days, are conducted in a calm, serene and democratic
atmosphere. These elections should continue to be free,
transparent and inclusive. The continued rigorous work
undertaken by the Provisional Electoral Council and
the responsible commitment of all political actors will
be decisive in this regard.

Eleven years after its establishment and the
approval of its first mandate, it is clear that the current
configuration of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) is no longer truly
adapted to the realities of the situation in Haiti. Much
progress has indeed been made since 2004, first and
foremost in the area of security. Haiti and its people
can now rely on a national police force whose level of
professionalism and growing capacity should enable
it in the near future to independently ensure the
maintenance of order throughout the territory.

Several signals recorded in the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667) are encouraging
and worth noting: the country's security situation has
remained generally stable since the adoption of the
previous mandate of the force, including during the
holding of the first round of the legislative and senatorial
elections; the Haitian National Police now operates
effectively at the front line in almost all situations; and
the level of violence in departments where the military
component has withdrawn has not increased.

Clearly, then, we need to do some deep thinking on
the future of the United Nations presence and role in
Haiti. We need to know how to collectively acknowledge
the achievements obtained with the support of
MINUSTAH in Haiti, while ensuring, naturally, that
the gains are maintained. A consolidation process for
that purpose was begun last year; it is important to
bring it to completion.

It is in fact our responsibility to develop the means
deployed locally to best meet the needs of the country
and its people. The credibility of the work of this
Council depends on it, as does its effectiveness. France
is convinced that it is now time to move from a logic of
maintaining peace to a logic of peacebuilding in Haiti.
Haiti's long-term security and stabilization rests on the
assumption of responsibility by the Haitian authorities
and the sustainable development of the island.

A United Nations presence is obviously highly
necessary today. However, it must be recalibrated
around the main objective of strengthening the capacity
of Haitian institutions, particularly in the areas of
security, rule of law, governance and respect for human
rights. Children's rights, dysfunction in the judicial and
prison systems and the problems of access to economic
and social rights in the context of reconstruction are
still of concern. It is particularly crucial to address
the significant gaps that remain in these areas, where,
although the Haitian authorities are proactive, they are
still not equal to the task.

France therefore warmly welcomes the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that a
strategic review be conducted in Haiti. We hope
that this leads to the presentation to the Council of
concrete policy recommendations on the future of
the presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti
in order to complete the consolidation effort within
MINUSTAH, in the interest, once again, of Haiti and
its people. We should like this exercise to be carried
out the day after the conclusion of the electoral cycle in
progress, and sufficiently in advance of the end of the
next and possibly the last mandate-which the Council
will consider next week- provided that the security
conditions remain unchanged, of course.

The situation in Haiti challenges us all. The support
of the international community and the United Nations
commitment remain more necessary than ever. But our
responsibility in this Council is to do what it takes for
our efforts to be as appropriate and effective as possible.
The challenges facing Haiti and the expectations of its
population do not allow us the luxury of delaying before
taking the necessary decisions.

