Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me begin by
extending to our colleagues in the delegation of the
United States our condolences with regard to the pilots
who lost their lives in February.

We are today addressing a very sensitive and
delicate technical subject. We have had to decode and
digest information from charts and graphs; some of us are
not very good at that. Our task has not been made easy
by the nature of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) report. It makes the matter under
review subject to conflicting interpretations, a state of
affairs that is compounded by the history of the area in
which the incident of 24 February 1996 took place. Our
comments this afternoon are therefore a synthesis of the
facts as we understand them from the ICAO report and of
our interpretation of the Convention on International Civil
Aviation and its annexes.

My delegation made its position very clear earlier
this year regarding the absolute necessity for States to
refrain from the use of weapons against civil aircraft.
There is no doubt in our minds that civil aircraft should
be rendered whatever assistance they may need at all
times whenever they enter the national airspace of any
State unannounced or through an ungazetted entry point.
In the normal course of their operations such aircraft
would definitely lose their way. They should ordinarily be
intercepted and guided to a landing strip, where the true
facts regarding their presence in the area may be
established.

Equally, civil aircraft should never be used for
purposes inconsistent with the spirit and intent of the
Chicago Convention. Civil aircraft that take to the air
from a country of registration, ignore air corridors they
have logged with the control towers and deliberately
penetrate the airspace of another country for the purpose
of fomenting civil disorder or disturbance there should be
seriously warned against engaging in such acts of
provocation. While States should indeed refrain from the
use of weapons against civil aircraft, they should not be
unnecessarily provoked into taking actions they would
otherwise ordinarily avoid taking.

 

In short, civil aircraft should not be used for the
provocation of States under any circumstances, and States
should not shoot down such aircraft on sight, as this puts
the lives of those on board, and the aircraft, in danger.

The draft resolution before us is generally acceptable
to my delegation to the extent that it reaffirms the
principles enshrined in the Convention on International
Civil Aviation and its annexes. We would have been
happier, however, if the language of paragraphs 2 and 6
had been drafted differently.

The incident of 24 February 1996 was most
unfortunate indeed, and we hope there will be no similar
tragic event in the future.

