Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate and for presenting the concept note that
guides our discussions today (S/2012/814, annex). I
also welcome the comments by the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Eliasson.

Despite international efforts in the fight against
piracy, that phenomenon continues to affect the
safety of navigation, trade and the development of the
countries on some of the major international shipping
lanes, particularly in the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of
Guinea. Although the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/783) refers, with respect to piracy off the coast
of Somalia, to a significant drop in the number ofattacks
carried out over the past year, the total number of pirate
attacks remains high. Also worrying is information
about the presence and activities of pirates on land, the
high number of hostages remaining in captivity, the
cases of violence against crews and their use as human
shields.
Piracy is yet another of the pernicious consequences
of the institutional fragility and precarious economic
conditions that obtain in Somalia. Although Somalia
has taken important steps towards the goal of peace and
stability and the efforts of the international community
to provide safe navigation, forestall attacks and capture
pirates have yielded some positive results, we believe
that security off the coast of Somalia is formed on land.
That is why Somalia, as the main source and victim
of this crime, must fully participate in solving the
problem.

Somali authorities bear the main responsibility
in the fight against piracy off their coast and for
re-establishing security, political stability, the rule of
law and economic development. However, it is Vital that
the international community continue to lend support,
assistance and capacity-building while acknowledging
the difficulties facing a State in the process of
consolidation. Any stable and lasting solution to the
problem of piracy must be founded on broad initiatives in
which the economic, security, judicial and penitentiary
components are implemented simultaneously.

An approach of that nature must be formulated
with regard to the prevention and punishment of acts
of piracy. It is vital that the Somali people perceive
piracy as an illegal activity that limits their options
for development. It is therefore essential to continue
the efforts of the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia through projects aimed at informing Somalis
about the dangers of piracy and discouraging young
people fromjoining networks dedicated to that criminal
activity.

In order to improve security, the international
community must continue to lend its support to the
security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia so
that they are able to deploy on land and in their coastal
waters. It is also essential to optimize the monitoring
and identification of violations of the general and total
embargo on arms and to impose sanctions as necessary,
given the devastating effects that the constant flow of
weapons has in the context of Somalia.

The Federal Government must give priority to
reforming the criminal and procedural framework
so that the legislation is consistent with the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Equally, it
is important to re-establish Somalia's sovereignty over
its maritime waters and resources. That means that
one of the fundamental areas where the international
community and particularly the United Nations are
called upon to provide technical assistance to Somalia
is that of the legal issue of the delimitation of maritime
areas so that they can be in line with international law
and make it possible to clearly establish its territorial
sea, the exclusive economic zone and the maritime
borders with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen.

All of that will contribute to strengthening
Somalia's capacity to exercise sovereignty over its
maritime waters and resources and protect the marine
environment and its resources, and will facilitate the
development of fishing and port-linked activities as
viable economic alternatives for the people, as opposed
to piracy and ancillary criminal activities.

The international community must apply the

lessons learned in other regions that have been affected
by this phenomenon in the past. Indeed, in the Strait
of Malacca, the incidence of piracy has decreased
thanks to the commitment of national authorities and to
regional and international cooperation, which included
coordinated maritime patrols, overflights, the exchange
of intelligence and joint actions against pirates and
those who gave them support and shelter on land.

In the regions afflicted by this criminal activity
there also happens to be an extremely high level of transit
in goods and resources under particular geographic
conditions, coupled with politically and economically
unstable situations, so that a stable and lasting solution
to the problem of piracy requires that preventive action
at sea be accompanied by action on land, including
strengthening the rule of law and building capacity and
institutions that can ensure governability, development
and the creation of economic alternatives for the people.

