Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In conveying a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Rafael Catala,
Minister of Justice of Spain, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela thanks the President for convening this
important briefing to address an issue of major interest
to our country, namely, strengthening international
judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism. We
would also like to thank today's briefers.

Given the significance and scope of this debate
in the efforts to boost international cooperation in the
area of combating terrorism, our delegation joined the
consensus in voting in favour of resolution 2322 (2016),
which we are sure will have a positive impact on our
common goal of eliminating that scourge and ensuring
accountability in cases linked to terrorism.

We would like to take this opportunity to express
our heartfelt condolences to, and solidarity with, the
families of the victims and the Governments of Yemen,
Turkey, Egypt and Nigeria, which this very weekend
were struck by the barbarity of terrorism, which has
once again left behind death and destruction in its wake.

Terrorism is a transnational phenomenon that
threatens international peace and security. Moreover,
given our interconnected world today, the linkages
between the financing, training and safe haven provided
to those responsible for this despicable scourge also
make terrorism transnational in character. If we are to
eliminate terrorism, the international community must
be resolute in its commitment.

Experience shows us that terrorist groups feed on
despair, injustice, frustration, a lack of opportunities
and the denial of human rights and fundamental
freedoms to promote their criminal and political
agendas, which are based on intolerance, sectarianism
and violent extremism. Poverty, social and economic
inequalities, political, ethnic and religious intolerance,
as well as the imposition of unilateral coercive
measures, foreign occupation and interference and
violations of the sovereignty of peoples and nations, to
name but a few, are also part and parcel of the so-called
drivers of terrorism.

We must recognize that, following the criminal
terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, a military
doctrine of a global war on terrorism was put in place.
Unfortunately, from that moment on, a set of military
interventions with different motives ensued in Iraq,
Libya and Syria, which have hugely destabilized the
region, leading to the collapse of the institutions of the
subject countries, along with their political and social
frameworks. That allowed for the extraordinary spread
of extremist and radical ideologies, with military
support and financing from other countries to use the
children of war and violence in terrorist groups affiliated
with Al-Qaida, Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
associated groups. Those groups have exponentially
expanded and are fuelled by war, sectarianism and the
proliferation of all sorts of weapons in the region. They
also affect other regions in Africa and Europe, which is
a tremendous humanitarian toll.

It is for that reason that, as we have said on previous
occasions, effectively combating terrorism requires a
joint and resolute effort by the international community,
as well as the full and non-selective implementation of
the relevant resolutions of both the General Assembly
and the Security Council that, among other things,
prohibit the transfer of weapons and the financing,
training and provision of shelter to terrorist groups,
including the integrated and balanced implementation
of the four pillars of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Therefore, our country is
strongly committed to the fight against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, as we have shown at the
international and regional levels through our accession
to a large number of treaties and conventions, as well
as in the national sphere through the enactment and
review ofa series of legal instruments.

In that connection, the Security Council must
at all times show clear and unanimous evidence
of its resolute commitment to prevent, combat and
eliminate this despicable scourge, while avoiding the
use of double standards in the fight against terrorism.
The ruthless violence unleashed in recent years both
by terrorist groups and non-State actors through the
recruitment of children, abductions, the destruction
of World Heritage Sites, as in the case of the ancient
city of Palmyra in Syria, slavery, sexual and gender-
based violence as weapons of war, as well as the use of
chemical weapons, have seriously impacted the civilian
population, particularly ethnic and religious minorities
and the most vulnerable groups, whose human rights
have been systematically and deliberately violated, in
contravention of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
In addition to triggering an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis, such actions constitute a clear
pattern of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, as clearly defined in the Rome Statute, and
the perpetrators of such acts must be brought to justice.
Accountability in terrorism-related cases is particularly
important for our country, which is why we would like
to see international legal cooperation strengthened in
the gathering and safeguarding of evidence in order to
ensure due process.

Effectively combating terrorism leaves no place
for dichotomies, and therefore there cannot be good
terrorists and bad terrorists. Terrorism is terrorism,
and it must be unequivocally prevented, combated and
eliminated. Given the transnational nature of terrorism
and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
international legal cooperation is key to ensuring that
investigations and prosecutions ofthose responsible for
terrorist acts lead to positive results. Of course, such
action must respect due process and avoid summary
executions or the use of technological devices that
violate human rights.

That is why we consider the recently just adopted
to be of great importance. In that regard, we take this
opportunity to recognize the efforts of the Spanish
delegation during the lengthy and complex rounds
of negotiation on the resolution, which resulted in
the consensus adoption of the resolution, despite at
least one permanent Council member's inflexibility
throughout the process.

Venezuela is of the View that international legal
cooperation in the fight against terrorism can be
strengthened, inter alia, through mutual legal assistance
and the principle of extradition or prosecution, in
particular to ensure that justice is served and to enforce
the sentences of those persons legally convicted of
terrorist acts in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 9 (d) of resolution 2322 (2016).

Our country has also been a victim ofterrorism, as
seen in the cases concerning the 1976 bombing of the
Cubana de Aviacion flight perpetrated by the notorious
self-avowed terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, in which
73 innocent people died, mostly Cuban athletes. I also
wish to cite the terrorist attacks on the Colombian
and Spanish diplomatic headquarters in Caracas in
February 2003. Despite the efforts made to prosecute
or extradite those responsible for committing those
criminal acts, they remain fugitives from justice under
the protection of the State of one of the members of the
Security Council.
We therefore call on the members of the international
community, in particular Council members, to ensure
coherence in their speeches and actions. We also call
for the effective implementation of the extradition
agreements regarding persons identified as perpetrators
of terrorist acts, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly. As in cases of atrocity crimes, there can be
no impunity in situations involving terrorism, much less
safe haven, protection or shelter for those responsible
for such reprehensible crimes. That means that, beyond
just technically cooperating on law enforcement, what
is needed is the political will to ensure that we bring to
justice and convict those responsible for terrorist acts.

Venezuela reaffirms again today that the fight
against terrorism must take place within the framework
of international cooperation, in accordance with
existing regional and international instruments,
including the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the rules of international law,
fully respecting human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law and with strict respect for the
sovereignty of States.

However, we believe that prevention will always
be the best way forward in tackling the scourge of
terrorism. In that regard, we consider it crucial to move
forward in strengthening international cooperation,
including the building of technical capacities to
develop and strengthen infrastructure, mechanisms and
processes, including the exchange of information and
good practices, to identify areas of vulnerability that
need improvement and review mutual legal assistance
mechanisms if we are to be truly effective in this fight.
In that regard, we recognize the important role of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and
in particular of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

Lastly, it is our View that the international
community, now more than ever, must continue to work
in a resolute, united and coordinated way to prevent
and combat terrorism. In that context, we believe
that the adoption of a future international convention
against terrorism would complement the existing
set of international legal instruments by providing a
definition that would strengthen consensus in this area.

