Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation offers
its gratitude for and welcome to the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
State of Palestine, to whom I offer our deepest respect
and admiration.

I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. We further commend the initiative
of the presidency of Kuwait for organizing this
important meeting.

Bolivia comes to this important meeting, the second
of2018 on this issue, with great concern, as every day we
continue to see the suffocation of the people of Palestine
by Israel through expansionist and colonialist policies
that violate international law and the resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council. It is
necessary and critical to recall that, while there are two
parties to this conflict, they are not of equality status.
One of those parties, Israel, is the occupying Power;
the other, Palestine, is an occupied people. This is a
historical and glaring inequality. One of the parties has
used and uses force to occupy the territory of another.

One of the parties has built a wall that, according to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
constitutes a violation of international law. One of the
parties builds illegal settlements in the territory of the
other. One of the parties displaces civilians by force,
confiscates land, demolishes housing and transfers
settlers to illegally built settlements. One of the
parties has imposed a blockade on Gaza, with terrible
humanitarian consequences, including limited access
to basic services. One of the parties is responsible for
the existence of 5 million Palestinian refugees. One of
the parties appropriates the water and agricultural land
resources of the other. One of the parties has unleashed
a brutal military campaign against the Palestinian
people. One of the parties commits serious violations
of human rights and may have committed crimes of
war. One of the parties forcibly displaces Palestinian
civilians. One of the parties shirks its international
obligations and systematically violates the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

For example, Gaza is currently suffering electricity
blackouts of up to 16 hours a day, and there is a severe
shortage of drinking water, medicines and basic
supplies. Fuel reserves are running dry. These facts
have dreadful repercussions, such as the closure of
hospitals and the possible collapse of basic services, in
addition to the likelihood of a cholera outbreak. The
situation is alarming, and even more so now that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA), which provides
humanitarian assistance to more than 1 million people
in Gaza, is facing a financial crisis that is undermining
its response capacity. In that regard, we express
our concern about the announced cuts in UNRWA
funding, a measure that is no more than a manifest
way to politicize the dignity and human security of
nearly 5 million Palestinian refugees. We welcome the
initiative of Sweden, among other States, to convene
a ministerial conference to address that important and
urgent matter.

For 50 years, Israeli policies of dispossession,
occupation and discrimination have heightened the
suffering of the Palestinian people. In January alone,
Israeli authorities demolished or seized 32 Palestinian
structures in the West Bank - approximately the
same number of structures as the monthly average
of 2017. Thirty-seven persons were displaced and
another 82 were affected as a result. In other words,
we must speak not of a status quo in the situation of
the occupied Palestinian territories, but of an ongoing
and continuous augmentation of the occupation,
rendering the possibility of attaining a two-State
solution increasingly difficult. We believe that those
who suffer the most as a result of those policies are
the most vulnerable faction of the population, which is
comprised of women, older people and children. In that
regard, we express our concern about the more than 300
children who have been detained in recent months by
Israel's security forces.

As Mr. Mladenov mentioned, we want to draw
attention the case of the young girl Ahed Tamimi, who
has become a symbol of the Palestinian resistance.
Ahed's story is notjust about a girl, but rather thousands
of youth over decades of occupation. Ahed has borne
witness to the violence and injustice that her people
endure on a daily basis. She has watched her mother be
arrested and her cousin fall into a coma after being shot
in the face - both of them victims of Israeli forces.
Ahed has felt the fear and hopelessness that other youth
cannot even imagine at that age. She has experienced
what no parent wants for their children. And despite
that, she has demonstrated extraordinary strength and
bravery. Israel, a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, is the only country in the world
that tries children before military courts. We express
our solidarity with Ahed Tamimi's family and we are
awaiting her prompt release.

Bolivia, as a pacifist country, believes in a unique
approach to ensuring fair and lasting peace in the
conflict between Israel and Palestine - one based
on dialogue and negotiations, with clear political will
demonstrated by both parties in order to achieve the
two-State solution. For that reason, we reaffirm our
full commitment to multilateralism and respect for
international law, and we reiterate our support for all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution to
the conflict, such as the Quartet road map, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, among others
that are dedicated to entrenching fair and lasting
peace, allowing both peoples to live within secure and
recognized borders.

We are convinced that the only long-term
option to solve the conflict is the two-State solution,
where, ultimately, a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State would be established with the pre-
1967 internationally recognized borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. In
that regard, we reiterate our emphatic condemnation
of the decision made by the United States Government
to recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital, since it
constitutes a flagrant violation of various Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 478 (1980), which
references the withdrawal of States' diplomatic posts
from the city. That decision only subverts any possibility
of dialogue between the parties and disproportionately
moves away from any peaceful solution.

In concluion, we believe that now is the time for
multilateralism and for the Security Council to assume
its historic responsibility entrusted to it by Charter of
the United Nations. Once again, we refuse to believe
that this building and the Council have become an
occupied territory in a colonized land. Nelson Mandela,
who was included on the United States terrorist list
until 2008 said that "we know too well that our freedom
is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians".

