Mr. Serry: Let me begin by expressing my best
wishes to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of the
holy month of Ramadan.

As the Middle East continues to go through
a deepening crisis, with an ever-deteriorating
humanitarian catastrophe in Syria and significant
political developments in Egypt, the Middle East peace
process remains critical to the fate ofthe region. Progress
in the peace process and a more constructive dynamic
between the parties would have important, positive
regional political implications. Conversely, continued
deadlock will further erode hope for an agreed two-
State solution. In the effort to renew a serious dialogue
between the parties, time is of the essence.

It is against that compelling background that
the Secretary-General has welcomed United States
Secretary of State Kerry's intense diplomatic efforts
in recent months and his announcement in Amman
that a basis had been established for resuming direct
final status negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians. We understand that the agreement is
still being finalized, and that Palestinian and Israeli
negotiators will join Mr. Kerry in Washington, DC,
in the near future to begin initial talks. We also note
that some very tough choices will be required from
both sides in the period ahead. Both leaders will have
to win the support of their domestic constituencies
for renewed negotiations. The meetings that President
Abbas has held with the Executive Committee of the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Al-Fatah
Central Committee serve as an indication thereof.
The Secretary-General, encouraged by the positive
developments towards negotiations, has called on both
sides to show leadership, courage and responsibility in
order to sustain this effort towards achieving a two-
State solution.

While United States engagement is central, we
are convinced of the need for a broader regional and
international role in support of any political initiative,
as well as continued efforts to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority remains a viable interlocutor and partner. In
that regard, we appreciate the ministerial meetings of
the Arab League Committee with Secretary Kerry and
President Abbas in Amman; the Committee made a
significant difference with its statement of support. We
particularly commend Jordan's important contribution
to the current efforts. It is crucial to build on the opening
offered by the Arab League ministerial committee's
recent reaffirmation of the Arab Peace Initiative and
the prospect of ending the Arab-Israeli conflict and
achieving regional peace. We continue to hope that
Israel will find a constructive way to respond to it.

As for the United Nations, the Council may rest
assured that the Secretary-General and I on the ground
will continue our engagement in support of the vital
ongoing effort to revive meaningful negotiations.
The Foreign Ministers of the European Union in their
Council conclusions of 22 July also reaffirmed that
they would give active and concrete support to help
ensure that negotiations between the parties were
successful. The envoys of the Quartet were recently
briefed on the efforts under way and intend to meet
soon to review the situation and assess how the wider
international community can effectively support
resumed negotiations.

The efforts to bridge the gaps between the parties
are commendable, but more hard work lies ahead of us.
As Secretary Kerry noted, it is important that tangible
progress be made before the new General Assembly
session in September. The United Nations has been clear
that progress this year can be expected only ifa credible
political horizon for achieving a negotiated two-State
solution emerges. Similarly, plans to shore up the
Palestinian economy with a major boost to private-sector
development are welcome, and indeed necessary, but
must now be complemented by progress on the political
track. In this near-to-last chance to preserve the
viability of the two-State solution, we remain hopeful
that renewed negotiations will be substantive and set
a clear path towards that solution, namely, the end of
conflict and lasting peace and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians. Nobody but the parties themselves
can make the hard choices required to achieve peace,
but the international community and the region should
cooperate in a concerted and committed manner to
drive the peace process forward.

We should further stress that any negotiations
must be accompanied by a renewed focus on visibly
and tangibly improving the situation on the ground.
Both parties must take every possible step to promote
conditions conducive to the resumption of the political
process and refrain from actions that undermine trust.
In doing so, we must not forget the situation in Gaza,
where practical steps to improve the humanitarian
and security situation in the wake of transformations
in Egypt can be an important enabler for peace and
stability. We feel that this is also the time for bold steps
to enhance the understanding on the ceasefire reached
in November 2012 through Egyptian good offices.
Turning to events on the ground, the situation in the
reporting period can be summarized as relatively quiet,
but tense and volatile at the same time. The potential
risk of increased instability and violence in the West
Bank was illustrated on 11 July, when Israeli security
forces reported seizing a rifle, ammunition and two
pipe bombs during a raid in Nablus. Palestinian security
forces continued working to maintain law and order in
the West Bank, in coordination with Israeli security
forces. On 12 July, a Palestinian explosive engineering
unit safely disposed of an unexploded ordinance near

Qalqiliya.

We are concerned about continued prisoner
protests, including of a number of hunger strikes that
have already lasted more than two months. On 14 July,
Jordanian detainee Abdallah Barghouti was transferred
from prison to an Israeli hospital in critical condition
after 76 days of continuous hunger strike. We note that
President Abbas has consistently called on Israel to
address the legitimate concerns ofPalestinian prisoners
and, as a confidence-building step, to consider
releasing prisoners, including those convicted in times
predating the Oslo agreement. With the parties having
now agreed to resume negotiations, I have little doubt
that a meaningful prisoners release would help to build
confidence and improve the situation on the ground.

Israeli security forces conducted a total of 360
search-and-arrest operations in the occupied West
Bank, including in Area A, resulting in one Palestinian
being shot and killed on 2 July and 134 Palestinians
injured, including 24 children and six women. Three
members of Israeli security forces were also injured.
Four hundred and nineteen Palestinians were arrested
by Israeli security forces. This includes Hamas
Palestinian Legislative Council member Mohammed
Abu Tair on 2 July in Ramallah, after he had previously
been deported from Jerusalem.

Against the background ofa UNICEF report, issued
in March, on the treatment of Palestinian children
by the Israeli security forces, we are also troubled by
the detention in Hebron on 9 July of a five-year old
Palestinian boy for several hours in a stone-throwing
incident. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) are reportedly
checking this incident and reviewing its policies
regarding the detention of children.

Israeli security forces announced a crackdown on
Israelis suspected of carrying out so-called price tag
attacks, with a number of reported arrests, including
of one suspect in connection to the desecration of
the Latrun monastery in September 2012. Tensions
continued on the ground as a result of settler attacks that
injured 13 Palestinians and caused extensive damage
to Palestinian property. Palestinian attacks on settlers
also resulted in two injuries and some material damage.

Following last month's reported slow-down,
demolitions of Palestinian property in Area C and in
East Jerusalem increased again during the reporting
period. A total of 83 structures were demolished,
leading to the displacement of 129 Palestinians,
including 45 children.

I regret to inform the Council that, despite earlier
reports of Israeli restraint on settlement activity, the
reporting period witnessed some renewed steps in
settlement planning both in the West Bank and, to a
lesser extent, in East Jerusalem. Steps towards the
approval and advancement of settlements involve
70 housing units in Har Homa, between Bethlehem
and Jerusalem, 84 units in Nokdim, in the southern
West Bank, and 700 units in Modiin Illit. A report of
the Israeli State Comptroller issued on 17 July noted
that there was little to no criminal law enforcement in
the settlements regarding violations of planning and
construction law, and that administrative procedures
for demolitions are rarely implemented.

Of note, on 19 July the European Commission,
drawing from earlier Council conclusions, issued
guidelines that stipulate that it would provide grants
and maintain relations only with Israeli institutions
within the 1967 line. The guidelines, to come into force
on 1 January 2014, prescribe that any Israeli legal entity
receiving funding from the European Union will have
to state that it has no links to the West Bank, including
in East Jerusalem, or the Golan Heights. Israeli officials
have voiced their strong objection to these guidelines.

The position of the United Nations regarding
settlements is unequivocal. They are contrary to
international law and Israel's commitments under the
road map. Continuing settlement activity would not
be conducive to creating a favourable environment for
negotiations.

In a positive development, Israel is providing a
considerable number of permits for Palestinian residents
of the West Bank to visit Jerusalem and Israel during
Ramadan, and applying more flexible regulations at
checkpoints and points of passage during the holiday.
Nevertheless, visits between 10 and 17 July of Israeli
groups, including senior officials, to the Temple Mount/
Haram Al-Sharif resulted in some clashes between
Palestinians and the Israeli police accompanying these
groups. We urge all parties to show extreme restraint
and to keep the calm around this holy site.
In Gaza, the relative calm observed in June was
largely maintained during the reporting period. A
total of three rockets were fired from Gaza into Israel,
without resulting in casualties or damage. There were
also no reports of Israeli airstrikes into Gaza. Israeli
forces conducted six limited incursions into Gaza and
in some instances the Israeli navy forced Palestinian
fishing boats ashore by shooting in their vicinity. No
casualties were reported on either side.

The situation on the ground in Gaza has been
affected by political developments in Egypt. For
security reasons, the Rafah crossing was closed for
nearly a week, and since 11 July it has been partially
reopened to allow limited categories of people and those
stranded on either side of the crossing to return home.
Egypt also deployed two additional battalions in the
Sinai to address security concerns. However, on 4 July
two explosions were heard in the Israeli southern city
of Eilat, without any casualty or damage, reportedly
resulting from rockets fired from the Sinai. A Salafist
group, Ansar Beit Al-Maqdis, took responsibility for
the shooting. We strongly condemn any such shootings.

The Egyptian authorities also took robust measures
against the tunnels into Gaza. As a result of these
actions against illegal activity, 80 per cent of the
tunnels are now no longer functioning, according to
some estimates. Gaza is beginning to experience some
serious shortages of fuel and basic building materials
for which the tunnels had become the primary entry
points due to severe restrictions on imports via the
official crossings and the higher cost of fuel available
from the West Bank and Israel.

While the only Israeli crossing for goods, Kerem
Shalom, has remained open and is handling increased
quantities of consumer goods, we are concerned that
already difficult economic and humanitarian conditions
in Gaza will further deteriorate if access into Gaza
through legal crossings of such basic commodities as
building materials is not liberalized. We are aware that
the Palestinian Authority has approached the Israeli
Government on the matter, requesting that remaining
restrictions on the entry of building materials via
Kerem Shalom be lifted.

We encourage all parties not to forget the precarious
situation in Gaza and to take advantage of the improved
context between the parties to further lift the remaining
closures. We call on Israel to liberalize the entry of key
construction materials into Gaza so that the private
sector will be able to legally procure these materials to
satisfy Gaza's infrastructural needs.

The opening of Gaza and the lifting of remaining
closures are part of the November 2012 understanding
on the ceasefire. The other part is adherence to full
calm. We therefore call on the de facto authorities in
Gaza to heed their commitments. Any violation of
the ceasefire by rocket fire at this politically delicate
juncture is not only unacceptable but also completely
irresponsible. We also call on Egypt to maintain the
Rafah crossing open for people, with due consideration
for Egypt's security requirements.

Let me briefly mention a few other developments.
The United Nations Mine Action Service reported the
removal over the past six months of most unexploded
ordnance that had been dangerously stored in Gaza city,
thereby greatly improving the protection of civilians
there. Over 2,000 items of unexploded ordnance have
been safely destroyed since January.

We continue to be concerned about death sentences
in Gaza, outside of the Palestinian legal framework.
Further to the four such sentences and two executions
carried out during the last reporting period, a man was
sentenced to death in Gaza on 14 July. We call on de
facto authorities in Gaza to refrain from carrying out
further executions.

All here heard the reports of the grim situation in
Syria last week from Emergency Relief Coordinator
Amos, High Commissioner for Refugees Guterres
and Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
Simonovie. The bloodshed in Syria continues unabated.
The Government continues to use its military might
against civilian areas, while increasingly attracting
foreign fighters and using paramilitary forces. Parties
to the conflict continue to fail in their obligation to
protect civilians. Humanitarian needs are outpacing our
efforts to increase the delivery of assistance throughout
Syria. The surge in sectarian threats and violence in
Syria and across the region is deeply worrisome. Syria
is increasingly turning into a regional, if not global,
battleground.

Unfortunately, the warring parties have not
responded to appeals for a cessation of violence during
Ramadan. All fighters in Syria should be reminded
that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law will be held accountable. Recent
reports of military victories by the Government should
not create false confidence that the conflict can be won
militarily. The legitimate demands of the people in
Syria cannot be met with arms, but only through vision
and leadership by all Syrians, the Government and the
opposition alike.

In that regard, we continue to do our best to ensure
that the Geneva conference takes place as soon as
possible. Joint Special Representative Brahimi has
pursued his consultations and convened in Geneva
two rounds of tripartite meetings with the Russian
Federation and the United States to prepare for the
Geneva conference on Syria. While progress has been
made and convergence found between the two initiating
States of the conference, a number of parameters are
still under discussion.

On 6 July, the Syrian National Coalition of Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces elected a new
leadership. The general assembly of the Coalition also
increased its membership from 63 to 114 to include,
inter alia, representatives of the Syrian Democratic
Platform led by veteran opposition figures. It is hoped
that the laudable enlargement of the Coalition proves
to be an expression of Syria's political spectrum, rather
than a mere response to exogenous factors.

The Secretary-General remains gravely concerned
at the reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Syria. The United Nations has received 13 such reports
so far. In addition, on 9 July, the Russian Federation
presented to the Secretary-General its analysis of one
incident of alleged use. That and other information is
currently being studied by the investigation mission.
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs Angela
Kane and Mr. Ake Sellstrom will visit Damascus this
week to complete consultations on the modalities of
cooperation required for the proper, safe and efficient
conduct of the United Nations investigation mission.
The Secretary-General hopes that the meetings in
Damascus will result in a mutual understanding on
access for the mission to conduct its fact-finding
activities and establish the facts pertaining to the
reports received by the Secretary-General.

The situation in the Golan remains volatile, with
heavy clashes between the Syrian armed forces and
armed members of the opposition occurring inside the
area of separation. The United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force reported that during intense clashes in
the vicinity of Al-Qataniya on 16 July, several artillery
rounds landed in close proximity to United Nations
positions, as well as across the Alpha line. Such military
activities in the area of separation have the potential
to escalate the situation between Israel and Syria, and
jeopardize the ceasefire between the two countries.

In its presidential statement of 10 July
(S/PRST/2013/9), the Council unambiguously stated
the need to redouble efforts to safeguard Lebanon from
the spillover of the conflict in Syria. The Secretary-
General welcomes the Council's unity and continued
attention, and its support for the efforts of President
Sleiman and the Lebanese Armed Forces to preserve
national unity and stability.

Following the fighting in Sidon last month between
supporters ofthe Salafist Sheikh Assir and the Lebanese
Armed Forces, the security forces arrested dozens of
suspects. Twenty-seven have been charged, including
Assir. Related violence broke out in Tripoli on 29 June,
and again on 2 July, causing three fatalities. There is a
real danger of further escalation in violence extending
from the conflict in Syria. On 9 July, a bomb in Beirut's
Shiite southern suburbs injured 53 people and caused
extensive material damage. On 7 July three people were
injured, including two soldiers, when a bomb exploded
near Hermel, and on 16 July at least two members
of Hizbullah were injured in a roadside bomb on the
Masnaa highway.

At the political level, two sessions of Parliament
scheduled for l and 16 July to vote on an extension
of the term of the army commander and other issues
were postponed due to a lack of quorum. Prime
Minister-designate Salam continued efforts to form a
Government. The delay in forming a Government is a
matter of concern. We reiterate our call on all sides to
engage constructively in that regard.

In a visit to Lebanon on 3 July, Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas stressed the need for
Palestinians in Lebanon to disassociate from the
conflict in Syria and from any internal tensions in
Lebanon.

On 14 July, the Lebanese security forces seized
a vehicle with arms and materiel reportedly en route
to Syria. On 16 July, President Sleiman reiterated his
call for the implementation of the Baabda Declaration.
He stated his intention to call a session of the national
dialogue to discuss a defence strategy for Lebanon and
consider solutions to the current crises.

The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations and along the
Blue Line remained generally quiet. UNIFIL protested
the violation of the Blue Line on 12 July by IDF soldiers
to secure the surroundings of the Sheikh Abbad tomb
during a visit by pilgrims on the Israeli side. Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost
daily basis.

Last week witnessed a promising opening in the
efforts under way to develop a meaningful political
initiative on the Israeli-Palestinian issue. We have
now reached a decisive point. In recent years, we have
shared the frustration at the political deadlock. This is
the moment to translate our collective call for action
into a shared sense of urgency in supporting leaders on
both sides, as they must realize that this is an opening
they cannot afford to lose.

Progress indeed necessitates serious political
commitments if leaders on both sides are to achieve
the vision of the two-State solution they have both
agreed on. We do not underestimate the difficulty of
developing a substantial initiative that should provide
a credible horizon for achieving a two-State solution
at long last. But we cannot emphasize enough that
this is the moment for concerted action and continued
support to the parties. The risks of forgoing the present
opportunity should be clear for both sides. As the
United Nations, we remain convinced that achieving
the two-State solution, ending the occupation that
started in 1967 and ending the conflict as envisaged by
the relevant resolutions of the Council are in the best
interests of both Israelis and Palestinians.

