Ms. Power (United States ofAmerica): In February
2014, the United Nations Human Rights Council
commission of inquiry released its now famous report
on human rights in North Korea (A/HRC/25/63),
methodically documenting the widespread and
systematic human rights violations carried out by the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. In December 2014, Australia led the Council
in holding its first meeting to discuss the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's human rights situation as
a threat to international peace and security (S/PV.7353).
In December 2015, we held our second meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.7575).

I think it goes without saying that there has been no
improvement in the lives of the North Korean people.
Just two days ago, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees issued a report about
the thousands of families torn apart because of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's repression
and the instability it provokes in the region.

This is only one piece of the crisis, of course, as
has been noted. This year has seen an increasingly
aggressive Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
with a record number of missile launches and two
nuclear tests. This behaviour affirms what we have
long stated - when Governments flagrantly violate the
human rights of their own people, they almost always
show similar disdain for the international norms that
help to ensure our shared security. It stretches credulity,
really, to suggest - as I know some Council members
will today - that the brutal governance practiced by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea regime is
neutral on international peace and security. We know
that nobody is saying that it is good for international
peace and security, but the idea that it is neutral - that
it is somehow a stable form of governance - is just
clearly not true.

It is inherently destabilizing when a regime carries
out the kinds of horrors that this regime perpetrates
against its own people, and given the other aspects of
the threat to peace and security posed by its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, that nexus should
worry us all. It really belongs on our agenda here in
the Security Council. The situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is on the Council's seizures
list, and that is where it belongs.

Therefore, with the delegations of eight other
Security Council members, we requested this meeting
today. We strongly support the adoption of the agenda,
and we very much look forward to the discussion.

