The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Germany.

First of all, I should like to say that my delegation
subscribes to the statement that Greece will make
shortly on behalf of the European Union. Along with
our partners in the European Union, we believe that the
situation in Kosovo has come a long way since the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). But, as we have
heard this morning, much remains to be done.

I should like to thank Mr. Michael Steiner for his
very detailed briefing this morning, which has brought
us up to date. I should also like to commend
Mr. Steiner and the whole team of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for their excellent work in Kosovo; we reiterate our full
support for their efforts. We also support KFOR's
excellent work on the ground and in the area of
security. KFOR is fulfilling an essential task in that
regard.

I should like to make a few points. First of all, we
should like to welcome the extension of UNMIK
authority to the northern part of Mitrovica, and we
consider that a great and important step forward. Any
attempt to undermine the authority of UNMIK or its
integration efforts or to maintain parallel structures is
in direct contravention of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999). There is no room for any form of co-
governance, either in northern Mitrovica or anywhere
else in Kosovo. The authority lies with UNMIK.

My second point is the following. We urge all
parties in the region to fully respect resolution 1244
(1999). Any attempt to prejudge the final status of
Kosovo now would be ill-timed and not helpful; such
attempts would not be acceptable right now. We reject
all attempts to prejudge the final status of Kosovo,
whether they are aimed at declaring independence or at
hastening a debate and a decision for which the time
has not yet come. The international community must
stay the course. In his report, the Secretary-General
was right: the principle of "standards before status"
stands. Therefore, we strongly support Michael
Steiner's concept.

We particularly welcome the explanations made
by the Special Representative on the further way ahead
in the implementation of the benchmarks. If we want to
transfer by the end of this year the remaining
authorities from UNMIK to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government, and if we want to exclude the so-
called reserved powers, then the benchmarks have to be
met. To that end, both UNMIK and the Kosovar
Institutions must join forces and make a major effort.

The implementation of the benchmarks is,
however, a question not only of capability and
efficiency, but also of good will. There are certain
benchmarks that could be fulfilled immediately, such
as the establishment of freedom of movement for the
minorities. We strongly urge the Kosovo Albanians to
demonstrate their commitment to the democratic,
multi-ethnic future of Kosovo. Concrete action must be
taken against the climate of ethnic hatred and revenge
for the atrocities the Kosovo Albanian population has
suffered. Instead, a climate of tolerance and mutual
respect throughout all ethnic communities has to be
created.

The answer to ethnic questions is not separation
and division, but cooperation and integration. The
development of a truly multi-ethnic society is a
prerequisite for a successful future in Kosovo. It was
towards the restoration of human rights and multi-
ethnicity that made the international community
intervene in Kosovo in 1999.

I would like to conclude by stressing the
important role that KFOR plays as the guarantor of
internal security and in assisting UNMIK in
implementing its task. With regard to ongoing
discussions of troop reductions in Kosovo, we should
be aware of the implications of further reductions for
the peace implementation process. We believe that
close consultations with the Special Representative are
needed to avoid possible security gaps.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now call on the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro.

