I would like to thank Geir Pedersen for his briefing and reiterate France's full support for his work. I would also ask him to convey to Ms. Khawla Matar my wishes for a speedy and complete recovery. I would now like to address four points. First of all, with regard to the Constitutional Committee, whose drafting committee is meeting next week, it is a positive sign that that meeting is finally taking place. We call on the parties to participate in it in good faith and without conditions or delaying tactics. France hopes that the work on the new Constitution, provided for in resolution 2254 (2015), will make real progress. We call in particular on those sponsoring the regime in those discussions to increase their efforts. We fully support the Special Envoy in that process, and we encourage him to continue in parallel his discussions with the Women's Advisory Board in order to enable the effective participation of women, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). Unfortunately, we have every reason to be pessimistic about future discussions. Last month's sham parliamentary elections show that the regime is locking itself into its dictatorial logic and following its own timetable, in defiance of resolution 2254 (2015). The lack of progress on the issue of detained and missing persons is another negative sign. How can one believe in the good faith of the regime when it refuses to allow innocent people to be reunited with their families? Secondly, I would like to recall that a political solution to the Syrian crisis is not the mere discussion of a Constitution. Accordingly, it is crucial for the Special Envoy to engage in all aspects of the crisis, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015). I am thinking in particular of the ceasefire. The truce concluded in the north-west a few months ago is fragile; violent clashes continue. A lasting and verifiable ceasefire agreement under the aegis of the United Nations is essential to allowing both the peaceful resumption of the political process and the smooth delivery of humanitarian aid, which has been critically restricted since the closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing point. I recall that the Security Council recently adopted resolution 2532 (2020), which, echoing the Secretary-General's appeal for a comprehensive ceasefire, calls for the cessation of hostilities in all countries on the Council's agenda. Instability and violence continue to prevail, including in the territories taken over by the regime, with killings, kidnappings and unrest, of which civilians are the primary victims. In this regard, we recall that France continues to give its full support for the fight against impunity, including through international mechanisms. Crimes committed in Syria cannot go unpunished. We are therefore still far from the secure and neutral environment necessary for a political transition and the organization of free and transparent elections, under the supervision of the United Nations, in which all Syrians, including refugees and displaced persons, would participate. We encourage the Special Envoy to continue efforts in that regard. He has a full mandate to explore practical conditions for the holding of elections, even if these must take place after the work of the Constitutional Committee. Thirdly, I would like to say a word about the situation of the Syrian people, who are the primary victims of the war and the mismanagement of a corrupt regime. The Syrian people are now facing a major upsurge of the coronavirus disease in Syria and a humanitarian disaster. At a time when humanitarian needs continue to increase and a large segment of the population is forced to live in exile, I reaffirm that France and its European Union partners stand firmly by the Syrian people, as evidenced by the commitments undertaken at the fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. I would like to conclude by saying that our positions on the lifting of sanctions, reconstruction and normalization remain unchanged. Our determination to contribute to finding a political solution to the Syrian crisis also remains the same.
