The Deputy Secretary-General: I am honoured
to address the Council today on Somalia. This is an
important briefing for me. I have a long relationship to
Somalia. Twenty-one years ago, I visited the country as
the United Nations first Emergency Relief Coordinator.
I still have vivid, painful memories of the massive
suffering at that time - the worst I have ever seen, I
should add.

For decades, it was difficult to see how Somalia
could lift itselfout ofconflict and misery. Last weekend,
I was finally able to visit Mogadishu again. The
difference from 1992 was remarkable. I saw hope and
I saw determination. I saw shops and cafes, fishermen
and traffic police, taxis and building sites. I saw what
everyone in the Council has heard about during the past
year - the beginning of a new Somalia.

I held extensive, open and highly interesting
meetings with Somalia's President, Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, the Prime Minister, the Speaker of
Parliament, the Foreign Minister and practically all
other members of the Government. I also met with
African Union and African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) representatives, security officials, the
diplomatic community, civil society and our dedicated
United Nations team. During the meetings, we spoke
much about national reconciliation. My interlocutors
highlighted the need to establish a culture of dialogue
and a new approach to regional engagement.

The Government reiterated its commitment to
federalism and power-sharing between the centre
and the periphery. I urged the President to continue
his efforts at political outreach and to take forward
inclusive dialogue on the future form of federalism
in the country. The United Nations plans to establish
a greater presence in the regions and to reinforce the
links between the regions and the federal Government.
I stressed the importance of building institutions, the
rule of law and respect for human rights. We agreed
that a United Nations team would travel to Somalia next
month to advise on the support required to prepare for
national elections in 2016.

We also spoke about the need for peacebuilding
and State-building. I congratulated the Government
on the conclusion of the "new deal" for Somalia
framework, which sets out Somalia's priorities. The
United Nations will align its efforts fully to support
those goals. Together with President Hassan Sheikh
Mohamud, I visited the new United Nations offices
nearing completion in Villa Somalia in Mogadishu,
where United Nations and Somali Government staff
will, appropriately, work side by side.

The African Union Mission in Somalia has done
much to enable Somalia to reach the current moment
of opportunity. Let me express my deep appreciation
for the work that AMISOM. forces have done, of the
sacrifices they have made, and of the unique partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations in
Somalia. I would also like to recognize the substantial
support provided by the European Union to AMISOM.

Let me also express my great respect for the many
representatives of the international community and
civil society now working in Mogadishu and for our
United Nations staff, of whom over 100 internationals
are now working in Mogadishu under the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Nicholas Kay, as we prepare to establish an integrated
mission in January.
I came away heartened by the commitment
of Somalia's Government and people and their
international partners to peace and unity, as well as
to development and human rights. But I also found
reasons for concern. As the Secretary-General has
informed the Council in the letter before the Council
today (S/2013/606), and as I have heard from many of
my colleagues on the ground, this moment of hope in
Somalia is fragile. High expectations are directed at the
United Nations, the African Union and AMISOM.

The findings of the African Union-United Nations
mission on security are clear. After 18 months of
successful operations that uprooted Al-Shabaab from
major cities, the campaign by AMISOM. and Somali
forces has in recent months ground to a halt. The
AMISOM. Force Commander told me that neither
AMISOM. nor the Somali army has the capacity to
push beyond areas already recovered. Their hold on the
existing territory would be tenuous if the current status
quo were to continue, he claimed.

While these forces remain largely static, Al-Shabaab
is mobile. Al-Shabaab is training and recruiting
substantial numbers of frustrated, unemployed young
men. There has been a surge in deadly attacks. Although
weakened, the insurgency is still able to conduct terror
operations, not only in its areas of control but in
Mogadishu, Kismaayo and elsewhere, as we saw in last
month's horrific attack on the Westgate Mall in Nairobi.
It is the joint recommendation of the Secretary-General
and the African Union that AMISOM. and Somali
forces need a significant temporary boost to maintain
the basic security required for peacebuilding, as well
as to respond to the evolving threat from Al-Shabaab.

The letter of the Secretary-General of
14 October provides the details of those proposals.
The recommended enhancements for AMISOM,
including helicopters and other enablers, will allow
the force to regain the initiative against the insurgency
and to recover strategic locations that are exploited
by Al-Shabaab to generate revenue and to recruit and
train combatants. The recommendations for non-lethal
and logistic support to the Somali National Security
Forces are equally critical. It includes medical support,
transport, tents, food and fuel, and would enable the
Somalis to operate effectively alongside AMISOM,
improving their capacity to hold cleared areas until the
Somali national police can take over, with AMISOM
police support. It is of significant long-term importance.

Council Members will recall that we have previously
provided assistance along similar lines to national
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, under
the guidance of a human rights due diligence policy. In
fact, the Council took a decision recently on the Central
African Republic, I understand. The Government of
Somalia conceded that, without support to the Somali
National Security Forces, no significant progress
should be expected.

Against that background, I urge the Security
Council to find ways to adequately provide for that
support. It would also facilitate the crucially important
recovery and development efforts of the United Nations
and other actors on the ground. It is hard to ask for
additional resources in our present difficult financial
environment, but it is my duty to advise the Council
that, without increased support, our present and,
indeed, past investment in peace and that of millions of
Somalis may be lost.

Success in Somalia has been achieved through a
unique brand of multilateralism. The United Nations,
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the European Union have combined
together in a creative, responsible and effective way.
If we do not reinforce the progress with additional
resources and presence on the ground, we risk a
setback for a great example of multilateralism, as well
as exposing the Somali people to aggravated Violence
and poverty.

I would now like to draw the Council's attention to
the Secretary-General's advice with regard to the safety
of United Nations staff in Somalia. In Mogadishu I met
with United Nations colleagues working with great
dedication in conditions of high risk. The surge in
attacks and threats in recent months places them under
great pressure. At the same time, that surge is a serious
obstacle to the implementation of resolutions 2093
(2013) and 2102 (2013), which mandated the Secretary-
General to establish an enhanced United Nations
presence in Somalia. It also risks setting back our vital
work for recovery and development on the ground in
the country.

Following the attack on 19 June, United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes have a severely
restricted capacity to plan and deliver programmes. I
visited the site of the attack in Mogadishu in order to

pay my respects to the victims and to personally thank
the courageous United Nations staff who protected our
colleagues that day. It was a sombre moment, and it made
me and my colleagues feel all the more determined not
to let extremists set the agenda and, by instilling fear,
stop our efforts to help the Somali people.

The security of the United Nations in Mogadishu
and Somalia requires urgent attention. We owe our
staff secure accommodation and the protected mobility
required to do their work. With AMISOM's present
assets and with competing priorities, it is not realistic
to substantially step up the protection of United Nations
installations and operations, as those are to expand. I
therefore ask the Council to authorize the deployment
of a United Nations guard unit to protect United
Nations locations until national forces can assume their
responsibility.

At the same time, we need to invest in measures
that can increase the Somali Federal Government's
capacity to protect international operations for the long
term. That is why we recommend supporting Somali
police units to provide mobile security for the United
Nations as part of security-sector development under
the new deal framework. I urge the Council to support
those recommendations.

It is essential that security efforts proceed
hand in hand with the political, peacebuilding and
developmental efforts. Security, reconciliation and
development must proceed in parallel in order to take
root and mutually reinforce each other. That is reflected
in the benchmarks that the Secretary-General has set
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. They cover advances in the campaign against
Al-Shabaab, the development of capacity for the Somali
national army and national police and progress on
reconciliation, as well as work on the constitution and
preparations for elections in 2016.

Those are the key steps for progress for the Somalis
and for the international community's investment in
Somalia between now and 2016. The United Nations
will continue to work closely with the Government and
international partners to help create those conditions.
That requires an integrated strategy that combines
political engagement and support for peacebuilding,
the rule of law and development. Should the Council
so decide, the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could then mark an exit
strategy for the current operations, and a milestone in
our work for peace in Somalia.

Let me now turn briefly to the report of the
Secretary-General on piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia (S/2013/623). The report is a timely
reminder of how effective security instruments can be
in fighting destabilizing forces. The number of piracy
incidents has decreased considerably. At the same time,
the report highlights the need for a comprehensive
strategy to sustain security gains. More work is required
to address the underlying causes of piracy in Somalia.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
security, development and governance factors have not
changed sufficiently to deter criminals from attacking
ships and holding seafarers hostage.

We must remain vigilant. The international naval
presence remains vital for conducting counter-piracy
operations pursuant to resolution 2077 (2013), as does
Member States' commitment to prosecute suspected
pirates. I also call on Member States to expand
efforts to develop Somalia's maritime resource and
security strategy. That is the anchor for improving
the governance of Somalia's maritime resources and
expanding economic opportunities for its citizens.

The report underscores the importance of
coordinated international action and of the self-
protection measures developed by the shipping industry.
I commend the work of the Contact Group on Piracy
in fostering cooperation, sharing information and
mobilizing resources. Looking ahead, the policy and
legal issues governing the deployment of contracted
armed security personnel on board vessels will require
continued close attention.

Let us not forget that Somali pirates are presently
holding hostage 60 seafarers. That is a matter of serious
international concern. We must continue to insist that
all hostages be released immediately.

In the long term, our shared goal is for Somalia to
assume full responsibility for its own security, within
the framework of the rule of law. The Council has
requested Somali authorities to report on the structure
of its security forces and on the measures to ensure
the safe management and accountability for weapons
and military equipment, under the terms of resolution
2093 (2013). I understand that a report on that matter is
expected to reach the Council shortly. I urge the Federal
Government to expedite its submission.

In conclusion, the Government and the people of
Somalia, as well as international partners, are on the
verge of rebuilding a shattered State and rescuing
millions of people from conflict and poverty. The
international community's commitment to Somalia
is reflected in the $2.4 billion pledged in Brussels in
September under the new deal. But without a sufficient
level of security, what we have worked so hard for could
be lost. The attack in June on the United Nations in
Mogadishu and the terrorist act in Nairobi in September
underline Al-Shabaab's intent to force an international
retreat from Somalia and to inflict suffering on
Somalis in order to erode their confidence in the peace
process 4 and, indeed, in the future. That is why we
must support AMISOM. and at the same time invest in
Somali national forces as well as in protecting our staff.

I appeal for the Council's positive consideration of
those recommendations.

