Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would
like to thank the United States and Cote d'Ivoire for
calling this meeting, as well as Special Representative
Chambas and African Union Commissioner Chergui
for their briefings. We would also like to extend our
condolences and prayers to the families of the fallen
soldiers of the Niger.

We have heard the briefers and read the report of
the Secretary-General earlier this year (S/2019/549),
which highlighted, inter alia, the volatile security
situation in West Africa, which is characterized by
intercommunal violence and fuelled by the activities
of violent extremist groups. Terrorist and violent
extremist groups have also expanded their areas of
influence, taking advantage of local grievances and the
lack of effective State presence, which has already been
mentioned by a number of speakers today.

Despite the efforts of national Governments and
regional organizations, the security situation continues
to deteriorate, resulting in dire humanitarian conditions,
including displacement. In addition, climate change
and environmental pressures in the region further
exacerbate the situation, which increases the pressure
on Governments and perpetuates the cycle of insecurity
in the region. Both briefers and Council members have
reiterated today that it is imperative to address the root
causes of instability. In this regard, I should like to
highlight three points.

First, with regard to support for national and regional
efforts, Indonesia welcomes the initiatives undertaken
by countries in West Africa and the Sahel to combat
terrorism through collective security efforts, such as the
Multinational Joint Task Force and the Group of Five for
the Sahel Joint Force. Such initiatives should continue
to be supported. However, in addition to international
support, it is important to ensure that such initiatives
also enjoy the greater support of the population. One
important aspect ofwhat we used to refer to as "winning
the hearts and minds of the population" is, of course,
ensuring due judicial process in bringing perpetrators
to justice. Security forces must also be held accountable
for their actions. National Governments should also be
supported through capacity-building in the provision
of security and protection for their citizens, including
through early-warning and early-response mechanisms.

Secondly, we must invest in community engagement
and reconciliation. Indonesia considers it the most
necessary course of action to reconcile communities
and divided groups in order to prevent further violence.
National, regional and international actors must invest
in community engagement and reconciliation efforts,
thereby bringing together all affected communities.
This can be achieved, inter alia, through mediation
and dialogue across communal lines to ensure that
social and economic grievances are heard. Issues such
as land tenure, economic inequality and livelihood
must be addressed and discussed, including through
the empowerment and reinforcement of cultural and
traditional mechanisms of conflict resolution.

My third point concerns the need for sector- and
region-wide strategies coupled with international
collaboration. Commissioner Chergui alluded to a
holistic approach, which I think is an important point.
The security response must be part ofa greater strategy
to counter violent extremism, and I am in favour of the
soft approach we have been carrying out in many other
parts of the world. Poverty eradication should also be
represented within the greater strategy, which should
also encompass the enhancement of State presence
and capacity, the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation, reconstruction, and economic and social
development. In addition, the proximity of countries,
the cross-border activity of violent extremist groups
and other factors increase the possibility of a spillover
of insecurity in the region. When we visited the region,
we were briefed on the matter of porous borders and the
need for international collaboration and assistance for
regional organizations.

To conclude, I wish to recall that Council members
visited the region earlier this year. We were in various
countries in the region and met with local leaders,
stakeholders and officials and heard their problems.
What is now needed is action in support of the countries
of the region, the various United Nations missions on
the ground and, of course, regional organizations. I
shall never forget when, during our visit to Mali, we
heard the plea from a women's non-governmental
organization that we translate all the statements we
make in this Chamber into concrete actions. Now is
the time, and we should make it clear, as many before
us have, that we must take decisive action in order to
address the situation in a concrete manner. Let us not
forget the plea of the people on the ground.

