Mr. Wolff (United States of America): My
delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
Ambassador Verbeke's continued leadership as the
Chairman of the Security Council Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for his report to the Council today.
Ambassador Verbeke's efforts have been essential in
the Committee's execution of its mandate as described
in his report, especially in encouraging States to submit
reports detailing their efforts to implement the Chapter
VII sanctions imposed by the Council on Iran in
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007). In that
context, we note that, while the number of reports
received continues to rise, many are still outstanding.
We urge all States that have not yet submitted their
implementation reports to do so as soon as possible.

Ambassador Verbeke's report also highlights a
request made by the Committee to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for an update to its
March 2007 report describing its implementation of
paragraph 16 of resolution 1737 (2006), which relates
to IAEA technical cooperation with Iran. Additional
details with respect to other technical assistance to Iran
were also requested. While we are still assessing the
IAEA's response to that request, we note that the IAEA
has evaluated 27 requests for IAEA technical
assistance against the restrictions imposed in Security
Council resolution 1737 (2006), finding three to be
contrary to what operative paragraph 6 prohibits. We
would welcome any additional details that the IAEA
could share on the nature and content of those requests,
as well as the 24 permitted to proceed. We propose that
the Sanctions Committee draft a follow-up letter to the
IAEA, seeking additional details.

Many months have passed since the adoption of
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007), and
unfortunately Iran has complied with neither of them.
To the contrary, IAEA Director General El-Baradei's
reports of 23 May (S/2007/303, annex) and 30 August
(IAEA document GOV/2007/48) confirm that Iran has
failed to suspend its uranium enrichment and heavy-
water-related activities, as required by the Council.
Although the IAEA workplan holds potential towards
resolving the IAEA's myriad outstanding concerns with
Iran's nuclear programme - if Iran fully cooperates
Iran persists in defying the Security Council's

 
3
requirement to suspend its proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities.

The United States once again calls on Iran to
change its confrontational course, suspend its
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities and cooperate
fully and unconditionally with the IAEA. Doing so
would begin the process of restoring international
confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme and would permit negotiations to
commence with Iran on the generous offer of the
Permanent Five plus one.
Our delegation looks forward to continuing to
work with others in the Committee to execute its
mandate and ensure the most robust and
comprehensive implementation possible of these
resolutions in order to persuade Iran to abandon its
pursuit of a nuclear weapons capability.

