Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me first
express my gratitude to you for convening this meeting
and for giving us the opportunity to contribute our
views on the disturbing situation in the Middle East.

The delegation of Indonesia is deeply disturbed
and concerned by the renewed violence in the occupied
Palestinian territory. We believe that it is important that
these developments immediately cease in the interest
of the peace process and of the peoples of both
Palestine and Israel. In that regard, my delegation fully
associates itself with statements made by the
representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement (NAM) and by the representative
of Yemen on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC).

The recent military operations of the occupying
Power, Israel, against the Palestinian people have been
excessive and ruthless. In several missile strikes, 21
Palestinians, including 2 children, were killed. The
media have reported that about 300 rounds are being
fired into the Gaza Strip each day from cannons, tanks,
warships, helicopters and drones. Although Israel
claims that its action is in response to the firing at civil
targets in Israel from northern Gaza, the indiscriminate
nature of the response and the scale of the innocent
civilian toll it has inflicted bear no relationship to the
rockets fired into its territory.

In addition, this Israeli action is an illegal act and
a violation of international humanitarian law, and we
call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility and stop Israel's aggression against the
Palestinian people. Let us be clear: the situation in
Palestine is a delicate one and the road to peace is
cluttered with all kinds of challenges. It does not need
the addition of further problems. Among those
problems is the financial crisis currently buffeting the
Palestinian Authority. Its legitimate funds, derived
from taxes being collected by Israeli authorities, have
been withheld following the recent election in
Palestine, which was widely acknowledged by the
international community as fair, transparent and
democratic. In addition, food commodities needed by
the Palestinian Authority are being blocked.

Given the facts as we know them, the collapse of
the Palestinian Authority, if that is the objective of
Israel, can only escalate the insecurity in the area and
make peace a more distant dream. In our view, this
continued situation would prevent the Palestinian
Authority not only from continuing to provide basic
services to the Palestinian people, but also from
providing the necessary administrative structure within
which to continue to explore the road to peace.

Therefore, we urge the international community
to give the new Government a chance. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the commitment made by the
Palestinian President, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, to continue to pursue peace in the Middle East
on the basis of the road map of the Quartet and
previous resolutions of the United Nations regarding
the settlement of the issue of Palestine. It is our hope
and expectation that the new Government and
forthcoming Governments will adhere to this path.

My delegation once again calls upon the
international community, as these developments arise,
to assert itself on the side of peace. Only by
consistently by putting the issue of peace into
perspective and seeking to prevail on both sides to act
more responsibly can we move ahead and ensure a
return to the path of peace.

In this regard, my delegation also wishes to draw
attention to the suicide bombing in a busy area of Tel
Aviv earlier today, in which 10 people, including the
bomber, were killed and dozens of others were
wounded. This tragic loss of life in the middle of the
Passover holiday does nothing for the cause of peace.

Finally, it is with a deep sense of concern and
responsibility that we call on the Israeli Government
and the Palestinian Authority, in the interest of the
peace process, to urgently find ways to halt the cycle of
violence and to exercise restraint. The cycle of
violence has been proven to have no redeeming feature
and cannot yield peace. In the end, it is peace that is in
the heart of the ordinary people of both sides, and a
focus on the need to return to the negotiating table is
imperative.

