Mr. Essy (spoke in French): I would like simply,
in conclusion, to offer my sincerest thanks to you, Mr.
President, for your commendable initiative to close out
your mandate this month by dealing with African
issues. I am gratified, because this meeting has allowed
us all to draw attention to African issues. I think that
through these discussions today, Asia, Latin America,
every continent better understands African problems.

When I return to Addis Ababa I will have the
opportunity to hold a brainstorming session on the
results of this meeting. We have learned much, and I
am glad to know that many countries now understand
our problems. This is reassuring.

The message that I would like the members of the
Council to come away from this meeting with is that
Africa is a mature continent. Africa knows its problems
and how to resolve them; it needs the means to resolve
them. During the cold war era, a great statesman once
said that the one who dominates Africa will dominate
the world. But I can say today that if we find a solution
to the problem of Africa, we will find a solution to the
problems of the world. There is a link between all the
conflicts of the world today. I think that the Council
devotes 60 per cent of its activities to Africa, and if we
can solve Africa's problems, I believe that the Council
could also breathe easier. This is why I believe that all
other States understand that the African heads of State
today have decided to take into their own hands the
solution to the problem.

It is true that when one takes a close look at
Africa today there are reasons for concern. Statistics
show that in order for poverty to be reduced by half,
African countries would need a growth rate of 7 to 8
per cent. But, as the Council knows, the growth rate is
3, 4 or 5 per cent, whereas the growth rate of the
population is 4 per cent. Therefore, the prospects are
truly bleak. This is why the fact that we associate the
questions of peace with questions of development
proves that we have understood that the best way to
resolve the problem is to settle the question of
development.

The African Union is the fruit of thinking that has
been evolving for some time and is now becoming
concrete with the Sirte Declaration. We are therefore
going to South Africa with the creation of the African
Union. For me, this is a source of great hope.

Europe has known enormous wars: the Hundred
Years War, the Thirty Years War and the two world
wars, and today all these States work together in the
European Union. I think that the future of Africa will
also proceed along these lines, where, tomorrow, with
the Inga Dam in the Congo, we can have energy
everywhere and combine our potential strengths. I
think that this is the future of Africa. We should not
despair. After 40 years of independence, I believe that
we have the potential. We have the people. We have the
heads of State.

The Secretary-General said that in fact, the
problem of Africa is not a problem of AIDS or the
price of raw materials. It is a problem of leadership. I
think that we have a leadership that is sufficiently able
to understand the problems. The New Partnership for
African Development (NEPAD) is an illustration of
this. We have had plans in Africa: we have had the
Lagos Plan of Action; we have had the Abuja plan.
Now we have NEPAD, and I think that past failures
will allow us to better grasp the future with NEPAD.

Therefore, the only message that I would like to
convey to one and all is that we truly attach much
importance to the question of economic development.
It is said that peace does not live happily with poverty,
and as long as there is poverty there will never be
peace. It is said that a person who is hungry has no
ears. Therefore, I think that development questions
must be effectively linked to questions of solutions to
conflicts. I would therefore like to personally thank
you, Sir, and all members of the Council for all the
importance that they have given to this meeting.

Today, - and I have become aware of this since
my arrival in Addis Ababa - the OAU has relations
with all the continents. And all the OAU summits are
attended by a large number of delegations that arrive
from all locations to show their solidarity with Africa. I
encourage them to continue to do so. We will make an
effort in the African Union to see that the hopes placed
in Africa are truly not in vain and that, 10 to 15 years
from now, the Council will have fewer problems. The
Council is extremely busy today. I remember that, 10
or 15 years ago, when a State held the presidency of
the Security Council, the President would saunter over
to the Delegates Lounge looking for conflicts because
there was, in fact, nothing to do. There might be only a
resolution on renewing peacekeeping in Cyprus. A
month could go by without a meeting of the Security
Council. It was almost tragic being president of the
Security Council and not have a conflict to resolve. But
today, the Council is overburdened. You are all very
busy, but I hope that in a few years the Council will
have fewer problems, that there will be fewer African
issues and that we will find an Africa that is at peace.
That is truly our most important wish. I would like to
thank all of you. I am leaving with much hope and I do
not despair because I definitely think that Africa today
has all the potential to succeed.

