Mr. Moeller (Denmark): Denmark welcomes this
opportunity to discuss how to address the urgent and
serious situation in the Middle East. The momentum
created by our common efforts to end the hostilities in
Lebanon and to put in place a process leading to lasting
peace must be used to revive the Middle East peace
process. Against that backdrop, we welcome
yesterday's Quartet meeting and fully associate
ourselves with its statement.

There is an urgent need to give the people of the
region a reason to hope. Their growing sense of
desperation must be overcome. That can happen only if
they are given a credible prospect of a better future.

My recent meetings with Israeli and Palestinian
leaders have been encouraging. My clear impression is
that both sides recognize the urgent need to revive the
peace process and are ready to do so. The international
community must do everything possible to assist them
in that endeavour and to provide the incentives needed
to foster the lasting peace we all want.

We already have the framework in place. Over
long years, we have developed a basis for achieving
lasting peace. It includes the Arab peace initiative, the
performance-based road map for a permanent two-State

solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as
relevant Security Council resolutions, all based on the
principle of land for peace. That framework, agreed
upon through arduous negotiations, offers the best
foundation for achieving our goal. It must continue to
be our guidepost as we try to revive the peace process.

The underlying premise of the road map is that
the two sides will take a series of simultaneous and
parallel steps leading to peace. Even if the time frame,
of course, needs to be revisited, the principles and the
sequencing it lays down remain as relevant as ever.

The ongoing efforts by Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas to form a Government of national
unity are welcome and I hope they will be successful.
It is also my hope that the new Government's political
platform will reflect the Quartet principles and allow
for early engagement. President Abbas' efforts in that
regard can be successful only with strong and
committed support from the international community.
Therefore, Denmark is committed to providing
financial assistance to President Abbas. I am also
encouraged by the prospects of a meeting between
President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Olmert in
the near future with a view to restarting the peace
process. To be successful, those negotiations must be
accompanied by an end to violence.

Moreover, the captured Israeli soldiers must be
released, and the Palestinian ministers and legislators
in Israeli custody must be immediately freed.

Urgent attention must be paid to humanitarian
conditions in the Palestinian territories. We welcome
the generous contributions made this month at the
Stockholm international donor conference and the
decision to extend and expand the temporary
international mechanism. At the same time, Israel
should release the Palestinian tax and customs
revenues it is withholding and keep open all border
crossings. And all Palestinian factions must
immediately stop their attacks, just as all Israeli
military activities in the Palestinian territories must
cease.

In conclusion, I encourage the parties to do
everything within their power to seize this moment
now that the world is again focused on Middle East
peace. The international community must and, I
sincerely hope, will provide full support to their
efforts. I pledge that Denmark will not waver from its
commitment to continuing to do everything possible to
achieve the ultimate goal - a lasting peace in the
Middle East in which all States are living side by side
in peace and security and where all peoples can prosper
and freely develop their societies.

