Mr. Hoxhaj: Let me start by expressing, on
behalf of the people and the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo, our profound gratitude for the
Council's attention to the latest developments in the
Republic of Kosovo during the most recent reporting
period.

We have gathered here yet again to discuss the
issues related to the post-independence situation in
Kosovo. Some members may remember that there have
been many times in the past when reports from Kosovo
spoke more of challenges and problems than of
solutions and positive developments. I am here today
to provide the Council with a first-hand account of
recent positive developments, but let me also thank the
members of the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for their strong role in our young country.

The United Nations presence in Kosovo has been
one of the international community's largest nation-
building efforts in the modern history, and these efforts
have borne fruit. The independence of Kosovo in the
last three years has produced peace, stability and
security in the region, and Kosovo is today gaining its
rightful place in the community of free nations.

As the Council has heard from Mr. Zannier, over
the past months Kosovo passed through a dynamic
period. Our young Republic has consolidated its
institutions in the pursuit of good governance and

political stability. A constitutional crisis was initiated
by the resignation of former President Fatmir Sejdiu,
and we had national elections that passed through
rigorous tests and challenges in both the courts and the
Central Election Commission. After certification of the
results - to which no party objected - we formed a
new Government under the leadership of our former
and present Prime Minister, Hashim Thaci.

The Democratic Party of Kosovo, the party that
won the most votes, entered into coalition discussions
with relevant political stakeholders. In the end,
common ground was found with the New Kosovo
Alliance, the Serb Independent Liberal Party and
Turkish, Bosniak and other smaller parties. This
coalition formed a dynamic and multi-ethnic
Government that is prepared to lead Kosovo towards
greater strength and integration in the community of
democracies.

After the final certification of election results,
members of the parliament elected Mr. Behgjet Pacolli
as the President. Opposition parties filed a complaint
with the Constitutional Court objecting to the
procedures of Mr. Pacolli's election. Less than a month
later, the Court ruled that the new President was
elected in violation of constitutional quorum and
candidate requirements.

That unexpected decision provided a moment of
political challenge that tested yet again the strength of
the governing coalition. However, it is important to
note that at no time did any party in Kosovo oppose or
object to the Constitutional Court's role or its decision.
The Government and the people of Kosovo respected
our institutions, and they recognize the importance of
the Court's independence as the arbiter of Kosovo's
Constitution. This is a primary example of Kosovo's
dedication to the rule of law.

Kosovo came through these challenges when the
governing coalition and the largest opposition party
showed that they were ready to elevate national
interests for stable governance above narrow political
interests. The Government and opposition reached a
compromise that supported the election of Atifete
Jahjaga as President of the Republic of Kosovo.

President J ahjaga is the first woman to be elected
as head of State in the Balkans. She brings to the office
a lifetime of dedicated public service, having worked
for years with the Kosovo Police trained by the United
Nations. She is a non-partisan leader who represents all
of Kosovo. This development is good for Kosovo, good
for the region and good for the world.

The governing coalition now leads in a stable
political environment and enjoys the participation of
ethnic minorities from Serb, Turkish, Bosniak, Roma
and other communities, who have 25 seats in the
l20-seat Parliament. For the first time in the history of
Kosovo, the Government also includes a Deputy Prime
Minister and three ministers from the Serb community.
Kosovo Serbs are represented at all levels of the
Government and civil service. This development
reflects Kosovo's status as a functional multi-ethnic
democracy that celebrates and draws strength from its
diversity.

Kosovo's communities have rejected the Republic
of Serbia's politics of division. Their participation in
Kosovo's institutions in the central and local
Governments shows that Kosovo has unified around
the promise of a representative democracy that gives a
voice to all of its members.

We are happy to report to the members of
Security Council that more Serbs participated in
Kosovo's elections than in the illegal elections
organized by the Serbian Government in the past in
some parts of Kosovo.

It is important to note that the parallel
Government of Serbia institutions that continue their
corrupt activities in some parts of Kosovo are illegal,
according to the Security Council's own decisions.

President J ahjaga is not the only Kosovan woman
receiving international attention nowadays. The
Government of Kosovo has also named Ms. Edita
Tahiri as a Deputy Prime Minister and the country's
special representative to lead Kosovo's delegation in
the dialogue with the Government of Serbia. Kosovo
recognizes the importance of this dialogue with Serbia
and is taking part in the discussions at the highest
level.

We accepted the invitation of the European Union
(EU) to engage in dialogue with Serbia, which was
welcomed by the General Assembly when it
acknowledged the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. If I may remind members, the Court
confirmed the legality of Kosovo's declaration of
independence.
The Government of Kosovo has engaged fully in
the EU-facilitated dialogue. It is a good opportunity for
both Kosovo and Serbia to put the past behind us. Our
focus is on a future that will see both the Republic of
Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia enter the European
Union as equals, as independent States.

With the facilitation of Mr. Robert Cooper as EU
representative, Deputy Prime Minister Tahiri has met
three times with Serbia's representative to the dialogue,
Mr. Borislav Stefanovie. We have opened several
topics of discussion in the dialogue, and there are
indeed many unresolved issues between the two sides.
I would like to inform the Council that today that the
first visit of Mr. Stefanovie happened in Pristina, the
Republic of Kosovo, and very soon representatives of
the Republic of Kosovo will visit Belgrade.

I assure the Council that Kosovo is ready for and
committed to finding new and creative ways to
improve the lives of all citizens and to assist Serbia in
coming to terms with our independence. That should
bring a package of solutions in areas of importance to
the daily lives of the citizens of both countries. It
should show the world that the Balkan people want
peace and prosperity. We do not want to enhance ethnic
divisions or to reopen old wounds.

The Government of Kosovo expects two things
from the dialogue. First, we want creative solutions
that respect our constitutional order, set up by Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General President Ahtisaari.
We want to solve practical issues, such as the mutual
recognition of documents, license plates, airspace,
school and university diplomas, telephone
communication and others.

We want to extend freedom of movement for the
people of Kosovo across the Balkans. Today, the
people of Kosovo can travel to most neighbouring
countries and most of the world with their Kosovo
passports, including many countries that have yet to
recognize us as an independent State. Serbia, on the
other hand, still refuses to acknowledge documents
issued in Kosovo, just as it refused to accept
documents formerly issued by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. Such
artificial and wholly political restriction on the
freedom of movement in the region has not helped the
dialogue or reconciliation between the two peoples and
their countries. While Serbia might question the right
of Kosovo to exist as a State, there is no question
whatsoever that Serbia itself has no right to exercise
any type of authority within the borders of Kosovo.

Our second goal for the dialogue is linked to the
first. The Government and the people of Kosovo are
tired of conflict and propaganda. We want to look
forward and to engage in a process of reconciliation
with Serbia. There have been many instances in our
common history in the Balkans when people of the
region have cooperated with each other. As both
countries move towards EU membership, now is the
time to shake hands again and to look to each other as
equal partners. We are ready to talk about solutions that
promote the rule of law and preserve Kosovo as a
unified legal space, in accordance with the Constitution
of Kosovo.

The Kosovo Government wants to prove beyond
doubt its willingness to meet, discuss and agree with its
neighbours as a fundamental condition of European
integration. It is in Kosovo's and Europe's strategic
interest to enable the free movement of people and
goods within the framework of EU integration. For that
purpose, the Government established a special Ministry
of European Integration to ensure that we meet
European Union standards. It will set the conditions for
Kosovars to join the rest of the Balkan States in the
visa-free zone within Europe.

The eyes of the world are focused on Kosovo and
Serbia during this dialogue. I assure members of the
Council here today that Kosovo wants friendly
relations with all of its neighbours. We recognize that
as a precondition for a stable and peaceful Balkans.

I promise the Council that we will not allow
extremist elements to distract us from our objectives.
We call on the Government of Serbia to join us in
opposing those radical organizations that have used
nationalist language, as well as violence, against
members of Kosovo's Serb community who have
agreed to cooperate with Kosovo's institutions. Serbs
across Kosovo participate in the country's democratic
institutions. Their involvement in political life has
ensured responsive local governance that represents
their priorities.

The situation is less positive in the north of
Kosovo, where an atmosphere of fear persists. The
Government of Kosovo has implemented the Ahtisaari
proposal, and is in permanent contact with the
international community on a partnership to extend the
rule of law and the country's unified legal system.

However, radicals who refuse democracy and
claim to represent the Government of Serbia have

prevented the organization of national elections. They
have employed intimidation and violence to prevent
the local communities and their residents from joining
Kosovo's institutions. Those radicals have opposed the
efforts of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force to establish
the rule of law in northern Kosovo. They have
prevented the reopening of the Mitrovica District Court
and have obstructed attempts by Kosovo's political
leaders to reach out to the population by making
personal visits to the communities. Such active
obstructions, which have delayed EULEX's core
objective of establishing equal and unified rule of law
in all of Kosovo, have given rise to the voicing of some
discontent among our civil society, media and certain
political leaders.

Kosovo is very supportive of EULEX, and the
Kosovo Government sees the Rule of Law Mission as
its partner. We look to EULEX for support in showing
radicals who reject peace and progress in Kosovo that
they cannot beat back the tide of the rule of law.
EULEX has the resources and the capacity to make a
difference in Kosovo. It can promote the rule of law,
strengthen the fight against corruption, and investigate
former Swiss parliamentarian Dick Marty's allegations
of war crimes that took place during the conflict. The
Government of Kosovo recognizes EULEX as an
independent arbiter of justice that can determine the
legitimacy of Mr. Marty's allegations. We invite all
sides to deliver any information and evidence that they
may have regarding Mr. Marty's allegation to the
EULEX prosecutors.

There are a few more items to report from
Kosovo. Kosovo has approved its new budget, which
includes salary increases for all categories of public
employees, from teachers to policemen, doctors and
civil servants. The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
has voiced its concern over the increases. The
Government is in close contact with our partners in
order to prove the necessity, as well as the prudence, of
such increases. Kosovo has managed to close the gap
in tax collection, improving revenue collection by
more than 30 per cent compared to the previous year.
According to the IMF 's economic outlook for the year
2011, Kosovo has the fastest growing economy in the
Balkans and in Europe. We started from a very low
base, but are rapidly catching up.

Kosovo has the third highest growth in wireless
Internet connections in Europe. The Kosovo

ll-33372
Government has just started implementing a new plan
that will further support economic growth. While the
rest of the Balkan States have already privatized their
public resources, we will start that process this year.
The combined value of investments in
telecommunications, energy, agriculture, ski tourism
and infrastructure for the next three years is expected
to further increase our gross domestic product growth.

That will provide a major push for the economy
and enable the Government to pass the baton of
development to private and free market-oriented
players. All major European banks, insurance
companies and airlines have established a base in
Pristina. The capital city has one of the lowest crime
rates of any capital in Europe. We are aware that some
people still associate Kosovo with war, refugees and
crisis, but, as any visitor to the new, independent
Kosovo can report, the new country is dynamic, young,
growing and open for business.

If Kosovo is to enjoy the same benefits as other
countries in the Balkans, we need Serbia to stop its
obstruction of our participation in the Central European
Free Trade Agreement accords. The EU and Kosovo
have both proposed various compromises on the issue
of the customs stamps used by Kosovo at border posts.
We are very sorry to see that Serbia continues to block
our producers from moving goods through Serbia.
Serbia's action represents an absence of reciprocity, as
the Government of Kosovo has maintained an open-
door policy to all EU countries and prospective
candidates. In fact, Kosovo is a major trading partner
for Serbia. We hope that our neighbours will soon
refrain from blocking and sanctioning our producers.

Allow me to address another positive
development. I am happy to report that we managed to
successfully complete the census in almost all of
Kosovo. The 2011 census was organized with the help
of the Statistical Office of the European Communities
and donor agencies that monitored the complex
procedure. In June, for the first time in three decades,
the central Government will have accurate data on
population, unemployment, education, age and gender,
among other information.

We have pleaded with Serbia to urge Serbs in
Kosovo's northern municipalities to take part in the
census that will be conducted by the United Nations
Office for Project Services. We are extremely
disappointed that Serbian Government representatives
have called for a boycott of this internationally
recognized census.

The census has already confirmed what we have
long suspected, namely, that more than one third of all
Kosovars now live abroad, making Kosovo one of the
most widespread populations on the European
continent. Kosovars live and work in countries ranging
from New Zealand to Germany and from Norway to
South Africa. We are proud that our citizens living
abroad are now giving something back to their country,
in the form of remittances and foreign direct
investment.

In conclusion, allow me to add some personal
observations regarding the path that lies ahead of us.
Since I was appointed to this position, I have travelled
a great deal to assess the international position of
Kosovo. It is clear that Kosovo is no longer the
primary focus of international diplomacy. That is good
news and means that there are fewer reasons for the
United Nations, the European Union, NATO and other
bodies to dedicate as many resources to the Balkans.
NATO has now decreased its forces to fewer than 5,000
soldiers. It is clear that Kosovo will have a shrinking
need for military support and a growing need for
investment, cultural and academic exchanges and
political and economic reforms.

When I hear Mr. Jeremic' describe Kosovo, I
cannot help but wonder at the reasons for his distorted
version of the country today. He is out of touch with
the facts on the ground. We have worked to
accommodate the needs of minority communities and,
over the past three years, have invested more than
€200 million in implementing the Ahtisaari Plan.
Today, Kosovo is a young, stable and vibrant State that
provides possibilities for all of its citizens. I thank the
United Nations and the international community for
facilitating that transformation in Kosovo.

Here and now, we renew the pledge that Kosovo
is committed to peace and stability in the Balkans. We
welcome the partnership of the United Nations in that
shared objective.

