The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ian Egeland to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council' prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic and
Social Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Marjatta Rasi to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 24 May 2004 from the Permanent Representative
of Pakistan addressed to the Secretary-General,
contained in document S/2004/423.

The Security Council is holding an important
debate today. Over the past several years, complex
crises and emergencies have increasingly afflicted
different parts of the world, particularly in Africa.

Complex crises are characterized by the
interlinkages among their military, security, political,
economic, social and humanitarian dimensions. The
overall political, economic and humanitarian costs
imposed by these complex crises are of serious concern
to the entire international community. Preventing and
effectively responding to these crises must therefore be
a matter of high priority for the Security Council in
particular and for the United Nations system as a
whole.

Over the past several months, the Security
Council has held several debates focusing on individual
aspects of complex crises and the international
response to them, including, among other issues, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
proliferation of mercenaries, small arms and light
weapons, justice and the rule of law, cooperation with
regional organizations, the role of the United Nations
in post-conflict stabilization and the role of business in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building.

This debate on complex crises and the United
Nations response is intended to take a strategic look at
the interrelated issues constituting complex crises and
to see how long-term, comprehensive, integrated and
composite approaches can be developed and
implemented with enhanced, system-wide
coordination.

I shall now give the floor to the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, to give the
Council the perspective of the United Nations
Secretariat on this issue.

