Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
also like to thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for his
briefing.
Luxembourg shares OCHA's concern about the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the
increase in violence in the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk controlled by separatists. While illegal armed
groups and their outside support continue to destabilize
the country and undermine its territorial sovereignty
and integrity, the first victims are, once again, civilians.
The numbers that Mr. Ging just mentioned speak for
themselves. We are also deeply concerned about the
number of cases of intimidation, torture, abduction
and murder that have been reported for a little more
than the past four months in areas controlled by the
separatists. Such human-rights violations must stop,
and international humanitarian law must be respected.

Given the situation, we must intensify our efforts
to help the population affected, in particular the
110,000 people who have been displaced. We call on
the Ukrainian Government to continue and to step
up its efforts in this area, in close cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations and international
humanitarian agencies. We believe that establishing
a centralized registry, as promised by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
is essential. We would also encourage humanitarian
actors to cooperate closely with other international
players present in Ukraine, including the human rights
observation mission of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the special
observation mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has been
deployed in Ukraine since March.

But beyond such humanitarian work, we must
above all step up our efforts to create the conditions
for realizing President Poroshenko's peace plan and
to find a peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
The talks that have begun under the auspices of the
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE are crucial in that
regard, as is the deployment of civilian monitors to
the two border checkpoints of Donetsk and Gukovo on
the Russian-Ukrainian border, decided by the OSCE
Permanent Council on 24 July. It is crucial that the
borders be made secure and that the separatist armed
groups do not continue to receive equipment. In order
to support and enhance the efforts under way, it is also
important that the Secretary-General continue to use
his good offices.

On 18 July, we condemned the tragic deaths of
the 298 passengers on Malaysia Airlines Flight 17
(see S/PV.7219), brought down from the skies above
Ukraine. We hoped then that 17 July would not simply
remain in our memories as the day of that tragedy, but
would also be remembered as a day that was a turning
point in the search for a solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
The time has come to honour the memory of the victims
of the Ukrainian crisis and finally make a commitment
in good faith to seeking a peaceful solution.

