As members of the Security Council, we have the responsibility to contribute constructively to political and peaceful solutions to political crises. It is in that spirit that we approach today's discussion on the situation in Venezuela. I wish first to reaffirm that the solution to the Venezuelan crisis can be found only in full compliance with international law and the Venezuelan Constitution. The use of force must be strongly condemned, without exception. Naturally, respect for international law also applies to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, and Venezuela has an obligation to guarantee the normal functioning of all foreign embassies in Caracas. In response to the Venezuelan political crisis, France, together with its partners in the European Union and Latin America, has engaged in diplomatic efforts with the creation of the International Contact Group on Venezuela to promote a resolution of the crisis through dialogue by taking into account the results of the Oslo and Barbados processes, among other elements. Inclusive, good-faith dialogue is indeed the only way forward with a view to the organization of free, transparent and credible elections. Venezuelans must be able to freely choose their future, and the prerogatives of the National Assembly must be respected in accordance with the Venezuelan Constitution. Venezuelans are the first victims of the current crisis, which has lasted too long. Millions have had to flee their country, and we pay tribute to the generosity that many neighbouring countries have demonstrated in welcoming and protecting them. The European Union has shown its readiness to support those countries and will hold a donor conference on 26 May, together with United Nations agencies, following on from the solidarity conference that was held in Brussels in October 2019. Our response to this crisis, under the leadership of the United Nations, must be inclusive and collective and must take into account the dangerous spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose humanitarian and socioeconomic impacts on the region could be terrible. Venezuelans are also suffering from the economic consequences of the political crisis. We call on all actors to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access and to reject any politicization of humanitarian aid. That is all the more necessary in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. I recall that France has been increasing its financial contribution over the last years; in total, the European Union provides more than half of the humanitarian aid to Venezuelans. Finally, Venezuelans are suffering from serious and repeated human rights violations. France calls on Venezuela to implement all of the recommendations of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly with regard to the release of political prisoners. We recall that European Union sanctions are individual measures adopted in response to those human rights violations and that they are designed not to affect the population and the response to the pandemic. As the Council can see, France, together with its European partners, is committed to all aspects of the Venezuelan issue - political, humanitarian and human rights. We call on all parties to resume dialogue, which is the only way out of the crisis.
