Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Mr. President, we
would like to thank you for convening today's meeting
to hear your insightful briefing on the final report of
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/672/Rev.1).

We are honoured to have his Excellency Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, among us and
welcome him to our deliberations. We also recognize
the presence of the parents of Michael Sharp - Mr. John
Sharp and Mrs. Michele Sharp - as well as the mother
and sister of Zaida Catalan, Mrs. Maria Moresby and
Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby. I would ask them to accept our
sincerest and most heartfelt condolences for their tragic
and irreplaceable loss. Michael and Zaida made heroic
sacrifices by giving their lives for peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We honour their
memories by offering our highest commitment to the
noble ideals they lived for.

We highly esteem the extensive work of the
Committee pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) and
commend its leadership and the Group of Experts
on the ground as they address the challenges facing
the country. Your trip to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Sir, and continuous efforts to maintain a
constructive dialogue with the local authorities and
regional and international partners make an invaluable
contribution to strengthening peace and stability in
the region.

On the political front, we are concerned at the
increasing popular dissatisfaction with the political
process, deepened by the worsening socioeconomic
situation and increasing insecurity in Kinshasa and other
main urban centres. We encourage the Government and
the signatories of the political agreement to make every
effort to reach consensus for its implementation and
to hold timely, credible and transparent presidential,
national and provincial legislative elections. We
therefore urge the National Electoral Commission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to work closely
with the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
uphold internationally acceptable electoral regulations,
engaging all interested sides.

While we see considerably reduced exploitation of
and trade in the country's natural resources, we need
to close all loopholes in the implementation of the
sanctions regimes and overcome the impediments of
corruption and the weakening of State institutions that
block our success. The fight against illicit trafficking in
natural resources is critical to enabling the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to move beyond conflict towards
peacebuilding and development.

Concerned with increasing violations of human
rights, especially conflict-related sexual violence
against women and children, we call for strict
monitoring, improved protection services and better
law enforcement, with a view to fighting impunity. We
therefore need a comprehensive assessment of effective
implementation ofmeasures imposed by resolution 23 60
(2017), including future engagements with concerned
States on the implementation of those measures and
recommendations of the monitoring group.

We strongly condemn the activities of all armed
groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and their violations, especially those involved
in attacks on the civilian population, United Nations
personnel and humanitarian actors. We therefore call
for the comprehensive and voluntary disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement of Congolese and foreign militia for the
long-term stability and economic development of
the country.

Finally, Kazakhstan, like others, is committed
to achieving peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We understand that there is no simple or
quick formula for completing all the large-scale tasks
of conflict prevention and stabilization. We therefore
call for the effective implementation of Security
Council resolutions and the political agreement of
31 December 2016.

