Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I congratulate France
on its successful stewardship of the Council in March
and its decision to address this very timely and critical
issue. We thank all our briefers, especially Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov, speaking on behalf
of the United Nations, for their contributions to
today's discussion.

We applaud today's adoption of the important
resolution 2462 (2019), submitted by France, which we
co-sponsored as we believe that the document provides
great added value.

We also share the view of the presidency that
cooperation must be strengthened among the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL,
other global and regional organizations, as well as
banks, to enhance capacities to identify, analyse,
investigate and share information about the financial
sources and flows of terrorism.

However, more needs to be done, above all
with respect to effective implementation, including
innovative practical measures to identify, track and
take action against unregulated money-transfer
services, as well as financial flows. Our efforts should
include capacity-building, the utilization of financial
investigative techniques in law enforcement, teaching
prosecutors to win money-laundering cases and training
financial supervisory and regulatory authorities to
identify suspicious activity.

We should also examine charities, underground
banking entities and registered money-service
businesses, among other entities. Likewise, there should
be close and coordinated interaction between financial
intelligence units and law enforcement agencies, with
measures to curb crowd-funding, cryptocurrency and
various gaming platforms that are widely used today as
camouflage, under anonymity.

Against that critical juncture, it is important that
all Member States enact legislation that designates
the financing of terrorism as a criminal liability, and
should be in full compliance with the United Nations
sanctions regime. Laws should be harmonized at
the regional and global levels for reciprocal action,
prosecution and extradition. We also need to ensure the
support of media and civil society watchdogs to make
our efforts successful.

Turning to Kazakhstan's work on today's pressing
topic, our national list to that end - prepared, inter
alia, on the basis of the Security Council's sanctions
lists - consists of 2,000 persons and 90 organizations
as of this month.

Kazakhstan has concluded some 35 bilateral
cooperation agreements with the financial intelligence
units of other Member States. As a result, 46 supporters
of radical religious ideologies were brought to justice
for financing terrorist activities in Kazakhstan. The
amounts sent abroad had been concealed through
trade operations involving consumer goods and food,
entrepreneurship, work on construction sites and
camouflaged means. It is noteworthy that this involved
tranches ranging from $150 to $2,000. In addition,
in September 2018 our delegation officially launched
and opened here in New York for signature a political
document aimed at achieving a world free of terrorism
by 2045. That instrument, which was signed by
approximately 80 Member States, serves as an impetus
to fulfil their obligations in countering the financing of
terrorism. It calls for greater cooperation between border
and customs control and criminal-justice structures,
with early-warning systems and intelligence-sharing.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's

commitment to confronting international terrorism and

its financing in compliance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

