Mr. Bitimov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamato, for his
substantive briefing and for his commitment to the
personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which seeks to restore
peace and security in Afghanistan, and for UNAMA's
contribution to achieving that goal. We are also grateful
to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement. I know Mr. Saikal very well: he is an
excellent political statesman in Kabul.

My delegation would like to share the following
substantive considerations on the issue of the agenda
before us. Since the previous report (S/2017/l89),
a number of major changes have taken place in the
country at the political level. Kazakhstan welcomes
intensification in the reporting period of the efforts
of the Afghanistan Government to settle the internal
political crisis and establish peace in the country. Proof
of this, inter alia, is the return to Kabul of Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar, the release of detainees of the Hizb-i
Islami party, the holding, in complex conditions, of
the international conference of the Kabul process on
peace and security cooperation, on 6 June, and the
recent meeting between Afghan President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Pakistani Prime Minister Sharif in
Astana as part of the Summit meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO), which gives hope for
improved bilateral relations and new joint measures to
combat terrorism.

We believe that the consultations on Afghanistan
in various formats are important and necessary if the
political differences are to be overcome and if joint
efforts are to be made to facilitate the peace talks.
Despite the open refusal of the Taliban to sit at the
negotiating table with the Afghan Government, we need
to continue to make efforts to find a peaceful solution,
as no other alternative exists.

The situation in Afghanistan was the focus of the
historic Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit
in Astana on 8 and 9 June, where India and Pakistan
became full-fledged members. We believe that, thanks
to the accession of these two States to the SCO, the issue
of tackling regional problems, including with regard to
Afghanistan, will take place more dynamically. At the
same time, we note the deteriorating security situation
in Afghanistan. The latest series of major terrorist
acts in the country means that whole international
community must take more decisive steps to eradicate
this scourge.

At the counter-terrorist level, Kazakhstan is
troubled by the appearance of certain radical terror
groups in the north of Afghanistan and notes, in that
respect, the growing threat to the security of the
Central Asian States. The situation of Afghanistan
plays a special role in providing long-term stability and
security for the whole region. In that regard, Kazakhstan
comprehensively shares and supports the vision of
Secretary General Guterres on bolstering preventive
diplomacy. Just a few days ago, on 13 June, this issue
was raised at the ministerial conference in Ashgabat. It
was also raised during the Secretary-General's visit to
Kabul on 15 June.

On the anti-narcotics front, we are concerned about
the spread of opium poppy cultivation and the increase
in drug production in Afghanistan. By some estimates,
in 2016 drug dealers' total income in Afghanistan
amounted to approximately $400 million. In our View,
only joint efforts at the international and regional levels
can achieve positive results in the fight against drug
trafficking, which is a source of financing for terrorism.

One of the legacies of the ongoing armed conflict
in Afghanistan is the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation, in which the civilian population, especially
its more vulnerable sectors, such as women, children
and the elderly, is suffering and dying, while their
homes and agricultural infrastructure are being ruined.
We call for comprehensive steps to be taken to assist
Afghanistan on the humanitarian front.

On the economic front, the continued critical
condition of Afghanistan's socioeconomic sector is
very worrying. Unfortunately, the measures that have
been taken by the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community are not enough. According to
the experts, the main reason for the economic recession
is the continuing lack of security, which is closely tied
to development issues. In that regard, Kazakhstan has
always believed that security and development are
intertwined and should be promoted in parallel. With
that in mind, we will continue to assist Afghanistan
with development. Since 2008, Kazakhstan has donated
approximately $100 million worth of aid, including free
education for 1,000 Afghan students. At the Kazakhstan
Government's expense, the road between Kunduz and
Takhar has been repaved and a school in Dara Suf, in
Samangan province, built, and a hospital in the Waras
district of Bamyan province is being completed. In
Samangan province, a number of bridges are being built
over the Aybak River and its banks are being fortified.

In the light of all the issues I have mentioned, we
would like to make the following recommendations.
On the political front, the current international
approaches to Afghanistan, including the position
of the Security Council, should be reviewed with
the aim of strengthening regional relationships with
Afghanistan's neighbours, particularly in Central
Asia. We should define a limited number of vital,
high-priority tasks and put all the focus on solving
them, without wasting energy and resources on lower-
priority issues. As the principal United Nations body
responsible for international peace and security, the
Council should take regional interests into account
while developing and adopting a clear, step-by-step
plan for stabilizing Afghanistan, with the participation
of the National Unity Government, that will outline the
highest-priority tasks and the sequence and timing for
dealing with them. Without this, and with a focus only
on peacekeeping rhetoric, humanitarian assistance and
donor infusions for the conflict-resolution process, it
will be exceedingly difficult to achieve the goals of
peace and stability for Afghanistan.

As a body specifically empowered by the Security
Council and as an unbiased player, UNAMA's role in
the intra-Afghan political settlement process should
be enhanced. It should collaborate more actively with
the National Unity Government in the interests of the
Afghan people and all members of civil society working
to help Afghanistan achieve national reconciliation and
advance the peace process.

On the economic front, we must change perceptions
of Afghanistan so that it is seen not as a threat, but
as an important partner. In that regard, it is essential
to help the Afghan economy integrate with those
of the countries of Central Asia by implementing
infrastructure, trade, investment and transit-
transportation projects. In Almaty, which already hosts
18 regional and subregional United Nations offices, we
should establish a regional centre for coordinating and
directing the implementation of all activity aimed at
promoting sustainable development, building economic
capacity for countering terrorism and channelling cost-

effective humanitarian assistance from the Organization
to Afghanistan.

On the anti-drug front, we should support the
coordinated measures that are being undertaken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), INTERPOL and the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre for Combating the Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic
Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and Their Precursors,
as recommended at the sixth Steering Committee
Meeting of the UNODC Regional Programme for
Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries, organized in
Astana in April by the Government of Kazakhstan.

