Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's debate. We are grateful to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his briefing, and we also thank
Ambassador Mulamula, Ms. Maite and Ms. Vilakazi
for their interesting briefings. We fully support the
subject that our South African friends have placed at
the centre of today's discussion. The task of preventing
armed conflict was indeed conferred on the United
Nations and the Security Council at the Organization's
founding. Why it is not being carried out as it should be
is a major question. The answer may be a question of
political will, or the lack of it.

Yet the prevention of armed conflicts, especially
on the African continent, is crucial to the process
of ensuring global stability. Today preventive
diplomacy and its main mechanisms - mediation
and good offices - are more essential than ever. As
Ms. Mulamula said earlier, we certainly do not need
to reinvent the wheel. The United Nations has every
necessary tool at its disposal as a basis for its work in
this area: Chapters I and VI ofthe Charter ofthe United
Nations, as well as a number of additional resolutions,
including resolution 2171 (2014), which enshrined the
fundamental principles of international assistance in
this area. We welcome the Secretary-General's efforts
to strengthen that capacity. The establishment in 2017
of his High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation,
composed of authoritative politicians and diplomats,
was an important element of that. We fully share the
assertion of the concept note (S/2019/786, annex) that
the voice of Africa must be taken into account on
issues of peace and security on the continent. And we
believe that voice must be decisive. In accordance with
the principle of national ownership, it is important
that African countries themselves play an important
role in conflict prevention and resolution. The job of
the international community is to support such efforts
while respecting States' sovereignty and complying
strictly with the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of others.

We are pleased to note that a number ofmechanisms
and instruments for conflict prevention on the continent
have emerged in the arsenal of African countries in
recent years. They are all included in the African Peace
and Security Architecture, whose main elements are
the Panel of the Wise, the Continental Early Warning
System and the African Peace Facility. In carrying
out its mandate for conflict prevention, the African
Union (AU) is following its plan of action to build its
mediation capacity and Standard Operating Procedures
in Mediation Support strategy. Important commitments
in the area of preventive diplomacy are also enshrined
in the Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, signed
in 2017, and there have been practical results in this
area. In particular, the African Union has made a major
contribution to the achievement of comprehensive
peace agreements in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, the holding of peaceful and democratic
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Nigeria, and improvements in the situation in the Horn
of Africa. Recent examples include the successful work
ofthe Special Envoy of the African Union Commission
Chairperson, Mr. Mohamed El Hacen Lebatt, in
stabilizing the situation in the Sudan.

African subregional organizations, including the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of Central African States
also play a significant role. In that regard, we should
not fail to mention the recent successful prevention of
a political crisis in Madagascar by the African Union,
the United Nations, SADC and other partners. We fully
support the strengthening of partnerships between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. The Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security
Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa has great potential in that regard. We believe
that such cooperation should be based on mutual
respect and in line with regional initiatives. Preventive
diplomacy should be founded on an impartial and
balanced approach, free of mentorship and pressure on
political processes in sovereign States. Only mediation
that is based on bringing positions closer together,
seeking areas of agreement and the achievement of
mutually acceptable accords has any chance of success.

It is essential to maintain dialogue with all
constructive players involved in a conflict. It is also
imperative to bear in mind the fine line between
preventive diplomacy and putting pressure on domestic
political processes. Often all that is necessary to
prevent conflict is ceasing to interfere in others'
internal affairs and refraining from lecturing them on
how to build democracy and respect human rights. An
example of an altogether useless case of prevention was
the NATO operation in Libya, which was carried out
in violation of a Security Council mandate and led to
myriad problems and the spread of terrorism in Libya
and the Sahara-Sahel region.

We do not need that kind of prevention.

Russia will continue to provide consistent political
support for the efforts of the African community to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. We are ready
to continue to support Africa in strengthening its own
potential to counter crises in the future, including by
training peacekeepers and law-enforcement officers
from African countries at Russian educational
institutions. We hope that the forthcoming Russia-
Africa summit, the first in history, will serve as a
catalyst for our cooperation with African countries
and give impetus to normalizing the situation on
the continent.

