Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): On behalf of
my delegation, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, Ms. Bensouda, for the presentation of her
thirteenth report. I wish to take this opportunity to
affirm the full support of France for the Prosecutor
and her team, for the International Criminal Court as
a whole and for the full implementation of resolution
1970 (2011).

From the various reports by Ms. Bensouda, we have
taken note of the prevailing insecurity and instability,
which have made it increasingly difficult for her to
continue her investigations. We welcome the support
of the Prosecutor-General of Libya, which makes it
possible to find innovative solutions and to continue
investigations remotely when the necessary conditions
for on-site visits are not always in place. France supports
efforts to facilitate the gathering of evidence and the
compilation of testimonies through secure channels.
Much remains to be done to end impunity in Libya.
That is why France believes that it has never been more
essential that the Security Council lend it support to the
Court, as well as to the efforts of the United Nations
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, to
reach a political compromise in Libya. In that regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General's personal efforts.
We also extend our full support to Prime Minister Faiez
Mustafa Serraj and the Presidency Council to make
institutions more efficient and fully representative.

In addition to those general comments, we wish to
make three specific remarks.

First, France recalls that the continuation of the
investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor requires
the full cooperation of all stakeholders. In order to be
effective, that cooperation must be carried out in an
integrated way, while giving full weight to the principle
of complementarity. In particular, close cooperation
with Libyan authorities is essential to carry out
investigations in complete security, in accordance with
the mandate given to the Court by the Security Council.
In that regard, I would like to recall the November
2013 memorandum of understanding on the sharing
of responsibilities with the Libyan authorities, which
provides a relevant framework.

Furthermore, France believes it is essential to
strengthen cooperation with all States, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute, in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011), to ensure that requests
made by the Office of the Prosecutor can be answered
in the most efficient and timely manner possible. This
cooperation is all the more important in the context
of highly complex and transnational investigations,
which require a coordinated strategy. In this regard,
we welcome the cooperation of the Tunisian, Dutch,
British and Italian authorities, which was noted by the
Prosecutor in her statement.

Our second remark relates to the elements in the
report related to the ongoing investigations. France
believes it is essential that Mr. SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
be surrendered to the Court, in accordance with the
judges" request. France calls on Libya to do everything
possible to honour this obligation and put an end to the
situation of non-compliance in which it finds itself. We
take note of the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber I,
in which the Chamber found that the Court was under
an obligation to comply with requests for cooperation
with respect to the only recognized Government and
not with respect to unrecognized entities, such as
representatives of the Libyan State. We therefore call
upon all entities concerned to allow the Government
of National Accord to respond without delay to the
Court's requests.

With regard to the Abdullah Al-Senussi case,
France takes note of the assessment by the Prosecutor
in the report on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya issued in cooperation with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. France is pleased
that the Prosecutor is closely following this procedure
to determine if new elements are likely to challenge,
once again, the decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber I to
declare the case inadmissible before the International
Criminal Court. With regard to the case of Al-Tuhamy
Mohamed Khaled, we take note of the Prosecutor's
decision to release the 2013 arrest warrant and call on
Libya and all States to cooperate in order to bring the
individual concerned before the Court without delay.

Thirdly, France wishes to revisit the views outlined
in the report of the Office of the Prosecutor. We note
the Office's desire to continue to prioritize Libya in
2017 and to significantly expand its investigations into
crimes committed since 2011. We note the Office's
desire to investigate crimes allegedly committed by
Da'esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and other terrorist groups,
but also atrocities perpetrated throughout the country,
namely, in Benghazi, and other crimes related to
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants
and refugees.

In conclusion, what we see in Libya shows us
how the absence of justice fuels violence and makes
reconciliation more difficult. That is why the Security
Council unanimously referred the situation in Libya
to the International Criminal Court, as was recalled
earlier. We must provide the Court with the resources
necessary to achieve its mission. France, which
cooperates unreservedly with the Court, believes that
this is only possible with the support of the Security
Council, including in cases of non-cooperation.

