Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me start by thanking
you, Sir, for having arranged this briefing today.
Inviting Mr. James Morris to brief the Security Council
on Africa's food crisis as a threat to peace and security
is the sort of initiative that helps us broaden our
understanding of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution in the Security Council's work.

I should like also to thank Mr. Morris for his
thorough briefing - a briefing that clearly
demonstrates how useful the insights offered are for
the Council's work. If I may say so, Mr. Morris's
account of the situation facing millions and millions of
poor people in Africa on a daily basis is an extremely
useful reality check for our work.

We all have a role and responsibilities in helping
to break the Vicious circle of instability, poverty and
protracted humanitarian crisis. The first Millennium
Development Goal is to halve poverty by 2015, and
one of the prerequisites for reaching that very
ambitious target is, among others, that humanitarian
assistance must be completed by activities that bridge
the transition to development.

The expected establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission will mark a new beginning for a
comprehensive approach to countries emerging from
conflict. In the post-conflict phase, the Commission
will provide a forum for the coordination of, among
other things, action related to humanitarian issues.

The situation in the Sudan was discussed
extensively during yesterday's consultations. However,
I would like to reiterate our concern about the
humanitarian situation. Tens of thousands of refugees
and internally displaced persons are returning to south
Sudan, and a continuous relief effort is needed in order
to secure peace and stability.

We share Mr. Morris's deep concern about the
humanitarian situation in Africa, in particular the
affects of the so-called triple threat of food insecurity,
HIV/AIDS and weakened governance capacity, which
is relevant in relation to the present developments in
many African countries, including Zimbabwe. We are
gravely concerned at the current crisis in Zimbabwe,
which has left more than 275,000 people homeless and
has led to further deterioration of the humanitarian
crisis. It is important that the Government in
Zimbabwe live up to its international obligations
pertaining in particular to scrupulous respect for human
rights.

In the light of the present situation in Zimbabwe,
we commend the Secretary-General for his
appointment of the Executive Director of UN-
HABITAT as his Special Envoy for Human Settlement
Issues in Zimbabwe, and we look forward to receiving
her report upon her return from Zimbabwe.

I have a few brief questions to address to
Mr. Morris.

First, we would be interested in Mr. Morris's
comments on coordination between the World Food
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations - for example, on dealing with food
insecurity in conflict situations and the handling of
food aid in such areas. I am thinking particularly about
the Sudan in that context.

Secondly, the need for an exceptional response
has rightly been emphasized in connection with the
triple threat and the potential dangers linked to
instability. What, in Mr. Morris's View, are the most
urgent priorities in the ongoing international work?
More specifically, how does he see the contribution of
the World Food Programme?

Thirdly, as United Nations Special Envoy, Mr.
Morris has repeatedly stressed the importance of the
coordination arrangements that have been established
in Johannesburg for United Nations activities in
southern Africa. What is the reason that they have been
especially successful? Does he see some more general
lessons to be learned by the United Nations?

Finally, if the World Food Programme decides to
make food aid available to Zimbabwe, will it then
obtain guarantees from the Government that the aid
will be distributed according to needs?

Let me conclude by commending Mr. James
Morris for the active advocacy role he has played,
highlighting the plight of millions of people whose
lives have been ruined by crises that are very real to
them, but very often - too often - neglected by us.

