Mr. Williamson (United States of America):
Following Papua New Guinea's independence in 1975,
large segments of the population on the island of
Bougainville continued to feel separate from Port
Moresby owing to historical, cultural and ethnic
concerns. The development of the copper mine in the
1980s became a complicating factor. In 1989 fighting
broke out, and during the 1990s bitter separatist
fighting took place on the island of Bougainville that
claimed thousands of lives.

In 1998, after nearly a decade of conflict and with
nearly 10,000 dead by some accounts, the parties
admirably chose to resolve their differences through
negotiation. Since its creation, in 1998, the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) has
played a valuable role in facilitating the return of
stability to the island. The Bougainville Peace
Agreement successfully ended the fighting, preserved
the peace that began four years ago, and put the island
on track to autonomy and a referendum on
independence.

The key remaining task for UNPOB is to reduce
the risk of re-incitement of violence by collecting,
storing and disposing of weapons on the island. The
Bougainville Peace Agreement envisioned that
UNPOB would complete its work around the middle,
and not later, than the end of 2002. A year ago, when
the Security Council discussed a similar request for a
12-month extension of UNPOB's mandate, we were
informed by UNPOB's Director, Ambassador Noel
Sinclair, that the mission was expected to conclude
"not later than the end of 2002". We believe goals need
to be set based on accurate projections and, once they
are set, everything possible should be done to try to
achieve them.

The Council is now being asked to endorse an
additional year beyond that target end-date. We
understand that the reasons that have been cited for the
delay include a loss of momentum in the peace process
owing to national elections in Papua New Guinea, an
incident of looting of some of the arms collected and
containerized as part of the arms disposal process and
occasional inclement weather, which has kept
UNPOB's helicopter grounded. Frankly, we do not find
this to be a particularly compelling case for another 12-
month extension.

We note that progress towards greater autonomy
and a referendum cannot be made until UNPOB has
certified the completion of stage II of the arms disposal
process, namely, the containerization of all collected
arms. We applaud the good work that UNPOB has done
in facilitating the collection and storage of over 1,500
weapons so far this year. At the same time, we would
like to see a clearer and more measured indication from
the Secretariat of the end-game for weapons disposal
and the exit strategy for the UNPOB mission as a
whole. We wonder, for example, how many weapons
are there left to collect; what UNPOB's plan is, on a
weekly basis, to achieve the collection and disposal of
all remaining weapons; and how UNPOB will draw
down its presence as the end of the mission
approaches.

Again, the United States supports the peace
process. We applaud the sincere efforts by the leaders
on all sides of this conflict to resolve their differences
through a peaceful process. We appreciate the efforts of
UNPOB to contribute to the successful, peaceful
completion of this process.

This morning Under-Secretary-General
Prendergast noted other considerations that may justify
a year-long extension of UNPOB, matters that warrant
our consideration and review. We note that UNPOB's
mandate does not expire until December 31, and
suggest that the Security Council meet at a later date,
perhaps early next month, to consider this issue further.
The United States preliminary View is that a six-month
extension of UNPOB's mandate is adequate. In the
coming days, we would hope to get answers to the
questions raised, and to better understand the other
considerations raised this morning.

