Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation warmly welcomes you,
Sir, the Foreign Minister of Gabon, as you preside over
today's meeting of the Security Council.

China endorses the extension of the mandate of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) in support of the
International Mediation Committee's efforts to help the
Government of the Central African Republic and all sides
concerned resolve the crisis in that country. The Chinese
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

As a true friend of Africa, China has always been very
concerned by developments in the situation in the Central
African Republic. We are deeply disturbed by the
sustained unrest brought about by the political and
military crisis in that country. We wish to express our
concern and sympathy for the people in their suffering.
China sincerely hopes that the Central African Republic
can resolve the crisis as soon as possible and that its
people will soon be able to enjoy a secure and prosperous
life.

We are pleased that all sides concerned in the
country have firmly and actively committed themselves to
the restoration of peace and stability there. We support
the Government of National Union established a year ago.
We also welcome the progress made over the past year by
all sides concerned in implementing the Bangui
Agreements. We believe that, so long as all sides
concerned take into account the basic interests of the
people while treating each with sincerity and proceeding
with determination, perseverance and confidence in a
spirit of reconciliation, they can certainly overcome their
difficulties and differences in order to implement fully all
the tasks laid down in the Bangui Agreements and to
achieve national reconciliation, peace and prosperity for
the people.

In order to help the Central African Republic resolve
the crisis and achieve reconciliation, the African
countries - especially those of Central Africa - have
risen above their own difficulties and made tremendous
contributions. In this regard, we highly appreciate the
critical role played by MISAB, led by President Bongo.

China has always encouraged and supported the
African countries in their efforts to rely on their own
strengths in resolving their regional problems. We hope
that all sides concerned in the Central African Republic
will cooperate closely with MISAB so as to bring those
regional efforts to fruition as soon as possible. At the
same time, we view with favour the Secretary-General's
proposal to deploy peacekeeping forces.

China has always held that the international
community should attach importance to African issues in
active support of the efforts of African countries to
resolve their own crises and to achieve regional peace and
stability. We hope that all sides concerned will respond to
the appeals of the Governments of Africa and the
Secretary-General to provide active assistance on behalf
of peace and reconstruction in the Central African
Republic. China will continue to make its own efforts.

 

