Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I should like at the outset to join in conveying condolences
to the delegation of Tunisia in connection with the death of
President Bourguiba. We would like also to join in thanking
Ambassador Chowdhury and the entire delegation of
Bangladesh for the work they did in March. In addition, we
are pleased to see you, Mr. Minister, preside over the
Security Council today.

We have listened with great interest to the briefing
provided by Mr. Renninger. We believe that it will help us
in our consideration of the matter before us today. We are
also grateful to Ambassador Listre for the information on
the useful work being done by the Committee he chairs.

The Security Council's consideration today of the
situation in Afghanistan is very timely indeed. The Taliban
is to blame for the situation in the country in all respects,
which is extremely unfortunate and disturbing. The Taliban
continues to flagrantly violate resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and apparently has no
intention of abandoning its illegal and destructive policies.
The Council must react to such developments.

We strongly condemn the continuing escalation by the
Taliban of the fighting there, which is postponing still
further any hopes for a peaceful settlement of the situation
in Afghanistan and which is bringing even greater suffering
to the people of that country. We are outraged by the
continuing policy of attacks by the Taliban on United
Nations personnel, as happened recently in Kandahar.

The Taliban's belief that it can resolve the Afghan
problem by force and its claim to ethnic and religious
domination of the country are indeed doomed to failure.
Only a political settlement, though direct talks between the
parties under the auspices of the United Nations, taking
account of the interests of all groups and sectors of Afghan
society, can put an end to this conflict. It is only by
establishing, on the basis of such talks, a broad-based and
multi-ethnic government that we can ensure the rights of all
Afghan people and that their country can move ahead
towards peace, national concord and prosperity.

The Security Council must issue a strong warning to
the Taliban about the need to halt preparations for the
resumption of a large-scale offensive and to begin serious
peace talks. The Government of the Islamic State of
Afghanistan has more than once expressed its readiness
for such talks.

We are seriously disturbed at the increase in outside
interference in internal Afghan affairs, particularly by the
direct involvement in fighting on the Taliban side of
thousands of foreign fighters and mercenaries. We appeal
to all neighbours of Afghanistan immediately to take
measures to prevent their territories from being used to
provide military support to the Afghan parties.

There is growing support by the Taliban for
international terrorism and extremism. Russia itself has
faced large-scale manifestations of this within its own
territory. This kind of problem has arisen for a number of
our partners in the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), and together with them we are taking coordinated
action, inter alia through establishing a single anti-
terrorist centre in the CIS.

Against this backdrop we are particularly disturbed
by the Taliban's refusal to comply with the Security
Council's demand that it turn over the international
terrorist Usama bin Laden, by its open collusion with
extremist and terrorist elements operating in territories of
other States, and by the training in Taliban-controlled
territory of mercenaries to carry out terrorist activities in
neighbouring and other countries. Such actions by the
leadership of the Taliban represent a blatant challenge to
the entire international community and flagrant
interference in the internal affairs of other States.

This in itself offers serious grounds for raising the
question of tightening the targeted sanctions imposed
earlier by the Security Council against the Taliban.

The Security Council must also do more to ensure
that the Taliban implement the other demands contained
in the Council's resolutions. We are seriously disturbed
about the growing drug threat from Afghanistan.
According to estimates, up to 40 per cent of the heroin
that enters Europe and North America comes from
Afghanistan. Incidentally, there are reports that Kosovo is
the main channel for drugs moving from Afghanistan into
Europe. Drugs from Afghanistan are also moving to other
regions of the world, including central Asia and Russia.
In the framework of the "six plus two" group, Russia has
actively supported the initiative to coordinate efforts by

 

neighbouring States of Afghanistan to counter this drug
threat.

We are grateful to the United Nations International
Drug Control Programme for taking practical steps to
strengthen the so-called security zone around Afghanistan.
We are expecting an increase in assistance to Russian
border units that are protecting the Tajik-Afghan border and
trying to staunch the flow of drugs across that border. The
international community must speak out about the Taliban' s
continuing disregard of demands for a halt to violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights,
including discriminatory policies against women and girls.

The United Nations must continue to play a key role
in resolving the situation in Afghanistan. The Security
Council must remain constantly aware of the issue of
Afghanistan and take necessary measures to help the
situation in the country evolve.

We support the work of the new Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Francesc Vendrell,
and of the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.
We welcome the resumption of the work of the "six plus
two" group, which is the main international mechanism
helping the United Nations in its efforts to find a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in Afghanistan. The Organization
of the Islamic Conference is doing useful work in
coordinating United Nations activities.

We expect the adoption of the agreed draft presidential
statement in the Security Council to help ensure better and
greater coordination with the international community on all
aspects of the Afghanistan problem, in the interests of
finding a swift political settlement to the situation there.

