Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the information provided by
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, as well as the
presence and statement of Mr. Vuk Jeremie, the
Foreign Minister of Serbia, and the statement of
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

Mexico has followed the full reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the transition over recent
months with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX). We welcome the fact that there
has been appropriate coordination between the two
organizations in this transition period and that
cooperation has continued in important areas such as
rule of law and resolving community disputes.

My delegation calls on the parties to meet their
obligations in conformity with resolution 1244 (1999),
under the principle of neutrality, and to cooperate with
UNMIK and EULEX in the implementation of their
mandates, as their presence will continue to be central
for the security, stability and development of the
region.

It is important to recall that, pursuant to
international humanitarian law, human rights and the
rights of refugees, the parties are obliged to create
conditions conducive to the secure, voluntary and
non-discriminatory return of displaced persons and to
adopt measures to facilitate that return, including
economic reconstruction and social development in the
locations of return.
My delegation views with concern the
humanitarian situation and the lack of conditions
necessary for the return of displaced persons and
refugees to their homes. While the security situation in
Kosovo has remained relatively stable, factors such as
discrimination, harassment and lack of development
opportunities arise as some of the major obstacles to
ensuring enduring return in the region. Much remains
to be done, given the much reduced number of returns
registered in recent months, to attend to the requests of
nearly 1,295 families for return to Kosovo.

We encourage UNMIK to continue to support
local authorities, together with the United Nations
Development Programme and other humanitarian
organizations working on the ground, in the promotion
of community development programmes aimed at the
reconstruction of homes, job creation and access to
services such as health, water and electricity, as well as
in areas such as security and education. Mexico joins
the call to local authorities to promote effective
measures that improve conditions in the camps for
internally displaced persons and offer basic services to
their inhabitants including medical care. Caring for the
population cannot be subordinated to other agendas.

For my delegation, strengthening the rule of law
remains one of the pending matters that require priority
attention. Along those lines we encourage UNMIK and
the EULEX to spare no effort in strengthening the
capacities of local authorities to provide access to
justice, combat impunity and promote and ensure
respect for human rights. Likewise, we call upon the
parties and UNMIK maintain their support for and full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in order to guarantee the
right to due process in the cases under its jurisdiction.

Mexico endorses the recommendation contained
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/497) to
increase strategic and political coordination between
the United Nations and the European Union. We urge
them to continue to work on the basis of a common
strategy to address the ongoing challenges in Kosovo,
with an eye to contributing to stability in the Balkans.

Lastly, we reiterate our position, consistent with
the principles of justice and international law enshrined
in the United Nations Charter and commend the
International Court of Justice as the judicial body
supremely competent to peacefully resolve disputes
arising from the interpretation of international law. In
that regard, we await with interest the advisory opinion
of the Court requested by the General Assembly on the
case of Kosovo.

