Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) for his briefing and for his informative and
exhaustive report on measures taken in the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000).

I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing and for his
tireless efforts to follow up on resolution 1308 (2000).

The mobilization and commitment of the
international community and the United Nations
system to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic have never
been as determined and resolute as they have been in
the past five years. Yet the epidemic continues to
spread, causing a large-scale human catastrophe,
undermining the socio-economic base and threatening
the stability and security of numerous countries. Sub-
Saharan Africa continues to be the most affected region
of the world, with 64 per cent of the world's HIV
infections and 74 per cent of all AIDS-related deaths in
2004. It is also clear that the numerous conflicts
affecting that region, as well as other regions of the
world, are, unfortunately, breeding grounds for the
spread of the pandemic.

In raising the issue of AIDS in zones of armed
conflict, we cannot but welcome the coordination and
strengthening of cooperation between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and UNAIDS. It
is indeed important that the struggle against HIV/AIDS
be part of all peacekeeping operations. In that
connection, the steps taken by DPKO to improve
awareness among, and training for, peacekeeping staff
are welcome developments.

Having said that, and despite the fact that we do
not have comprehensive data on the role of
peacekeeping operations in spreading the epidemic, it
is clearly not a matter of demonizing peacekeeping
staff. On the other hand, it is useful to assess the
impact of peacekeeping operations in the fight against
AIDS. We also believe it necessary that there be
parallel action aimed at local communities, in
particular in peacebuilding and transition processes. As
suggested by the UNAIDS report, personnel deployed
in the field should be able to take on that task.

We also believe that combating AIDS must be
one of the priorities for national sectors in charge of
security, particularly armies and police. In that regard,
we note that UNAIDS supports the national
programmes of several countries, including those of
troop-contributing countries. We welcome that. The
idea of launching new programmes involving
uniformed personnel deserves full consideration.

The problem that is the subject of our briefing
today is a complex one, given its numerous
dimensions. Because of the Council's mandate, its
actions are limited and it is not involved in the fight
against AIDS except in the context of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we should acknowledge that
its efforts have been extremely useful, even if much
remains to be done.

In order to be really effective, combating
HIV/AIDS must be a comprehensive, unified and time-
bound effort, regardless of the current circumstances.
Obviously, such an effort must be devised and carried
out by the General Assembly. The actions of the
Security Council must therefore be fully integrated into
that coordinated undertaking.

UNAIDS has called for the strengthening of
existing initiatives. We join that appeal, which is in
keeping with the spirit and letter of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS, adopted by the General
Assembly on 27 June 2001 (resolution S-26/2, annex).

As we know, in 2006 the General Assembly is to
receive a comprehensive report on international
progress thus far, which will provide us an opportunity
to continue the debate we began with the adoption of
resolution 1308 (2000), as well as to act in a resolute
and concerted manner to combat this modern scourge.

Lastly, my delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Greece for the preparation of the draft
presidential statement, as well as to assure it of our full
support.

