The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like
first of all to express my sincere thanks to the
Secretariat and, in particular, to the interpreters, for
staying the course until this late hour.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Afghanistan
in which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bazel
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/703, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2002/703) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.

In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom, United States of
America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1419 (2002).
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

I would like to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for
his presence among us as we adopted the draft
resolution.

The meeting rose at 1.45 p.m.

