I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen for his briefing. Peace and stability in Syria can be restored only through a Syrian-owned and -led political process, facilitated by the United Nations, and require an environment that encourages cooperation and reconciliation. A cessation of hostilities is therefore essential to realizing the goals of resolution 2254 (2015). Now more than ever, sustained calm is needed to enable an all-out fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In that regard, we are pleased that the 5 March ceasefire in the north-west continues to hold, and we echo the Special Envoy's appeal for it to extend to the rest of the country. It is our hope that, despite the virus-related challenges and restrictions, work on the Constitutional Committee will continue and that, through compromise and commitment, consensus on the provisions of a new constitution can finally be achieved. We reiterate that the meaningful participation of women in the negotiation process is imperative to ensure fair and balanced outcomes for all. Resolution 2254 (2015) highlights the need for all parties to undertake confidence-building measures to make the political process more viable and to help to sustain a cessation of hostilities. In that context, action on the issue of missing persons and detainees should be prioritized, particularly in view of the current pandemic. Syria is facing a grave economic situation, which is further exacerbated by the measures that have had to be taken, justifiably, to contain and suppress COVID-19. We reiterate the call for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures in order to enable Syria to sustain an effective response to the pandemic and address its current economic challenges. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continues to support the determined efforts of the Special Envoy. His continued positive engagement with all parties concerned will only serve to promote cooperation and advance the wider process. The Council has a great responsibility to assist Syria, through positive action, to help it emerge from the despair of 10 years of conflict. We must set aside geopolitical quarrels and unite in support of Syria and its people.
