Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the Group of Arab States, I congratulate you,
Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. It is an honour to inspiring
and friendly Viet Nam that we all welcome. We also
welcome warmly His Excellency, Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian Authority.

Israel has now become the subject of discussion
in the Security Council yet again, but not only because
of its despicable occupation of Palestine and other
Arab territories and its violation of all norms and total
disregard for the United Nations and its resolutions.
Israel has returned here, not through the door of the
separation wall that was condemned by the
international community or through its actions in
taking lives and destroying crops and other practices
that have been denounced in this Organization, but this
time through the gateway of its shameful violations
contained in the report by Judge Goldstone on Israel's
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
through its barbaric campaign in Gaza.

This will not be the first or the last time in which
the Security Council will discuss the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. This
issue has been on the table of the Council for six
decades. In all of its aspects, it constitutes a threat to
international peace and security, at a time when the
Security Council has been unable to assume its
responsibility to compel Israel, the occupying Power,
to withdraw from the Palestinian and Arab occupied
territories or to enable the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital, and reach a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Palestinian question - which is the core of the
conflict in the Middle East.

However, today's meeting acquires great and
distinct importance as it coincides with the release of
the Goldstone report. That represents a real challenge
to the credibility of the Security Council, as noted in
9

the request made to the Council last week by brotherly
Libya.

Israel's war in Gaza was no secret. We all
witnessed it through the international media. Its
terrorization and murder of civilians have been the
subject of discussion everywhere. Israel launched a
destructive war against Gaza that killed and maimed
thousands of people, caused great destruction to
infrastructure and citizens' property, and violated
international, international humanitarian and human
rights law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

Nevertheless, this Council has remained virtually
silent, having made no response other than to denounce
and express its concern about such actions, in spite of
the fact that Israeli violations against Palestinian
civilians have shocked the peace-loving people of the
world and all advocates of freedom, justice and human
rights. Israel's actions have also placed a burden on the
Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security and to put an end to
this destructive war against Gaza and to the suffering
of its unarmed civilians.

In April this year, as everyone here knows, the
Human Rights Council established the Fact-Finding
Mission on the Gaza Conflict

"to investigate all violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law that might have been committed at any time
in the context of the military operations that were
conducted in Gaza during the period from
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, whether
before, during or after" (A/HRC/12/48, para. 1).

Since then, the Mission has implemented its
mandate with great professionalism, in accordance
with that request and reviewed all relevant materials
regarding the occupied Palestinian territories and
Israel. Wherever the Mission found a positive
response, Israel would not permit it to receive
assistance or cooperation from any party. This was not
the first time that Israel has interfered in the discharge
of legitimate international mandates, missions and
committees, or with cooperation with United Nations
bodies. Israel has always considered itself above the
law. This is the culture with which we are all familiar.

The Mission looked into many incidents and
conducted hundreds of personal interviews. It has
reviewed hundreds of reports and photographs, as well
as scores of video tapes. It has made field visits and
conducted investigations on the ground. It has talked to
victims, witnesses and other relevant people, and it has
reached a set of factual and legal conclusions that are
extremely important.

On the matter of the siege of Gaza, the report has
concluded that the behaviour of the Israeli occupation
forces represents a grave violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention by virtue of deliberate killings and
the infliction of inordinate suffering on civilians under
its authority. The report also concludes that the
deliberate targeting and arbitrary killing of Palestinian
civilians represent a violation of the right to life. The
report also indicates that the persecution of the
besieged people of Gaza under siege represents a crime
against humanity.

The Mission also looked into many cases in
which Israel has destroyed industrial infrastructure and
food production facilities, water storage facilities,
sanitation facilities, homes and even flour mills. It
concludes that the violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the excessive and illegal destruction, and
other grave violations committed undoubtedly
constitute war crimes.

With regard to the destruction of Government
installations and infrastructure, the report indicates that
the attacks against those targets were deliberate, as
were the attacks on civilian targets, in violation of
international humanitarian law. It also concludes that
there was a systematic policy by the Israeli armed
forces to target civilian sites and that, in addition to the
wide-scale destruction of homes, the Israeli army also
launched a campaign of barbaric destruction of civilian
installations during the final days of occupation and its
withdrawal from Gaza, which the report deems to be a
violation of the fundamental right of families to life
and dignity.

With regard to violations against civilians, the
Goldstone report also indicates that the behaviour of
the Israeli forces - particularly the relentless and
barbaric targeting, abuse, humiliation, persecution,
collective punishment and use of Palestinian civilians
as human shields - constitutes a grave violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and a war crime. The report
also clearly indicates that Israel knowingly ordered the
direct bombing of mosques and hospitals and that those
attacks represent deliberate aggression against civilian
inhabitants and installations.

What I have noted here is probably just a small
part of the truth and of the examples cited in the report.
The report cites crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed by Israel before, during and after the
war against Gaza, within the Gaza Strip and throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, and the imposition
checkpoints and restrictive measures against and
repression of the Palestinian population.

The Mission also concludes that the occupying
Power bears the responsibility for war crimes and
crimes against humanity and that the main reason for
those crimes and the suffering is the occupation itself.
The report indicates that

"Israel's continuing occupation of the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank emerged as the fundamental
factor underlying violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law against the
protected population and undermining prospects
for development and peace. Israel's failure to
acknowledge and exercise its responsibilities as
the occupying Power further exacerbated the
effects of occupation on the Palestinian people,
and continue to do so. Furthermore, the harsh and
unlawful practices of occupation, far from
quelling resistance, breed it, including its violent
manifestations. The Mission is of the view that
ending occupation is a prerequisite for the return
of a dignified life for Palestinians, as well as
development and a peaceful solution to the
conflict." (ibid., para. 189fl 
None of these Israeli measures has weakened the
resolve of the Palestinian people, which has stood fast
in demanding its right to dignified life. The Mission's
report also indicates that "[t]he Mission was struck by
the resilience and dignity shown by people in the face
of dire circumstances" (ibid., para. 1898).

The Mission's legal conclusions and citations of
violations put the Council in a position of historic
responsibility and require it to address these
conclusions and to support the resolute and steadfast
demand of the Palestinian people to its legitimate right
to self-determination, to establish its independent State
and to achieve a comprehensive and just peace,
including Israel's withdrawal from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of this Council and the General Assembly.

The very fact that some parties have been trying
to find a way to prevent the Goldstone report from

being considered has sent the wrong message to Israel.
It was not enough for that country to launch a
destructive war against Gaza and its women and
children; it had to begin another war against Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, destroying homes, Judaizing the holy city
and continuing its settlement activities, its excavations
under the Al-Aqsa mosque and its siege against those
who pray there, in another catastrophe for the
Palestinian people.

We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility before it is too late and before it has to
meet again after the blood of martyrs has been spilled
and the cries of children and women have been heard
and their anguish seen. The situation in Jerusalem is
extremely grave, and Israel's practices will unleash a
catastrophe. The Council must shoulder its
responsibility and respect its commitments by putting
an end to Israel's excavations under the Al-Aqsa
mosque, the suffering of the people who pray there, the
destruction of homes, and above all else the
occupation.

Furthermore, the Arab Group wishes to reiterate
once again that all actions by Israel to alter the legal,
physical or demographic character of the occupied
Syrian Golan and all measures taken by Israel to
impose its legal authority there are null and void. We
also wish to emphasize once again that the building
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
Syrian Golan constitute a challenge to the international
community and a grave violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations, the relevant
resolutions, including Security Council resolution 497
(1981), and the Fourth Geneva Convention. We call on
the members of the Security Council to shoulder their
responsibility by compelling Israel to comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw from the
Syrian Golan to the borders of June 4 1967. We also
call for an Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
Lebanese territories, including the Shaba'a farms, the
Kafr Shuba Hills and Al-Ghajar village.

From Israel's assassination of United Nations
representative Count Bernadotte early in its occupation
of Palestine to its destruction of the homes of children
and schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Israel
has posed a grave threat to the peace and security of
the region and of the entire world, disregarding the
authority of this international Organization. The
Security Council bears a responsibility to restore the
Organization's credibility, which has been gravely
damaged by Israel, and should do so today, not
tomorrow. The Goldstone report provides the Council
with a final opportunity to restore that essential
credibility and to refute all claims that justice was
politicized in the report. Will the Council do that? We
hope so.

