Mr. Brattskar (Norway): The deeply troubling turn
of events in Sierra Leone warrants urgent attention and
requires the best efforts of the international community.

Norway condemns in the strongest terms the detention
of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) by the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and calls for their immediate, safe and unconditional
release. Those responsible for these actions, including RUF
leader Foday Sankoh, must be held accountable.

A Norwegian military observer, Commander
Gjellestad, is held captive somewhere in Sierra Leone, with
no confirmed reports on his whereabouts or health. We are
deeply concerned about his fate, as well as that of other
detainees, United Nations personnel and that of the people
of Sierra Leone, who has suffered so much in recent years.
The United Nations should have as its highest priority to
obtain the release of the detainees held by the RUF. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a special team
within the UNAMSIL headquarters, working towards this
end.

Norway supports the efforts by the United Nations and
UNAMSIL to restore peace in Sierra Leone and to fulfil the
mission's mandate, including the protection of civilians. We
also express our support for the regional and international
efforts under way to resolve the crisis, including those by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Norway is considering ways to support the
United Nations in addressing the difficult problems ahead,
and we urge others to extend all possible support to the
mission.

Norway deplores the blatant violations of the Lorne
Peace Agreement by the RUF and calls upon its leadership
to implement the provisions of this agreement in full,
including cooperation in implementing the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.

Lessons from other conflicts have taught us the
importance of rebuilding viable administrative structures
and civil society, with the support of the international
community, in order to move from an initial cease-fire to
sustainable peace. Norway has contributed to this in Sierra
Leone through the support of several initiatives, such as the
DDR programme. Altogether, we have pledged or allocated
some $5 million to projects in Sierra Leone for the current
fiscal year. In the present situation, the future of these
projects is uncertain, and we have been forced to
withdraw all our civilian personnel in charge of
humanitarian aid from Sierra Leone.

In the search for a long-term solution to this conflict,
high priority should be given to curbing arms supplies
and the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons.
These weapons undermine the security of civilians and
threaten the safety of international peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel. The present situation highlights
the importance of initiatives such as the moratorium on
small arms in West Africa, an initiative Norway has
actively supported. In a similar vein, we underscore the
importance of regulating sources of income that fuel civil
strife in Africa, such as the trade in diamonds and other
precious minerals.

Norway remains firmly committed to peace and
development in Africa. These past months we have seen
how the work to build peace and a better future for
women, children and men in many parts of the continent
has been reversed by armed conflict and unrest. At this
critical juncture, the international community must not
turn its back on Africa, but redouble its support for the
efforts to ensure sustainable peace and development on
the continent.

