Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Let me at
the outset, Sir, congratulate you on behalf of my
delegation upon your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to pay tribute to Ambassador
Denisov and to the members of his delegation for their
successful guidance of our work in the past month.

Let me also thank Ambassador Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere for the way in which he led our mission to
Central Africa and express our satisfaction at the
positive outcome that the mission generated.

During the Security Council's recent
consideration of the fifth report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in Burundi
(S/5005/728) (see S/PV.5311) we had the opportunity
to confirm the sense we got during our visit to the
region of both considerable progress and many
remaining challenges on the way to restoring peace,
stability and progress in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi. The restoration of peace and
stability no longer seems to present an insurmountable
challenge, and with perseverance on the part of the key
players on the ground and with the resolute support of
the international community, there is reason to hope
today that the transition in those two countries will be
successfully completed.

For this to happen, the of 30 June 2006 deadline
for the end of the transition period in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must definitely be met, so that
we can deprive those who would be tempted to
rekindle the fires of crisis of any pretext for doing so.
We urge the Government of National Unity and
Transition to make up for past delays in reform of the
security forces; to resolve the material difficulties
facing the national army and police; to speed up the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the integration of the national armed
forces; and to extend State authority throughout the
territory.

On the eve of the 18 December constitutional
referendum, which will be a genuine test case for the
ongoing transition, inclusion and transparency must be
the hallmark of the electoral process in its preparatory
and organizational phases in order to ensure the
credibility of the outcome and to ensure the legitimacy
of the resulting institutions and strengthen their
chances to resist and survive any disputes.

We commend in this respect the enthusiasm of
the Congolese regarding the voter registration process.
This is an indication of their support for the elections
and confirms the importance they attach to the
electoral timetable in meeting their expectations in the
security, policy, economic and social areas.

Given the size of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the preparation and organization of these
elections, which will be the first in over 40 years, is
fraught with many logistical and communications
problems specific to that country. This will be, in and
of itself, a challenge; the international community
needs to contribute to meeting it. In that connection,
we pay tribute to MONUC for the efforts it has
undertaken to address these difficulties. We urge the
Transitional Government to establish the conditions for
successful elections by accelerating the issuance of an
electoral timetable and ensuring that it is met, and by
ensuring the timely adoption of an electoral law that
will do away with exclusion and ensure compliance
with the rules of democratic competition, including in
the area of transparency and freedom of expression.

In the security area, we believe that the presence
of the militias and foreign armed groups in the eastern
part of the country is an additional reason for concern
regarding the future of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and regarding
stability in the Great Lakes region overall. We
welcome the robust stance taken with respect to them
by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with the support of MONUC, as well as the
efforts undertaken by the countries members of the
Tripartite Plus One Commission to enable the
Transitional Government to disarm these groups and
ensure that they are repatriated. We urge the countries
of the region to respect the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to provide their
full cooperation to the Group of Experts established
under resolution 1533 (2004).

Burundi, for its part, has now begun the crucial
phase in peacebuilding and reconstruction of the
country, following the successful conclusion of the
transition process and the installation of democratically
elected institutions. The difficulties it continues to face
will make it a top candidate for the Peacebuilding
Commission when that body is set up. Right now, the
support of international partners and the assistance of
the donor community are key for enabling peace to
take root in the country in a durable fashion.

By setting out the priorities of their plan of
action, the new authorities have demonstrated their
resolve to directly tackle the sources of conflict and
work to establish peace and democracy, promote
national reconciliation and fight impunity through the
establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the special chamber of the judiciary,
which needs to be modernized and refined.

We regret the refusal of the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) to sit at the negotiating table and
participate in the peace process. We believe that
everything must done to persuade that movement to
cease hostilities and to contribute, working with the
elected authorities, to the reconstruction of the country.

While we fully support the Government's request
to adapt the United Nations presence to the new
realities of the country, we believe that recent history
and the still fragile nature of the situation favour a
prudent approach to the international community's
disengagement from Burundi. However, the Security
Council must reflect on the modalities and conditions
of a gradual withdrawal of ONUB that would enable
the Operation to continue to fulfil its mandate in an
effective and orderly fashion in close cooperation with
the Government of Burundi.
Furthermore, my delegation is encouraged by the
engagement and the determination of the authorities of
Uganda to continue to take measures needed to ensure
the security of humanitarian assistance and aid in the
north of the country.

We regret that the Conference of the Great Lakes
Region has been postponed, and we hope that the spirit
that inspired its preparation can be maintained in order
to ensure the Conference's success.

Finally, we welcome the initiatives taken by
MONUC and ONUB to enforce respect of the policy of
zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse within
those missions, and we encourage them to persevere in
that direction.

