Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 2371 (2017), on
nuclear non-proliferation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, as well as the constructive spirit
that prevailed during the negotiations held under the
leadership of the United States delegation as penholder.

With this resolution, the Security Council has, for
the second consecutive time this year and the third time
in less than 10 months, strengthened sanctions against
the Pyongyang authorities as a logical reaction to the
country's methodical pursuit of its ballistic and nuclear
programme. Indeed, the launch of ballistic missiles
conducted by North Korea on 3 and 28 July, in deliberate
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, represents a serious threat to peace
and security on the Korean peninsula and beyond. It
is also a direct threat to air navigation security and to
the security of the millions of people who live, work
and travel in the region. There were no warnings or
advance notice of the launches, which overshot by far
the maritime and aerial jurisdiction of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, affecting other areas that
are among the most densely populated in the world.

Senegal expresses its deep concern about these
actions and wishes to echo the words that our Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, addressed to the
North Korean authorities, urging them to fully abide
by its international obligations in this area in a clear,
irreversible and verifiable way.

It is for these reasons that the delegation of Senegal
voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017), which, in
addition to freezing the assets of and banning travel by
certain individuals and entities, imposes bans on the
export of coal, iron and iron ore, as well as restrictions
on access to the international banking system.

The delegation of Senegal will await the report
that the Security Council, through this resolution, has
requested the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on non-proliferation
in North Korea, to provide within 15 days. The report is
to highlight any additional items related to proliferation
and conventional weapons that could be added to the
consolidated list of measures already taken.

Another important element that led to Senegal's
positive vote is the fact that the resolution reaffirms the
Council's resolve to prevent the measures adopted from
having any negative humanitarian repercussions on the
North Korean civilian population, normal economic
activities, cooperation or the provision of food
assistance. Senegal welcomes the exemptions granted
to activities carried out by diplomatic or consular
missions in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
as well as those related to the humanitarian assistance
provided by the United Nations or in coordination
with it.

The delegation of Senegal reiterates that this
series of targeted measures, taken in order to respond
to the challenge represented by the North Korean
nuclear and ballistic programme, must be part and
parcel of a comprehensive political strategy aimed at
engaging the parties in dialogue, with the support of the
international community.

I therefore reiterate my country's commitment
to a political and diplomatic solution to this issue
and express Senegal's support for the relaunching of
the Six-Party Talks, so as to achieve the verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and promote
peaceful coexistence among the countries in the region,
with full respect for each other's sovereignty and on the
basis of the commitments undertaken by the parties in
the joint declaration of 19 September 2005.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our call on the
members of the Security Council and the international
community to launch at long last this crucial phase in
the situation on the Korean peninsula.

