Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank Mr. Volcker for presenting the final
report of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the
United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his statement.

France commends the submission of the report to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1538
(2004), in which the Council, in April 2004, welcomed
the appointment of the Committee at the Secretary-
General's initiative. The Secretary-General acted
courageously to ensure transparency and truth, and
France pays tribute to him.

My country fully supported the establishment of
that independent body and has cooperated fully and
transparently with it. We have always hoped that the
brightest light would be shed on the irregularities
committed under the oil-for-food programme. The final
report has been highly anticipated. We welcome the
important work done by the Committee and its
Chairman in a limited amount of time and in often
difficult conditions.

We have considered the preface to the report that
was made public yesterday. The French authorities
shall carefully study its conclusions and
recommendations before making a final statement on
its substance. As a preliminary reaction, we would
stress the following points.

First, as noted by Mr. Volcker, the oil-for-food
programme was the largest, most complex and most
ambitious humanitarian effort ever undertaken by the
United Nations. Given its magnitude, political stakes
and financial costs, it cannot be compared to any other
programme ever launched by the Organization. The
report stresses that the programme provided
considerable assistance to the Iraqi people, thereby
enabling it to surmount the threat of a humanitarian
crisis and to maintain the international effort aimed at
preventing Iraq from acquiring prohibited weapons.
There were a number of breakdowns. As
Mr. Volcker pointed out, responsibility for those is
collective. It fell above all to the Iraqi regime itself,
but also to other players in the programme. All of us
must now draw the appropriate lessons from the
experience. In that regard, we note the
recommendations in the preface of Mr. Volcker's
report. We have every confidence in the United Nations
ability to learn lessons from the report and to address
the dysfunction's highlighted by the Committee's
inquiry.

Finally, we note that the Committee's report
underscores the importance of achieving successful
United Nations reform at the forthcoming summit
meeting of the General Assembly. France shares that
concern and reaffirms its determination to ensure that
the summit will be a venue for in-depth reform of the
Organization so that it may more effectively address
the challenges currently facing the international
community.

