Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/617) and
Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing this morning, updating the
written report. We are also grateful for the statement of
His Excellency Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan. Like the representative
of Panama, I would also like to thank the presidency
for having enabled us to hear from Afghanistan prior to
members of the Council taking the floor.

With regard to the situation on the ground and the
report of the Secretary-General, the Secretary-General
states clearly and repeatedly that the situation in
Afghanistan, despite some progress, has suffered a
marked deterioration, particularly in the area of
security. According to the report, there has been a
44 per cent increase in the number of incidents
between August 2007 and August 2008. That
deterioration in the security situation, however, as the
report clearly indicates, is the result of a combination
of diverse factors. Mr. Eide has given us an additional
explanation as to what that means. We would like to
draw on some aspects of what he said.

The subject of governance is at the heart of the
challenges posed by this situation and of the
combination of factors to which we have referred. On
that subject, the Secretary-General states, in his report:

"Despite those positive developments, the
key challenge for the central Government will be
to create capacity at the sub-national level, where
the lack of resources, as well as corruption,
continues to have a crippling effect."
(S/2008/617, para. 45)
At this meeting, we would like to highlight and
emphasize our concern about the issue of corruption,
which is mentioned by the Secretary-General in the
paragraph just cited. In the same context, the report
points out that the atmosphere of impunity perpetuates
the notion that crime and the abuse of power are
acceptable. Clearly, for the Security Council, that is
unacceptable.

We cannot fail to express our concern at the
increase in the number of civilian victims. The
majority of those casualties have been caused by the
murderous hand of the insurgents. But, unfortunately,
some have also been caused by failed actions on the
part of the international forces. Unfortunately,
seriously and disturbingly, the extremists have even
attacked humanitarian convoys, including those of the
United Nations.

The threatened food crisis, which is not exclusive
to Afghanistan, is the result of internal and external
factors and must be addressed by the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community with the
required urgency and assiduity, for humanitarian and
strategic reasons alike. In that connection, all timely
cooperation that the international community can
provide to Afghanistan and its Government to reduce
and alleviate the threat of the food crisis will play a
role that is not only humanitarian, but also strategic.
The more hunger increases, the greater the risk that
other sectors will be absorbed into the extremist
insurgency.

We do not wish to ignore the positive aspects of
the report, in particular the reduced production of the
raw materials for opium and the monitoring of the
importation of the chemical precursors necessary for its
manufacture; the adoption of important laws by
Parliament; and, as Ambassador Tanin informed us, the
300 per cent increase in manufacturing in Afghanistan
since 2001.

Finally, we wish to ask Mr. Eide a few questions.
First, apart from his hope and his personal conviction,
what makes him believe that the recent political
changes, particularly in the interior and agriculture
ministries, are positive elements or developments, as
he said in his statement? Secondly, both in the
Secretary-General's report and in Mr. Eide's own
briefing this morning, we perceive - and if we are
mistaken, we ask him to correct us - that there is a
complaint regarding the issue of coordination, which is

so essential that it was central to the mandate given to
UNAMA under Security Council resolution 1806
(2008) in May. The question is: What can the Council
do to cooperate further with Mr. Eide and his team on
that particular aspect and others that he considers
important?

It is pointed out quite rightly in the report that
coordination can be provided so long as there is a will
to be coordinated, but I would like Mr. Eide to explain
to us further what the obstacles are, because in our
previous resolution, as I said, coordination was central
to the tasks added to the new mandate.

Finally, since this is a piece of information
provided by the Ambassador and the Special
Representative, I wonder whether they can explain
why, given the tripling of manufacturing in
Afghanistan over the past seven years, the
unemployment and poverty rates remain so high.

