Mr. Serrano: I thank you, Madame, for giving
the floor to the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova
align themselves with this declaration.

The European Union listened carefully to the
important statements by Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and the Permanent Observer of Palestine.

The European Union notes with regret that since
our last discussion on the situation in the Middle East
in October 2010 (see S/PV.6404), the direct talks
between Israelis and Palestinians have come to a stop
for the moment. Our hopes for the resumption of direct
peace talks, expressed in this very place four months
ago, did not materialize.
11
There is no alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution. Therefore, the European Union calls on all
parties to find a satisfactory way to engage without
delay in substantive negotiations on all final status
issues. The European Union affirms its readiness to
contribute to a negotiated solution on all final status
issues within the 12 months set by the Quartet. The
European Union is preparing to participate actively in
the envisaged Quartet meeting in the coming weeks.
Intensified coordination within the Quartet, as well as
close cooperation with Arab partners, building on the
Arab Peace Initiative, will be instrumental.

In this context, the European Union considers
that it is indispensable that both sides show restraint
and refrain from actions that could negatively affect
the continuation of this process. To that end, both sides
must uphold and implement previous commitments and
strive to create an environment conducive to a
successful outcome of these negotiations.

The European Union reiterates its call on Israel to
end all settlement activities, including in East
Jerusalem. As stated by EU ministers in December
2010, settlements are illegal under international law and
an obstacle to peace. If there is to be a genuine peace, a
way must be found through negotiations to resolve the
status of Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.
In this context, the EU strongly condemns the latest
developments in East Jerusalem, most recently the
demolition of the Shepherd Hotel on 9 January and the
planned construction of a new illegal settlement. These
construction plans should be abandoned.

The European Union High Representative,
Catherine Ashton, visited the region once more in the
first days of 2011. She has listened carefully to the
positions and concerns of both parties and underlined
the need for urgent progress towards a two-State
solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in
peace and security as part of a just and comprehensive
peace. She discussed with the Palestinian Authority the
implementation of its State-building plan. This work is
of crucial importance for the establishment of the
future State of Palestine, and the EU will continue to
actively support it. We welcome the World Bank's
assessment that:

"If the Palestinian Authority maintains its
current performance in institution-building and
delivery of public services, it is well-positioned
for the establishment of a State at any point in the
near future."
Political and financial support from the entire
international community is essential. The European
Union urges those who have made financial
commitments to deliver on their promises. All efforts
to achieve Palestinian reconciliation behind President
Mahmoud Abbas must also be accelerated.

The European Union remains extremely concerned
by the prevailing situation in Gaza and firmly reiterates
its calls for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009), as well as for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to and
from Gaza, including goods and persons from the West
Bank. The EU recognizes the progress following the
decision of the Israeli Government of 20 June 2010, but
changes on the ground have been limited and
insufficient thus far. Further efforts and complementary
measures by the Government of Israel are needed to
achieve a fundamental change of policy that will allow
for the reconstruction and economic recovery of Gaza
and improve the daily lives of the population while
addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns. The
European Union has always recognized these concerns,
deeply regrets the loss of life and calls for a complete
stop of all violence, including rocket attacks, and of
arms smuggling into Gaza. The European Union renews
its calls on those holding the abducted Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit, in contradiction with all principles of
international humanitarian law, to release him without
delay.

The European Union welcomes the
announcement by the Government of Israel concerning
new measures to facilitate exports out of Gaza, an
essential component of its recovery. The European
Union encourages a swift implementation and is ready
to work with Israel and the Palestinian Authority
towards reaching pre-2007 levels of exports in 2011 to
achieve real change on the ground. Increased and
accelerated imports of construction materials are
another crucial component of Gaza's recovery.

The European Union highly values the services
delivered by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
provide health, education and social protection services.

It also recalls that peace in the Middle East
should be comprehensive and reiterates the importance
of negotiations on the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-
Lebanese tracks. As regards Lebanon, the European
Union has appreciated the Syrian-Saudi efforts to help
Lebanon avoid tensions. The European Union reiterates
its support for the Lebanese authorities and calls on all
political actors to work constructively to seek a
negotiated solution to the current situation. Dialogue
and stability are essential to responding to recent
events in the interest of the Lebanese people.

At the same time, the EU renews its support to
the Secretary-General's recent unequivocal statement
reaffirming the independence of the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon, as well as his appeal for calm. The
European Union urges all parties not to interfere in the
Tribunal's work and not to prejudge its outcome. The
European Union takes note that the Prosecutor filed, on
Monday, 17 January, an indictment with the Registrar
for transmission to the Pre-Trial Judge.

The European Union reaffirms its full support to
the Lebanese authorities and commends the crucial role
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon. It calls upon all parties
concerned to implement all provisions of resolution
1701 (2006), to respect the Blue Line in its entirety, to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and UNIFIL,
and to ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel.

Finally, the European Union would like to
underline the fundamental importance of respecting
and ensuring the promotion and defence of human
rights. Human rights are universal and indivisible.
They are a key prerequisite for peace and security.
Violations of human rights need to be effectively
remedied. Human rights, as laid down in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and core international
human rights treaties, include the responsibility of
Governments to protect minorities and the freedom of
thought, conscience and religion. Everyone has the
freedom to manifest his religion or belief in teaching,
practice, worship and observance. Therefore, in the
context of recent violent incidents in the region, the
European Union reaffirms its condemnation of all
forms of intolerance and violence against persons,
including on the basis of their religion or belief,
wherever they take place.

When it comes to peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, these vital elements of the future - State-
building, strong economic development, respect for
human rights and security - need to be nurtured, but
nurtured in the context of resumed serious negotiations
on all final status issues, which should lead to a two-
State solution. Regional security is at stake. By ending
the conflict, both parties, as well as the entire region
and beyond, have much to gain. The European Union
reiterates its readiness to contribute substantially to a
comprehensive and sustainable solution, with the State
of Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security.

