Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, and the Chair of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their briefings. I would also like to express our deep appreciation to Viet Nam for the wise choice of topic for today's open debate. At the outset, allow me to recall the words of President Jair Bolsonaro during the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session (see A/74/PV.3). In accordance with the Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, the Organization was created to promote peace among sovereign nations. It was not created to suppress nationalities, but to promote a world where sovereign nations respect each other and national Governments honour their own citizens. That is the only viable basis for a real and enduring peace. After 75 years, we can honestly assess that the United Nations has lived up to its goal of becoming a podium to voice hopes and concerns from all over the world, a platform for fostering cooperation and partnerships and a tool that allows us to use diplomacy and dialogue as remedies for differences and grievances. The United Nations has also been successful in achieving what was perhaps its highest aspiration, namely, to avoid another systemic war among the world's greatest Powers. To a large extent, the value of the United Nations derives from its ability to frame the core of international relations, substituting power politics with shared commitments and ideas that have been guiding our actions since 1945. We owe much of that success to the establishment in the United Nations Charter of the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes as the modus operandi for inter-State relations. Going hand in hand with the prohibition of the use of force, Article 33 of the Charter crystalizes the duty of parties to seek peaceful solutions to their disputes. It also offers a variety of tools to address disputes that could endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. As with all other Chapter VI provisions, Article 33 is instrumental for conflict prevention. With regard to the use of force authorized under Chapter VII, the Charter reminds us that the Security Council acts on behalf of all Member States. Hence, all States have a legitimate interest in ensuring adherence to the mandate established in a Security Council resolution authorizing coercive measures. Moreover, the authorization must be limited in its legal, operational and temporal dimensions. Finally, when considering military action, the Council must demand adequate reporting and establish panels of experts to monitor implementation. As we recognize our successes, we must also acknowledge that the time has come to renew our overall approach to peace and security and to reform the structure of the Security Council. An expansion of the organ in both categories is key to making it more transparent, legitimate, representative and effective by bringing to the table those actors capable of making meaningful contributions to international peace and security. We must also address the fact that Africa still lacks permanent representation in the Security Council. Almost 15 years have passed since the 2005 World Summit, where Heads of State and Government called for an early reform of the Security Council. Yet we remain far from having achieved that goal. This year should mark not only the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, but also the beginning of a new chapter in which our adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter is reaffirmed through our commitment to a reform of the United Nations, including the Security Council. As muchas we have spoken of conflicts and disputes, it is important that we also speak of peace not merely as the absence of aggression but also as the pursuit of justice, inclusiveness and freedom. As we have seen time and again in the Council, when peace processes are not inclusive, they tend to fail. In that sense, it is paramount to recall that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family as the foundation not only of peace but also of freedom and justice. Bearing that in mind, Brazil reaffirms its uncompromising dedication to the highest standards of human rights and to the defence of democracy and the freedoms of speech, religion and the press. Such a commitment by all nations is imperative in order to attain lasting peace. As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations Charter, we must not forget that the future of humankind is embedded in each nation's exercise of its own identity and sovereignty. The United Nations must be the stage where we come together and work side by side for the benefit of our peoples.
