Mr. Akram (Pakistan): This is the first time that
my delegation is speaking in the Council on the subject
of Timor-Leste since the independence of that country
last May. At that time, the Secretary-General summed
up the sentiments of the entire United Nations
membership when he said to the people of Timor-
Leste:

"You should be very proud of your
achievement. That a small nation is able to
inspire the world and be the focus of our attention
is the highest tribute I can pay to you."

The Secretary-General added: "While your
determination ensured the success of your cause, you
have also been helped by friends from all over the
world".

Indeed, Pakistan is proud of its modest
contribution to the emergence of Timor-Leste as an
independent State. One of our most distinguished
diplomats and my predecessor during Pakistan's last
tenure on the Security Council, Ambassador Jamsheed
Marker, served as the Secretary-General's Personal
Representative on East Timor. Ambassador Marker
conducted critical negotiations which facilitated the
way for the independence of Timor-Leste.

Pakistan is also proud to have been one of the
largest troop contributors to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, which
oversaw the transition of the country to an independent
State. We are pleased to be still present in Timor-Leste,
as part of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET). Our commitment to the
peace, stability and independence of Timor-Leste
remains undiminished. We are also proud of Pakistan's
role over the years as a leading advocate of the right of
peoples to self-determination. We have upheld this
right often at a time when the world has forgotten the
promises it has made to peoples struggling under
foreign occupation and alien domination. Pakistan has
helped to keep the flame of freedom and self-
determination alive, especially Within the United
Nations over the last 50 years.

We are therefore gratified to see the realization of
the aspirations of the people of Timor-Leste. Let us
take this opportunity to remind the Council of its other
promises which have not been realized and to appeal to
the Council to show consistency, and not selectivity, in
its decisions. Let us work also to resolve the issue of
J ammu and Kashmir in accordance with the resolutions
of the Security Council and the promises of the Council
to the people of J ammu and Kashmir.

In this context, I would like to quote a remark
about Kashmir made by one noble fighter for freedom:

"They have now been waiting 50 years for a
chance to express their own resolve in a plebiscite
mandated by the United Nations shortly after the
Indian-Pakistani partition. It is thus time,
before this conflict ignites an even greater
tragedy, for all parties to take pause and finally
endorse the will of the Kashmiri people, the
United Nations and the founding fathers of these
two great nations. I therefore urge everyone
wishing to bring peace, democracy and social
justice to this troubled region to join in
supporting a free, fair and binding plebiscite for
all the people of Kashmir, so that the world may
finally know and abide by their long-deferred
aspirations."

Those are not the words of a Pakistani; they are
the words of His Excellency Jose Ramos-Horta, Nobel
Peace Laureate, now Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste.

Timor has been a triumph for self-determination.
It is rightfully referred to as one of the success stories
of the United Nations. For that reason we share the
concern which has been expressed in this Chamber
about recent events. Pakistan has always advocated that
no peacekeeping operation should be terminated if it
has not achieved its mandated objectives. While we are
confident that the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) will indeed complete the
tasks assigned to it, the security situation in
Timor-Leste has now become its priority consideration.
We feel that the scheduled downsizing of UNMISET at
this stage would not be desirable. Therefore, Pakistan,
both as a member of the Council and as a troop
contributor to UNMISET, fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to delay the
downsizing until December 2003.

We also support the adjustments in the military
and police compositions, as proposed by the
Secretariat. Pakistan further believes that the
international community, especially the donor
community, as well as the neighbours of Timor-Leste,
must help the Government and people to improve their
economic situation. The economic recovery of the
country is essential in order to restore hope and
generate stability. Pakistan welcomes in particular the
growing institutional cooperation between the
Governments of Indonesia and of Timor-Leste. We
strongly believe that the growing ties between those
two countries is the surest guarantee for peace in
Timor-Leste and for prosperity for the region as a
Whole. We urge both countries to continue to
strengthen their bilateral relations.

In closing, I would like to recall that, in Dili last
year, the Secretary-General made a commitment, on
behalf of all of us, to the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste. He said,

"Let me assure you that independence will not
mean the end of the world's commitment to you.
The United Nations will stay. Your friends around
the world will continue to help. We will all work
together to ensure that the first years of
independence are years of stability and progress."

Pakistan would urge that we abide by that
commitment.

