Mr. Eitel (Germany): Let me state at the outset that
Germany supports the statement made by the representative
of Italy on behalf of the European Union.

When the public order in Somalia collapsed in 1991,
when the Somali people suffered from fighting and famine
and when more than a million Somalis fled to neighbouring
countries, the international community shouldered its
responsibility. First, the American-led operation "Restore
Hope" prevented a further deterioration. Then the Security
Council decided on the mandate of a regular peace-keeping
operation. The United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II) was the first United Nations operation to
which Germany contributed regular troops on a large scale.
The German contingent comprised over 700 men.

Germany does not share the view that UNOSOM. II
was a failure. In many regions, a stabilization of the
situation was achieved. Tens of thousands of people were
saved from starvation. We admit, however, that UNOSOM
II did not become the success we had wanted it to be. The
reason is clear: peace and stability in a country depend in
the first place on the forces in that country. Without the
cooperation of all factions in Somalia, UNOSOM. II could
not bring about the desired peaceful solution to the internal
conflict. UNOSOM. II had to be withdrawn.

We again pay tribute to those men and women who
served in that operation. We honour those peace-keepers
who lost their lives in Somalia.

The United Nations has not abandoned Somalia.
Political efforts and humanitarian assistance continue. Our
meeting today, which is open to all Member States is
proof of our ongoing commitment. We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having taken this initiative, which,
as a measure to increase the transparency of the Council's
work, we welcome and support.

Unfortunately, there has been little movement until
now towards a political dialogue between the warring
factions or towards national reconciliation. We regret
recent military activities that have further increased the
suffering of the people. Those responsible for these
actions must realize that no breakthrough will be achieved
in that way. There is no single group or party that would
be strong enough to effectively control the country.

A solution to the present situation can only be found
through political dialogue. The Political Office of the
United Nations has already established relations with
those warring factions that are represented in Nairobi.
These contacts could and should be further developed. As
soon as the situation allows, the United Nations should
also aim to extend its presence in the country. The United
Nations Office has been able to gain a reputation for
impartiality, so that it is being accepted by the warring
factions - with the exception of one - as a partner for
dialogue. It might make sense, therefore, to increase the
number of personnel in the Office.

It has proved particularly difficult for the Political
Office of the United Nations to initiate a dialogue with
General Aidid. His insistence on being recognized as
president of Somalia has so far prevented any negotiations
with him about the political future of the country. At the
same time, the destabilization of agriculturally fertile
provinces constitutes a threat to the economic situation of
the whole country.

In addition, a key problem for political dialogue is
a general refusal to consider power sharing. However, the
fact that no party alone is capable of controlling the
country has led to the present impasse. Only the factions
themselves can find a way out by changing their
positions.

The efforts to establish basic administrative
infrastructures at a local and regional level are a very
positive sign. However, we are concerned over the
difficulties of filling positions and dividing power, which
may thwart timely progress. This decentralized process

 

should under no circumstances result in the further break-up
of the country.

The humanitarian situation appears to remain stable,
in so far as the United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations have been able to carry out
activities in Somaliland, the Bari region and the north of
the country. Here I would like to express my special
gratitude and admiration to these agencies and
non-governmental organizations for their courage and their
commitment. I want to make a special point of this. In the
face of the withdrawal of all diplomatic and comparable
missions, they continue to assist the people of Somalia.

In the field of humanitarian assistance, since 1992
Germany has given bilateral aid amounting to
approximately $60 million. That is in addition to what is
being done by the European Union, of which we normally
have a share of 30 per cent.

We call upon the warring parties not to impede or
endanger the work of the humanitarian organizations, which
do their utmost to alleviate the suffering of the people of
Somalia despite the persistent instability.

We appeal to the warring factions to accept the good
offices of the United Nations and to finally agree among
themselves on a peaceful solution.

