The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing. Today's briefing
provides an important opportunity to recognize the
positive developments in the Sudan over the past
months, including efforts to begin to forge a just and
comprehensive peace and address long-standing human
rights concerns in the Sudan.

When we met with the Prosecutor on this item
in June (see S/PV.8554), we were concerned about
security force excesses against peaceful protesters and
were unsure what path the Sudan's transition would
take. We are pleased to gather today, eight months after
the ouster of Omar Al-Bashir, for the first briefing
since the establishment of a civilian-led transitional
Government. We have been encouraged by concrete
steps parties in the Sudan have taken to build a more
stable, secure and human rights-respecting future. The
formation of the civilian-led transitional Government
this summer, the signing of the Juba Declaration for
Confidence-building Procedures and the Preparation
for Negotiation in September and ongoing negotiations
between the Government and armed opposition forces
have increased the prospects for an enduring peace
across the Sudan. We have also been pleased to see
the appointment of women to key leadership positions,
including the first female Chief Justice of the Sudan.
Ensuring the inclusion and participation of women in all
branches of Government is vital for the Sudan's future.
The ouster of Omar Al-Bashir - a symbol
of genocide, crimes against humanity and other
atrocities-hasbothtangible and symbolic implications.
It means that he can no longer engineer horrific crimes
against his own people, but it also signals to the Sudan's
victims that power cannot be secured indefinitely
through violence. The United States was honoured to
host Prime Minister Hamdok in Washington, DC, in
early December - the first Sudanese Head of State
to visit Washington in over three decades. During
the visit, the United States announced the decision to
elevate our diplomatic representation in Khartoum and
pursue an exchange of ambassadors with the Sudan.
Secretary Pompeo explained the decision by stating
that the Prime Minister's Government had

"demonstrated a commitment to peace negotiations
with armed opposition groups, established a
commission of inquiry to investigate violence
against protesters and committed to holding
democratic elections".

The constitutional declaration makes justice
a centrepiece of the transition, committing to
accountability for crimes against the Sudanese people
since the start of the Al-Bashir regime, developing the
justice system and promoting legal reform to ensure
equality for all regardless of gender, religion or ethnicity.
We have seen positive signals that the Prime Minister
and his Government will not overlook Darfur's victims.
The Prime Minister's visit on 4 November to Darfur,
including to an internally displaced persons camp, sent
a powerful signal to both victims and perpetrators of
past violence. We urge the Government to make good
on its promises and address the root causes of conflict
in order to create the conditions that will allow people
to return home.

There are few in the Sudan more deserving of facing
justice than Omar Al-Bashir. While we are encouraged
by his conviction on 14 December, we note that the
charges were narrowly focused on corruption and
money-laundering. As we have said for over a decade,
there will be no lasting peace in the Sudan unless there
is genuine accountability for all of the crimes that have
been committed against the Sudanese people. To date,
no one has been held accountable for the deaths of
almost 300,000 people in Darfur, the rampant sexual
violence or the looting and burning of homes. Those
most responsible for the crimes suffered in the conflicts
in Darfur and the two areas should be held accountable
for their actions, including by ensuring that they have
no power to hijack the Sudan's future. The United States
is deeply committed to supporting Sudanese efforts to
ensure justice and encourage open inclusive national
dialogues about how transitional justice mechanisms
can facilitate truth, justice, reconciliation and healing.

While we support justice for past abuses, we are
concerned by reports of ongoing violence. Fighting
between security forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid in the northern Jebel Marra area
has displaced more than 2,000 people and sexual
violence remains a grim reality for many. The violence
and abuses are symptoms of unresolved challenges
facing the Sudan, including weak political and judicial
systems that have failed to ensure accountability on
all levels, as well as the absence of a durable peace
agreement in Darfur. We are committed to supporting
the Sudan in those endeavours. The United States
has historically been and will continue to be a strong
supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for
victims of atrocities through appropriate mechanisms.
Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face justice, but
we must also be careful to recognize the right tool for
each situation.

Finally, I must reiterate our long-standing and
principled objection to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction
over nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the consent
of such States. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the
situation in Afghanistan are well known. However, our
position on the ICC in no way diminishes the United
States commitment to supporting accountability for
atrocity crimes, violations of international humanitarian
law and gross violations of human rights.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

