Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate the Secretary-General for the
quality of his report (S/2015/157) on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Haitian Government has considered with
great interest the contents of the report, which follows
the Secretary-General's field mission in Haiti last
summer and that of the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations some weeks before, as
well as the visit by members of the Security Council
in January. The report contains a very fair and lucid
analysis of the crisis that has shaken Haiti over the
past year and which, fortunately, is now passed. It also
paints a balanced and objective picture of the overall
situation in Haiti in terms of stabilization and security
and the new opportunities emerging with the launch of
the electoral process, which, as everyone recognizes, is
a major test not only for MINUSTAH and the Haitian
institutions, but also and especially for the future of
democracy in Haiti.

In the first part of my statement I will provide
some complementary information and assessments to
those provided in the report of the Secretary-General.
In the second part I will share with the Council some
observations of the Haitian Government on the security
situation on the eve of the elections and challenges
that could be brought about by the upcoming electoral
consultations, given their particular complexity, as
mentioned by the Secretary-General.

The long political crisis in which Haiti has been
mired, is over. Fortunately, reason has finally prevailed.
Supporters of the republican order overwhelmingly
chose to go to the ballots. The Secretary-General's
report highlights that development. The President
of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Michel Joseph
Martelly, has spared no sacrifice and no concession
in establishing conditions conducive to the proper
holding of the elections. That was demonstrated by
the long series of consultations that he held with all
political actors, the establishment of the presidential
advisory commission and the full implementation
of the recommendations issued by that body aimed
at breaking the stalemate. The appointment of a
new Prime Minister, the formation of a consensus
Government, the reform carried out in the judiciary and
the establishment of a provisional Electoral Council,
in accordance with the requirements of article 289 of
the Constitution, have all won over the most reticent
and have convinced everyone of the unwavering will
of Haiti's Head of State and Government to hold free,
honest, democratic, transparent and inclusive elections
in 2015. I am pleased to recall that that commitment was
also solemnly reiterated to the members of the Security
Council during their important visit to Haiti in January.

In the meantime, a new electoral decree, widely
discussed by all of the stakeholders, was adopted on
2 March. Similarly, a realistic timetable has been
presented by the Electoral Council for the holding of
presidential, legislative, municipal and local elections
this year. The executive just issued, on 13 March, a
presidential decree calling people to the ballot box on
9 August, 25 October and, if necessary, 27 December.
Therefore, after facing manifold obstacles that could
have derailed the electoral process and jeopardized the
gains made in recent years, the Haitian Government
is pleased to have successfully completed what the
Secretary-General characterized in his report as a
decisive step towards the holding, by the end of the
year, of the long-overdue elections.

Things are on track. The holding of the next
election is crucial to the strengthening of democracy
and the rule oflaw and lasting stability in Haiti. In that
respect, the Haitian Government is deeply grateful to
the Secretary-General and Security Council members
for the interest, trust, solidarity and support they have
shown to the Haitian people, in particular during the
recent political crisis. We were particularly grateful for
the efforts undertaken by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore,
and the members of the core group for facilitating
dialogue among all political actors. Their participation
in the development of a consensus and the search for a
constructive and viable solution deserves recognition.

MINUSTAH's presence has undoubtedly been
an important factor in the establishment of stability
and security in Haiti over the past decade. Ten years
after its establishment by the Security Council, the
Mission, as everyone agrees, must evolve and adapt to
an environment that is different from the one in which
it was created. That is the spirit in which the gradual
and progressive withdrawal of peacekeepers was
announced, and, in principle, the withdrawal has been
carried out up to the present from the perspective of
the Mission's post-2016 reconfiguration, in accordance
with resolution 2180 (2014).

However, without wanting to call into question
the guidelines of the current withdrawal plan or the
prospects for the Mission's reconfiguration, the Haitian
Government believes that it would be useful to call
on the Security Council to demonstrate the necessary
flexibility in implementing the reconfiguration.
In particular, in the light of the assessment of the
situation and the current needs in the area of security,
the Government believes that the timetable for the
withdrawal should be reassessed so as to take into
account, at each stage of the evolution, the actual
situation on the ground and, in particular, the threats
and risks that could jeopardize national stability and
security. That is why the Haitian Government strongly
hopes that, in the current pre-electoral context,
MINUSTAH troop numbers can be maintained at
a level at which they can significantly improve the
security environment, which, as members know, is a
key factor in voter confidence in the process and one of
the determining factors for the success of the elections.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightly notes
an upsurge in violence recorded over the past weeks
in Haiti, although the security situation has generally
remained stable and the ability of the Haitian National
Police to maintain order has continued to improve.
At this critical juncture, when the electoral process is
entering its decisive phase, we are indeed witnessing a
significant increase in violence, which is illustrated in
particular by the resurgence of clashes between armed
groups in certain neighbourhoods and a clear resurgence
of crime and violent outbursts, which in turn give rise
to socioeconomic or political protests. Those events, as
the report shows, often occur along with the destruction
of public property and facilities, as evidenced by the
recent MINUSTAH vehicle fire.

In that context, the Haitian Government attaches
the highest importance to the maintenance of a
sufficient presence by the MINUSTAH military and
police components. By supporting the work of the
Haitian National Police in a more proactive manner
and throughout the electoral cycle, those components
would make a measurable contribution to enhancing
confidence in the security environment.

Therefore, given the renewed insecurity, the
obvious complexity of the upcoming elections and the
special challenges that they will present in terms of
managing logistics and security, as the report notes, the
Government of Haiti believes it necessary to appeal to
the Security Council and request that there be a pause
in the ongoing withdrawal process of the MINUSTAH
military contingents.

Meanwhile, the Haitian Government would greatly
welcome the strengthening of the police component of
MINUSTAH and its presence on the ground through
increased support to the Haitian National Police and
more sustained participation in the daily tasks relating
to the safety and protection of citizens.

Finally, the Haitian Government believes that, in
the light of the aforementioned resurgence in violence,
the United Nations should reassess, jointly with the
Haitian authorities, the rules for implementing the
withdrawal plan in two phases, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's August 2014 report (S/2014/617),
so as to take fully into account the evolution of the
situation on the ground throughout the election cycle
and beyond.

I would like to express the Government of
Haiti's profound gratitude for the positions and
recommendations just expressed here by a certain
number of partners, including Spain, Venezuela, Chile,
New Zealand and, of course, your country, France,
Mr. President, and for the interest expressed in the
Haitian Government's request. I noted the remark
made to that effect by the President. However, the
Haitian Government's request relates to paragraph 4 of
resolution 2180 (2014), of 14 October 2014, which states
the Council's commitment to act at any time to adapt
MINUSTAH's mandate and force levels, if compelled
by a change of conditions in Haiti and if necessary to
preserve the progress Haiti has made towards durable
security and stability.

The Government is fully aware that the responsibility
for organizing elections and security rests with the
Haitian authorities. In that context, it fully counts on
the spirit of cooperation and flexibility that has always
governed the cooperation between the United Nations
and Haiti. MINUSTAH's contribution will certainly be
essential to the holding of elections in the best possible
security conditions, which is key to their credibility and
legitimacy. In the same vein, the Government endorses
the deployment of international election observer
missions, which could only contribute to improving
confidence in the process.

The Haitian Government attaches great importance
to the eminently constructive role played by the United
Nations in Haiti. It reiterates its gratitude to all the
Member States that continue, in the spirit of solidarity
and international cooperation, to support the Haitian
people in their march towards the building of the
rule of law and a democratic society. I also express
the Government's gratitude to the friendly nations in
the hemisphere that have recently spared no effort to
draw the Council's attention to the need for consistent
support by the international community for Haiti and
its people.

We welcome the prospects for such continued aid
in the upcoming election cycle, whose importance we
all understand. We must not lose sight of the ultimate
goal, which is also the very foundation of the Mission,
namely, the consolidation of the rule of law and the
realization of long-term stability, which will ensure the
sustainability of democracy, growth and development
in Haiti.

That is why it is of the highest importance that
every effort be undertaken to promote a gradual and
orderly transfer of MINUSTAH's responsibilities. That
transfer must, at every stage, take into consideration
the progress made and the existing vulnerabilities.
Care must be taken especially to avoid any premature
withdrawal that could create a vacuum in the security
situation, as was so eloquently recalled in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General.

I once again thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which will undoubtedly shape the Council's
work with regard to the evolution and reconfiguration
of the Mission, and I reiterate the determination of
the Haitian Government to continue to work closely
with the Security Council and the Secretariat to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to MINUSTAH. I hope, in
particular, that the Council will grant Haiti its priority
attention and take whatever follow-up measures are
deemed necessary based on the requests of the Haitian
Government.

Haiti is the oldest child of France in the Americas.
You, Sir, know of the special historic and cultural
ties - and every other type of tie - between my
country and yours. You stated earlier that France stood
united with Haiti. I would like to reiterate to you that
Haiti shares a family bond with France.

