Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Madam President, and to
congratulate the United States of America upon its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I would like to express my appreciation to
the representative of the United Kingdom, Ambassador
Sir Mark Lyall Grant, who presided over the Council
last month.

In the light of the humanitarian situation faced by
our brothers the Syrian people, and as an imperative
humanitarian duty, the Iraqi Government has taken
a number of measures to alleviate the suffering
experienced by our brothers in Syria. In recognition of
how the Syrian people hosted a great number of Iraqi
refugees during the crisis our country faced, the Iraqi
Government contributed $10 million at the international
donors conference on Syria held in Kuwait, and
established a $40-million fund to assist Syrians.
Furthermore, the Government is providing monthly
grants of $400 to families and of $150 to unmarried
individuals. We note that Iraq provides this financial
assistance without requesting any compensation from
the international community.

The Iraqi Government is also providing social
services to its Syrian guests by opening its school
doors to all Syrian boys and girls, at all levels, so that
they can continue their education without interruption.
Iraq is also providing medical services at Government
hospitals unconditionally. Furthermore, those Syrians
who are financially capable are given the freedom to
choose where they want to settle within Iraq. We have
also extended an invitation to the Secretary-General and
his representatives for humanitarian affairs to visit Iraq
and inspect the conditions of the Syrian refugees. We
take this opportunity to recall the assistance provided
by the Iraqi Government in facilitating the successful
visit of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflicts, and her team to inspect the conditions of
Syrian children in Iraq.

With regard to the security and political situations,
the position of the Iraqi Government since the early
days of the crisis has been one of support for a peaceful
resolution of the crisis by the Syrians themselves
coming to the negotiating table to stop the spilling of
Syrian blood. We have provided clear support for the
efforts of the United Nations, including those of the
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi and Mr. Kofi Annan. We voiced our support
for the six-point solution proposed by Mr. Kofi Annan
to resolve the crisis in Syria.

Here we reaffirm our position that Iraq does not
support any military or foreign intervention. We call on
all sides, Arab and non-Arab alike, to cease providing
financial and military support to all militias and Islamic
militant groups, which we believe can only further
complicate matters.

In the light of Iraq's support for the resolution of
the crisis, my Government has been a keen participant
in the conferences that we believe may help all sides
to reach a viable solution to stop the conflict, whose
negative effects on the region and on Iraq in particular
are quite clear. My Government has made its position
very clear in meetings held with the moderate Syrian
opposition, which is seeking a peaceful solution and
working to establish a democratic constitutional system
that satisfies the demands and aspirations of the Syrian
people.

The Iraqi Government urges the Syrian Government
to provide access for international organizations to
reach civilians trapped in conflict areas so as to provide
them with food, medical services and basic necessities.
Furthermore, Iraq is concerned over reports of the use
of chemical weapons in the conflict, in particular in the
light of the fact that the Iraqi people have suffered from
the use of such internationally banned weapons.

In conclusion, the solution of the Syrian crisis lies
with those Syrians who truly want a peaceful settlement
that would provide for a prosperous future for all sectors
of Syrian society, living in peace and security. My
Government has supported and continues to support the
convening of a second Geneva conference to consider

ways and means to find a solution acceptable to all
parties to the conflict.

