Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the efforts of the Russian presidency of the Security Council to enable us to resume our meetings in the Chamber. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Minister Annadif for his briefing. I would like to take this opportunity to thank him and all United Nations staffin Mali for their tireless efforts in often difficult and dangerous circumstances. In that regard, I would like to point out that Belgium continues to provide specialist troops to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). There are currently 95 military personnel, in close cooperation with our German partners. The fact that Belgian soldiers serve in Mali today under the German flag is a fine example of the unity of our European Union (EU). I will address five points in my statement. First, Belgium has condemned the seizure of power by the military on 18 August. Mali faces an additional challenge as it struggles to emerge from the multidimensional crisis affecting it and the region. It is positive that the Economic Community of West African States reacted immediately and decisively, resulting in the latest welcome developments. The appointment of a civilian President and Prime Minister, as well as the formation at of a Government to implement the Transitional Charter, which has now been published, are important steps on the path back to constitutional order. Today's release of the officials detained since 18 August is a step in the same direction. It is a positive gesture. Belgium wishes the transitional authorities every success in their work and hopes that they will be able to meet the expectations of the Malian people. My country is ready to support them in carrying out the tasks set out in the Charter. The organization of credible elections within 18 months and the constitutional and institutional reforms, including the important security sector reform, are in my view a particular priority. In that regard, Belgium, together with its EU partners, is currently looking at the modalities for resuming the operations of the military European Union Training Mission in Mali and the police EUCAP Sahel Mali mission in Mali. Secondly, it is crucial that the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali continue. I welcome the Malian statements to that effect. Moreover, the struggle against terrorism and in support of development must not be put on hold. I would like to recall that, in addition to the necessary security measures, combating terrorism also involves strengthening the legitimacy of the State. That could be bolstered by decisively combating impunity and the resolve to respect human rights in all situations. The publication of the report of the International Commission of Inquiry on Mali will certainly serve to initiate both reforms and criminal proceedings. Similarly, I encourage our Malian partners to bring to a successful conclusion the investigations into the alleged abuses committed by the defence and security forces against civilians. That must lead to trials. In that regard, it is deeply regrettable that, to date, no trials have been held against alleged perpetrators of crimes against MINUSMA peacekeepers. Thirdly, the situation in central Mali remains of great concern. We call for a reformed State to redeploy as soon as possible and to perform its statutory role of protecting its weakest citizens. Self-defence militias and terrorists are increasing in number for many reasons - the lack of security, justice, education and, above all, quality jobs, including for young people. In that regard, I would like to take this opportunity to commend the work of MINUSMA, in cooperation with other actors. That brings me to my fourth point. We regret that few women have been appointed to the new Government despite the fact that Malian legislation provides for a minimum of 30 per cent women Ministers. The meaningful participation of women is crucial to the success of each of the three points I mentioned above and to finding a way out of the crisis and a long- term solution. Finally, I would like to stress the importance of maintaining and strengthening humanitarian access in order to reach those in need. Countless people continue to suffer, particularly due to the lack of access to basic social services, and it is important that such assistance reach them. In that context, I would like to draw attention to the contents of the two events organized last month by the Niger, Belgium and the European Commission's Humanitarian Aid Office. It is clear from those discussions that climate change exacerbates the plight of the populations in the Sahel. Through those side events and the meeting convened by the presidency of the Niger, we have tried to further raise global public awareness of this disaster and its impact. In conclusion, I would like to stress that Belgium will remain Mali's friend by supporting it on the path to strengthening its democracy, sustainable development and security.
