Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening an open session today,
and we also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing.

My Government was represented at the Annapolis
meeting last November. We had welcomed the
initiative of the United Sates for convening the
conference which, for the first time, brought together

many countries keen to support the peace process in
the Middle East. We also welcomed the Joint
Understanding reached by the parties. More
importantly, we commended the efforts by the parties,
Palestine and Israel, who bear the primary
responsibility for achieving peace.

We are particularly pleased that, in accordance
with the understandings reached at Annapolis,
Palestinian Chief Negotiator Ahmad Qurei and Israeli
Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni have begun meeting to
discuss core issues. The resumption of direct
negotiations will hopefully lead to a definitive
settlement of the sixty-year-old Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in the foreseeable future. Experience has
shown that successful conflict resolution has as its
basis the willingness of the parties to negotiate without
preconditions. Despite the violence and despair that
threatens peaceful change in conflict situations, our
belief is that the only alternative is an inclusive
negotiated solution.

We are, however, deeply concerned that while
there is an attempt to begin the process of resolving
final status issues, Israel continues its illegal settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, despite
its stated commitment at the Annapolis Conference to
stop building settlements in the West Bank. The
planned expansion of the Har Homa settlement not
only expands illegal settlements but also predetermines
a solution to the future of Jerusalem. The existing
network of hundreds of illegal settlements, military
posts, checkpoints and the separation wall already
undermine the prospects of achieving a Viable and
contiguous Palestinian State and is in clear violation of
United Nations resolutions and the Road Map.

The situation in occupied Palestine, in particular
Gaza, cannot be ignored any longer. Try as it might,
this Security Council cannot remain silent and hope
that the situation in Gaza will change as time goes by,
when 1.5 million residents are left without water,
electricity and basic sewage systems. We have to
remember that the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, has a special responsibility in
supporting a peaceful resolution to the conflict in the
Middle East.

Allow me to digress and say that my neighbour,
Ambassador Sawers of the United Kingdom, raised an
important issue about whether such meeting formats
are helpful, whether they throw more light or more
heat on the situation. I know for a fact that my
delegation believes that silence on the situation in the
Middle East is more dangerous than even meetings
where temperatures and heat might be raised. In fact,
we would have preferred a meeting where all Member
States could come and speak on this issue, because we
do not believe that the issue at hand belongs only to
fifteen Member States and four other invited Member
States.

Already yesterday, the Office of the Special
Coordinator Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process in Jerusalem reported that all crossings
into Gaza from Israel remain closed, except for fuel
imports. This, of course, contradicts the intentions
expressed by Israel to ease the border blockade. We
learned today from Ambassador Gillerman that about
50 trucks have gone in, but Mr. Pascoe just indicated
that there is a backlog of 224 trucks. That is why we
believe this issue must always be discussed.

My delegation wishes to reiterate that the pursuit
of peace must mean that neither side creates conditions
that would undermine possible confidence-building
measures. Any process to find a peaceful solution
should also translate into parallel progress on the
ground. The continuing occupation undermines the
credibility of the peace process.

South Africa is on record as supporting a
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital,
existing alongside the State of Israel, with both States
enjoying secure borders. A Palestinian State will
require an adequate physical and services infrastructure
along with sufficient financial resources, if it is to
function effectively and to successfully address the
extensive needs of the Palestinian people. South Africa
remains ready to assist concretely in this regard,
despite its own considerable development challenges.

At the recent Paris pledging conference on
Palestine, the South African Government announced
that it will donate $1 million per annum for capacity-
building and humanitarian assistance in Palestine over
the next three years. It has also agreed with its partners
within the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
Dialogue Forum to provide an additional $lmillion per
year from IBSA funds for the same purposes over the
same period.

The international community has the duty to
assist and support the parties to reach a settlement and
also to ensure that political progress is coupled with a

change for the better in the lives of Palestinians and
Israelis. In this regard, we commend previous regional
and international efforts to take the peace process
forward, including the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Road Map. The United Nations, the Security Council
in particular, has an obligation to remain committed to
assist the respective parties in their quest for a lasting
peace.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate and recall
all Security Council resolutions on this matter, in
particular resolution 338 (1973), for the parties to work
towards a just and durable peace. Only through a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East
that addresses the Syrian and Lebanese tracks as well
would this just and durable peace prevail.

In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the
recent agreement reached by the Arab Foreign
Ministers on the composition of the Lebanese National
Unity Government. However, we remain concerned by
the endless Violence plaguing Lebanon. We reiterate
the Council's call for inclusive political dialogue in
order to foster the unity of all the Lebanese people.

