Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting,
and we welcome in our midst the Foreign Ministers of
Jamaica and the Bahamas, as well as other

representatives of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM).
We have viewed with growing concern in recent
weeks the deteriorating political and humanitarian
situation in Haiti. The situation has been rightly
described as reaching crisis proportions. The need for
immediate action in order to save lives and prevent yet
another conflict cannot be over-emphasized. We share
the concerns of other Council members regarding the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Haiti.
Immediate action is warranted to alleviate human
suffering.

Pakistan commends the efforts made so far by the
friends of Haiti to help defuse the crisis. Pakistan also
supports the initiative taken by the Organization of
American States (OAS) and CARICOM. to promote a
peaceful political and constitutional solution of the
crisis. We still hope that the parties can find a way
forward towards a peaceful settlement through these
efforts. My delegation is also willing to consider
broader international engagement in support of a
political solution in accordance with the United
Nations Charter.

As the Council considers this situation, we offer a
few words of caution. We agree that there are no quick
fixes and no easy solutions in Haiti. The problems that
Haiti faces are multi-dimensional; decades of poverty,
economic collapse, environmental degradation,
violence and instability have left it the poorest country
in the Americas. The solutions to these problems must,
therefore, also be found on several fronts.

The immediate concerns in the political, security
and humanitarian areas must be addressed, but so must
the other, deeper socio-economic root causes of
conflict and instability in Haiti. Although the
involvement of the United Nations in Haiti dates back
to 1986 and even included a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the mid-nineties, the United
Nations withdrew prematurely without addressing
many of the root causes. My delegation has repeatedly
advised against the premature disengagement of the
United Nations in any conflict situation. We have also
called for a more comprehensive approach involving
not just the Security Council but also the General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council to address
all the underlying issues in such complex situations. If
the United Nations becomes involved once again, it
must do so with sufficient political and financial will
and with a sustained commitment to stay the course
until lasting peace and security in Haiti and the region
is fully assured.

