Mr. Ipo (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the United Kingdom for
its initiative to convene today's meeting on the letter
dated 13 March 2018 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
on behalf of Prime Minister Teresa May, addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218),
following the poisoning of Mr. Sergei Skripal and his
daughter, Yulia, in Salisbury on 4 March.
Cote d'Ivoire would like to reiterate its strong
condemnation of the poisoning, which was carried out
with nerve agent, and the use of chemical weapons,
regardless ofthe perpetrators, whether in times ofpeace
or of war. The investigations conducted by the British
police have zeroed in on two individuals who have
alleged links to a Russian military intelligence agency.

The Skripal incident reminds us all about the
importance of the strict implementation of the relevant
provisions of the international non-proliferation
architecture. There is no doubt that strict respect
for international law in the area of the combating
the proliferation of chemical weapons will enable
us to prevent such acts, which constitute a threat to
international peace and security. My country calls upon
all stakeholders to show restraint and work with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in line with the competencies entrusted to it during its
special session held on 26 and 27 June in The Hague, in
order to identify those who use chemical weapons and
bring them to justice before the competent international
judicial bodies.

The Skripal incident is a source of discord in
the Security Council. In that context, Cote d'Ivoire
remains committed to the values of dialogue, peace and
friendship among peoples and calls upon Member States
to preserve the unity of the Council, without which our
efforts to meet our goal to maintain international peace
and security would be in vain.

