Mr. Crowley (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes this opportunity to again address the
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. We also wish to
congratulate you and your delegation, Mr. President,
for effectively and efficiently steering the work of the
Security Council during the month of October.

South Africa wishes to thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing delivered earlier to
the Security Council. My delegation associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

This debate is timely and takes place at a critical
juncture in the latest round of stalled negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli parties. My
delegation was hoping that we could address this
meeting of the Security Council in the month of
October on a more optimistic note, on a more hopeful
note. My delegation was hoping that, at this point in
time, some measure of progress would have been
reached through direct negotiations, which would
signal a forward-moving momentum that would place
us firmly on the path of finding a sustainable and
peaceful resolution of the outstanding permanent status
issues and that would bring us closer to the realization
ofa two-State solution.

Our hope was based on some very positive and
encouraging developments, including the efforts to
resume negotiations between the parties through
proximity talks, the continued engagement of
the Quartet - and separately the United States of
America - with the Palestinian and Israeli leadership,
the resumption of direct talks between the parties on
2 September on all permanent status issues, and the
continued support of the Arab League and
Non-Aligned Movement, with the hope of seeing the
direct talks achieve the ultimate objective of creating a
two-State solution and ushering in a new era of Middle
East peace and security. Those developments were
significant and created an atmosphere at the
international level conducive to moving the process
forward and to ensuring that the Palestinians would
realize their inalienable right of self-determination.

Throughout the period of negotiations, the resolve
of the parties was severely tested through incidents such
as the continued imposition of the inhuman blockade of
the Gaza Strip, the continued construction of the
unlawful separation wall, and the violent assault by
Israeli forces on the international humanitarian flotilla
on 31 May 2010. Further threats to the negotiations
stemmed from Israel's decision not to extend the
settlement freeze when it expired on 26 September
2010.

In connection with the latter decision, my
Government issued a statement in which it noted,

"with serious concern that the partial moratorium
imposed by the Israeli Government in November
2009 on the further construction of Israeli
settlements in the occupied Palestinian West Bank
has not been renewed. The ten-month Israeli
moratorium, which expired on 26 September
2010, was not renewed despite the resumption of
direct negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian
leaders. . .".

Furthermore, the halting of settlement
construction is seen by the South African Government
as a commitment already agreed to by the Israelis
during prior negotiations, including at the International
Middle East Peace Conference at Annapolis, which
took place in November 2007 and in which South
Africa participated.

My Government further stated that

"the continued building of new settlements
threatens to halt negotiations between Palestine
and Israel, as Palestinian President Abbas has
repeatedly made it clear that in the absence of a
halt to settlement construction, he would not
continue with the negotiations".

The South African Government further noted that

"[t]he first few rounds of direct Israeli-
Palestinian talks held during September 2010
appeared to have demonstrated a clear intention
by both parties to effectively move the peace
process forward. The South African Government
accordingly calls on the Israeli Government to
honour its previous international commitments by
putting an end to all further settlement
construction in the Palestinian West Bank
indefinitely. In so doing it will demonstrate its
serious intention to bring about the establishment
of a viable and fully independent Palestinian
State, existing side by side in peace with Israel
within internationally recognized borders".

During our negotiations to establish a democratic
South Africa, my country also experienced moments
that threatened to derail the negotiations process and
tested the resolve of our political leadership. Focused
on the broader goal of peace, democracy and
reconciliation, the South African political leadership
defied all those who sought to have them fail in
achieving those objectives.

This is such a moment in the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations process, where the leadership of Palestine
is confronted with circumstances that make it difficult
for them to count on the good faith that is necessary for
negotiations. My delegation has always stated that a
long-term solution to the challenges facing the region
can only be achieved through negotiations. For that to
happen, it is essential that a climate of mutual trust and
peace be created and that the Israeli political leadership
take the difficult decisions needed to ensure sustainable
peace in the region.

We therefore call on the Israeli Government to
desist from all actions that could have a negative
impact on the negotiations process. Israel's current acts
threaten to undermine the legitimacy of the process by
weakening the Palestinian Authority as an equal
partner in the negotiations process. The Palestinian
Authority has come to the talks in good faith,
expecting the full implementation of Israel's previously
agreed commitments under international law, as well as
relevant Security Council resolutions and Israel's Road
Map obligations.

My delegation also calls for continued unity
among the Palestinian political leadership which, in
our view, would strengthen the negotiations process.

South Africa urges the international community,
this body and all players concerned to exert all the
influence necessary and pressure Israel to meet its
obligations under various Security Council resolutions
and under international law. The Security Council in
particular has to shoulder its responsibility for ending
the Israeli occupation and ensuring that the Palestinian
people's right to self-determination is met.

My delegation remains convinced that the only
viable solution to the challenges confronting the region
is a political solution based on the creation of a
Palestinian State coexisting peacefully alongside Israel
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and the implementation of resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and

1850 (2008), as well as the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.

Israel has an historic opportunity to move the
peace process forward and to keep this flame of hope
alive. If they do, they will ensure that the dream of a
Palestinian State is brought a step closer and will bring
within reach the realization of peace and security for
themselves and for the region.

