Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank the French presidency
for having convened this important meeting. Without a
doubt, the force of humanity lies in its diversity. But
entire communities, which have existed in the Middle
East for thousands of years, are at risk of disappearing
owing to fanatic and radical attacks. Without the
richness of religious, ethnic, linguistic and cultural
diversity, the Middle East would no longer be itself. We
are not only talking about the loss of an age-old heritage,
but also structural transformation into a region where
extremism no longer finds any obstacles to its spread.

The situation in Iraq and Syria no longer constitutes
merely an armed conflict or a conflict of values, but
a global human, economic and cultural tragedy. The
attacks in Tunisia and Yemen last week, which followed
several others, including those that struck France in
January, have confirmed the urgency of the common
battle against radical extremism in all its manifestations.

The Daesh fanatics are not like other terrorists.
They control a vast territory and present themselves
as an illegal and criminal version of a State. They
aspire to create a space for themselves, one of a fanatic
extremism that is blind and deadly, a space where
those who do not share their Vision - whether Yazidis,
Shabaks, Kurds, Christians, or even Muslims who have
a different concept of their faith - are left only with the
alternatives of flight, forced conversion, enslavement
for women and girls, forced conscription for children,
or, in the end, massacre.

The report that the Human Rights Council has just
published does not falter in addressing Daesh crimes
against humanity and their genocide with reference
to the Yazidis. The situation of other minorities in the
region is equally tragic. In particular, the Christians,
an integral part of the historical regional diversity,
a people of the Book, are disappearing in the areas
controlled by Daesh.

The terrorist scourge of Daesh knows no borders.
From Syria and Iraq, it is moving to Libya; it carries
out attacks in Mali, Yemen, Tunisia and elsewhere.
It threatens to destabilize the entire Sahel region. It
is creating dangerous ties with radical movements
in Nigeria and Somalia. It is recruiting thousands of
foreign fighters, which is further fuelling the conflict.
These fighters come from other countries, and given
the fact that they are not local, they are often the
perpetrators of the most brutal and inhuman crimes
against local populations, including minorities.

In spite of all that Daesh's propaganda claims, we
the international community must remain very clear
and unequivocal with regard to one fact - Daesh is
simply a murderous and perverse organization. We must
stop these barbaric extremists by taking all necessary
measures against them. We must coordinate our
efforts in order to destroy the fabric of their deceitful
propaganda. We must rip off their religious mask to
reveal their true criminal, brutal and depraved face.

Daesh is a modern terrorist organization. It is
sophisticated in its use of media technologies and
social networks. While terrorism is becoming more
modern, the international community's response must
also evolve. The new dimension of the threat requires
continued work on intelligence and analysis to deal
with the propaganda, recruitment and misinformation
created by these Internet terrorists. Additional efforts
are required to disseminate persuasive messages and
counter-arguments - and to hunt down, neutralize and
punish those responsible for brutal and extreme cruelty.

We insist that Security Council resolutions be fully
implemented. Daesh and other terrorist groups that are
overrunning the region should no longer be allowed to
find sanctuary there. We must dismantle their financing,
recruiting and weaponization networks. Additionally,
we must attack the marriage of convenience between
terrorism and cross-border organized crime. That
massive and multifaceted task requires coherence,
coordination and complementarity of action on the
part of the entire United Nations common system. In
particular, we must overcome the silo mentality that
still persists in the work of the various entities of the
system.

We know very well that at the heart of the fight
against terrorism lies respect for human rights, good
governance, legality, trust on the part of populations in
their Governments as being truly capable of ensuring
them a dignified future based on inclusion, integration
and equality among all ofthe elements of society - true
economic and social cohesion. We must coherently and
consistently promote the ideas of tolerance, rewarding
diversity and open and inclusive dialogue among
religions, cultures and civilizations. It is also important
to take into account good practices already existing in
this area.

We must win the hearts and minds of the local
population so as to overcome existing divisions,
prejudices and marginalization. We bear in mind that in
Iraq considerable efforts have been required to achieve
national reconciliation and a fair and inclusive policy.
In that respect, we fully support the necessary efforts
of the Iraqi Government, while recognizing that much
remains to be done. Unfortunately, the Syrian regime
persists on its path of death and destruction, while
facilitating the expansion of forms of terrorism that are
most atrocious and barbaric, including those of Daesh.

Before I conclude, please allow me to underscore
another key point, namely, justice. It is imperative that
those responsible for terrorist atrocities, war crimes
and serious violations of human rights, including those
against minorities, be properly identified and punished
by tribunals, including the International Court. The
fight against impunity is a prerequisite in ensuring that
the historical, cultural and religious diversity of the
Middle East are preserved and protected.

