Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015). The resolution endorses the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action agreed in Vienna last week. It creates
the baseline from which to recalibrate our broader
relationship with Iran, and it is an opportunity for
us all to re-engage economically and culturally with
an important regional Power as it takes on its proper
responsibility for improving regional stability. Today's
adoption is an important milestone in the history of the
Council, the culmination of negotiations that have taken
place over more than a decade. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is a landmark achievement, and I join
my colleagues in expressing my congratulations and
gratitude to everyone involved in that process.

In the Council, we often call for the peaceful
resolution of disputes. In some cases, progress is
slow and situations remain unresolved, but while
in the past we have met to call on Iran to respond to
our concerns, today we can be proud that Iran has
committed to taking actions to address those concerns.
I am delighted that the Council has endorsed the deal
unanimously. It is a good deal - good for the United
Kingdom and the international community, good for
the region, and good for Iran. If implemented fully,
the resolution will address our proliferation concerns
through comprehensive commitments on the part of
Iran to limit its nuclear programme - commitments
that will be verified through extensive monitoring and
transparency. As soon as Iran takes steps on its nuclear
programme, it will receive comprehensive economic
and financial sanctions relief, enabling it to trade
more freely again with the rest of the world. Under full
implementation ofthe deal, Iran will be treatedjust like
any other non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

We now need to look ahead and make sure that we
all deliver on our commitments as we implement the
agreement. That will not be easy. There will inevitably
be difficulties and unforeseen obstacles, but we must
live up to our commitments, act in good faith and try
wherever possible to resolve together any problems in
implementing the deal. The role of the Security Council
will be important. We will maintain oversight in the
implementation of the agreement. We also need to take
significant steps to support its implementation. In some
areas, that will involve novel working methods for the
Council. We will have to be flexible and imaginative,
and get this right.

The deal gives us the chance to change the
relationship between Iran and the Security Council,
and change for the better the dynamics in the region
and beyond. We can now start the work of rebuilding
a deficit of trust that has arisen over decades; we can
start to normalize our relationships, which hold great
promise for the future. We will also encourage Iran
to play a transparent and constructive role in regional
affairs, including in the current crises in Yemen and
Syria. Iran has an opportunity to make a positive
decision about its responsibilities in the region.

The world is now a safer place in the knowledge
that Iran cannot build a nuclear bomb. I encourage all
of us in the Council to show the same determination,
courage and vision in supporting this project and
pursuing our other top priorities, as the negotiators on
all sides have demonstrated in getting us the agreement
we have endorsed here today.

