Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Poland's initiative to convene this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs Czaputowicz
to New York to preside over this meeting. I would
like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
International Committee of the Red Cross Director-
General Yves Daccord and the non-governmental
organization representative, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for
their briefings.

Civilians bear the brunt of war in armed conflict.
At present, the international security situation remains
grim. In some regions, armed conflict continues to cause
heavy civilian casualties. Local medical personnel are
attacked and medical facilities are destroyed on an
ongoing basis. The international community is gravely
concerned about this situation. The parties concerned
should adopt pragmatic and effective measures to
ensure the safety of civilians in conflict. I would like to
highlight the following points.

First, we must address both the symptoms and
the underlying causes, strengthen prevention and
try to ensure the protection of civilians by tackling
the root causes of conflict. Effectively preventing
armed conflict offers the best protection for civilians.
The Security Council, which lies at the heart of the
collective security mechanism, should genuinely
fulfil its important responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security, actively encourage
preventive diplomacy and facilitate the settlement of
conflict through political means so that civilians can be
spared the scourge of war.

The international community should take concrete
actions to solve the underlying problems that give rise
to conflict. All countries should raise awareness of the
fact that we are in a community with a shared future
of humankind; we advocate the philosophy of global
governance characterized by extensive consultations,
joint contributions and shared benefits; and work hard to
create a peaceful and stable international environment.

Secondly, the Governments of the countries
and the parties to a conflict must live up to their
responsibilies to protect civilians. Governments
have the primary responsibility for protecting their
civilians. The international community can provide
constructive assistance, but it cannot replace the role
of the Government of the country concerned. All
parties to any conflict should respect international
humanitarian law, implement the Council's resolutions
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
fulfil their obligations to protect civilians and ensure
humanitarian access. Any act in armed conflict that,
among other things, threatens or attacks civilians in
violation of international humanitarian law should be
investigated and punished by the country concerned
according to the law.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must work strictly within the parameters of the
Council's mandate in fulfilling their responsibility
to protect civilians. The mandate of peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians is no substitute for the
responsibilities and obligations of the Government of
the country concerned and ofthe parties to the conflict.
When drawing up a mandate for a peacekeeping
operation, the Council should holistically take into
account a whole raft of factors, including the context
and needs of the host country and the capacity and
conditions of the peacekeeping mission, so as to ensure
that the mandate is clearly articulated, realistic and
feasible. Missions should formulate clear strategies
and action plans in the light of the situations on the
ground, strengthen internal coordination and ensure the
effective implementation of the mandate. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
have unique local advantages and special roles to play,
which should be fully leveraged to generate synergy with
United Nations peacekeeping operations, strengthen
information sharing and policy communication and
help the host countries better protect their civilians.

Fourthly, humanitarian operations should respect
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the United Nations humanitarian assistance
guidelines. Humanitarian assistance agencies and
medical personnel have been rescuing the dying and
treating the wounded in armed conflict. We pay tribute
to their work.

Humanitarian operations should remain neutral,
objective and impartial, fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of host countries and promote
their humanitarian character and professionalism, so as
to win the understanding and trust of all parties and
avoid becoming embroiled in conflict. That also helps
secure the safety of humanitarian workers and medical
personnel and facilities in conflict areas.

The United Nations should fully play its
coordinating role, maintain communication with
all parties to any conflict, strengthen guidance for
humanitarian workers and create conditions for timely
and safe humanitarian access to ensure the effective
implementation of humanitarian relief operations.

