Mrs. Camara (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
My delegation wishes first of all to congratulate you
warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. I wish also to
pay well-deserved tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the United States, for the fine
work achieved last month.

My thanks go also to the Secretary-General, whose
initiatives and activities have always helped arrest the
scourge of war - and sometimes to avert war in countries
whose peoples are threatened with fratricidal conflict, as
they are in Somalia.

It gives us pleasure to participate in today's debate on
the situation in Somalia. We are pleased that after a long
silence the members of the Security Council have
remembered that millions of men, women and children in
Somalia continue to suffer the inhuman consequences of a
fratricidal war. The suffering of the Somali people remains
of great concern to my country, for the Somali crisis is
more than a regrettable internal conflict: it is a genuine,
serious threat to the security and stability of the entire
subregion.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting; we believe it will have positive
effects on the security of the region. We are convinced that
this debate will yield successful solutions for alleviating the
moral and material suffering of the Somali people, who are
the innocent victims of a crisis.

My delegation cannot forget the considerable and
intensive efforts of the international community to provide
help and humanitarian assistance to the victims of war and
famine in Somalia through effective, coordinated efforts
under Security Council auspices. We thank all those who
have provided help and humanitarian assistance to the
Somali people.

Since December 1995, my country, the Republic of
Guinea, has presided over the Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference; as Chairman of the group of members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference at the United
Nations, my delegation is pleased to recall that at the
twenty-third session of the Islamic Conference of Foreign
Ministers, held in Guinea, States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference reiterated their
commitment to the restoration and preservation of the
unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Somalia.

That conference noted with appreciation the efforts
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to bring
national reconciliation to Somalia and to relieve the
suffering of the Somali people, in cooperation with the
States of the region, the United Nations, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of African Unity, in the
context of a joint approach. It called for the continuation
of these efforts and requested the Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to dispatch a
contact group to urge the various Somali groups to
resume dialogue to achieve national reconciliation. The
conference called for the convening of an international
conference on peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, with the participation of all Somali
parties and the international and regional organizations
concerned.

My delegation appeals once more to all States, and
in particular to the neighbours of Somalia, to cooperate in
implementing the arms embargo imposed by resolution
733 (1992). We urge all Somali factions to engage in
negotiations and constructive dialogue aimed at finding a
solution through peaceful means. In that connection, my
delegation remains convinced that to build a path to
national reconciliation and peace in Somalia, all the
factions must create within the country conditions that
will enable the international community to carry out its
efforts towards peace and reconstruction.

