Mr. Egeland: I thank you very much, Mr.
President, for organizing this meeting, and I give my
heartfelt thanks to the members of the Council for their
support for this type of briefing and for the work that
our colleagues are doing on the ground under very
difficult circumstances, often with their own lives at
stake as they try to prevent further suffering and a
further loss of lives among our beneficiaries.

There is a strong consensus around the Council
table that the situations that I have described must see
positive change in the year ahead. Indeed, as the
representative of China observed, our motive as
humanitarians in bringing this up is that we need to see
change. We want to see change. It is our job to bring to
the Council's attention situations that are going badly
or which are deteriorating. In each of these three
situations, there is at the moment a crisis that is
deteriorating. What is happening in Darfur, in northern
Uganda and in the region at large, and also in the
southern African region, including Zimbabwe, is
indeed a moral outrage.

First, with respect to Darfur, the reports we are
getting from our colleagues in the field is that it all
could end tomorrow. Together we have built up a
remarkable humanitarian operation. Against all odds,
mortality rates are now one third of what they were in
the beginning of 2004. We have been able to provide
logistical changes - a camp management operation, a
food operation, a water sanitation operation, primary
health care and primary schooling, which is
remarkable. Now it is all in jeopardy. We are once
again down to levels of access that are comparable to
those we started with in 2004.

Our colleagues in the field say, therefore that they
are extremely worried that the major gains we have
made could be lost. Again, it goes back to not having
had political and security progress commensurate to
that made in the humanitarian area.

The parties - the armed groups, the armed
men - are outrageously irresponsible, at all levels, in
their acts against civilians and internally displaced
persons. Some of them are also outrageously
irresponsible in their whole attitude towards reaching a
negotiated settlement. A question was asked as to what
the consequences would be if no deal is reached in
Abuja. Well, I do not dare to even think of the
consequences, because the situation could potentially
totally unravel. We would have 13,000 humanitarian
workers caught in the crossfire and, of course,
operations would be paralysed. Within weeks, millions
would starve and be in the utmost peril.

We should therefore rather focus on how to
achieve success in Abuja, so that our progress can
continue and we can plan for the return of people.
Again, it is the kind of situation that is unsustainable in
the long term. We cannot have many millions of people
on regular food handouts in overcrowded camps. It has
to change for the better.

The same is, of course, true of the Ugandan
situation. Not nearly enough attention has been paid to
the crisis in northern Uganda. I hope that attention is
forthcoming, as the crisis has now become a regional
one. I have tried to describe the situation: millions of
people are being affected by the actions of as few as

1,000 combatants roaming around those areas. But
when they target humanitarian workers and civilians,
the consequence is immediate paralysis.

The representative of France asked how this
could be, how the situation could continue - how such
a small number of fighters could wreak such havoc. I
really do not know. It may be due to neglect and
ineffective action over so many years. The Lord's
Resistance Army has been active in northern Uganda
for nearly 20 years, and now it is acting regionally.

It is really an outrage to see what has been
unfolding over the past 20 years. It must stop. It really
must stop. It is the kind of situation where we have to
say, it cannot continue like this in 2006, with yet
another generation of children being abducted to
become killing machines on behalf of that movement.

The proposed panel of experts would be one way
of finding out why it does not stop, why it continues,
why it is allowed to go on. I really urge the Council to
look at the other proposals as well, regarding both
northern Uganda and the regional dimension of the
crisis. As humanitarians, we have the hope that we can
now say, "Enough is enough. We have to see change."

Zimbabwe could continue to deteriorate, but it
could also improve in the year ahead. If there is one
country in the world that should be able to feed itself,
it is Zimbabwe. As I tried to outline in my briefing, if
there are changes in the various areas where we see the
Government changing its policies and practices; if
donors invest not only in food handouts but in
financing agricultural production and livelihoods; if
there is a climate in which the Government and others
facilitate our work in all aspects so that we can become
effective in all aspects, including in the area of shelter;
and if the disastrous evictions and other practices
stop - if all of those things happen, I think that we
will see positive change in Zimbabwe. We need to see
positive change; indeed, cross-border migration is also
continuing, because the situation is becoming
intolerable for many people.

The representative of Denmark asked about a
future United Nations engagement with Zimbabwe.
The Secretary-General has been invited by President
Mugabe, who reiterated that invitation to me while I
was there. The Secretary-General is planning to send
Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari on a
mission to engage in dialogue with the Government.
We hope to see progress on many fronts, so that both
Mr. Gambari's visit and the possible visit by the
Secretary-General can advance our work and our
common agenda.

I should like to make two final and general
points, which also surfaced during our debate. Indeed,
humanitarian work is, overall, making major progress.
We are thankful for the increased attention of Security
Council members and for their increased investment in
us. In 2005 we achieved an unprecedented number of
goals; we reached more people more effectively and
more speedily. With a new emergency Fund, we may
have more predictable funding. With a better
coordination structure among ourselves as
humanitarian workers, our work will be more effective
and we will have more leadership among humanitarian
coordinators on the ground.

The technological revolution makes it possible
for us to do miracles where before we had to be passive
observers to suffering. But too often we see that this
technological revolution is not being reflected in an
ethical, moral and political revolution that would make
it possible for us to really do our work.

Here I am very heartened to hear many members
say that yes, there has to be progress on the political
front, in terms of peacemaking and security. My first
mission was as a young assistant to Torvald
Stoltenberg and Lord Owen during the joint United
Nations-European Union effort in 1994 in the Balkans,
namely in Bosnia. I saw at that time how we discussed
safe areas in Bosnia and the provision of increased
food, water and sanitation to Srebrenica and to the
other safe areas. People were not disarmed at the time,
there was no political or security action commensurate
with a large humanitarian operation, and then
Srebrenica happened. Let us not repeat that in the
places that I have described. We have to have some
way of healing the wound, because we recognize we
are the plaster on the wound.

I would like to end on a positive note, because, as
the representative of Greece and others have noted,
there has also been a lot of positive change in Africa in
recent years. We as OCHA are phasing out of Angola,
Sierra Leone - of a number of areas. We are phasing
down in Liberia as we speak. We are discussing
handing over operations in places in southern Sudan to
our development colleagues in the course of next year.

Africa is the youngest continent, and it is one The President: Thank you very much indeed,
with great promise for positive change. With increased Mr. Egeland, for your briefing and for the way in
resources next year from the 6-8, from the European which you have dealt with the questions.

Union - all of those who have promised greatly
increased resources - I think we can do a lot. But then
we must make progress on the political and security
fronts. So I am very heartened to hear that Council
members will now study our proposals. You say,
Mr. President, that you will do it in a slightly slower The meeting mxe at 12.2017.m.
pace, but I hope that it will only be slightly slower than

the pace I havejust suggested as being needed.

lf there are no other comments from colleagues.
then the Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
