Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to commend
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing
this timely debate aimed at ending the conflicts on the
African continent. We are very pleased to see you today,
Sir, as President of the Council, and we appreciate
the work of the Equatorial Guinean diplomats here.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns, and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder and Executive Director of
the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of
Disputes, for their very informative interventions.

Poland believes that a conflict-free Africa is
an ambitious goal that can only be achieved with
African ownership. We perceive the Silencing the Guns
initiative and today's debate as clear evidence of this
ownership. There is no doubt that Africa deserves great
credit for making efforts to end the violence that has
plagued the continent. Particularly in recent years, the
African Union has taken on important responsibilities
and its role in promoting peace and security across the
continent has only expanded.

However, there is also no doubt that a lot remains
to be done in order to achieve the goal ofa conflict-free
Africa. Strong commitment is needed to make peace a
reality for all people and to rid the continent of wars,
civil conflicts, human rights violations, humanitarian
disasters and violent conflicts and to prevent genocide,
as stipulated in the African Union's fiftieth anniversary
solemn declaration. Let me focus on certain crucial
elements that are of particular importance from our
point of view.

We believe that additional efforts have to be
made to counter the illicit transfer, destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons in Africa. The illicit proliferation of arms
destabilizes the continent and negatively impacts its
development. Therefore, I would like to encourage
African partners to ratify the Arms Trade Treaty and
follow its provisions, and the United Nations to stand
ready to offer its expertise and assistance. We cannot
cease to underline the significance of all levels of
implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We highlight
action at the national level, which plays a decisive role.
Regional approaches and interaction also create the
necessary input in support of those instruments.

It is equally important to provide necessary
technical and financial assistance to conflict-affected
countries in the processes of security sector reform, as
well as demobilization, disarmament and reintegration.
Therefore, we commend the efforts of the African
Union Commission aimed at providing support to such
countries. The strengthening of African capabilities
in the area of early warning, mediation and conflict
prevention, including the Panel of the Wise, as well as
the adoption of confidence-building measures, are of
the utmost importance. Enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union remains
crucial, and continued United Nations support to the
African Union in its efforts to equip itself with the
capabilities, capacities, tools and means necessary for
effective action is also critical.

Conflicts in Africa are complex and so are their
root causes. Social, political and economic inequality
still exists in Africa, along with unemployment, lack
of education and population pressure. There is also a
historical pattern of conflict and battles for control
over natural resources. All of these elements must
be addressed in order to secure durable peace on the
continent. Tackling the root causes requires concerted
efforts, the ownership of African Governments
and local communities and support from the
international community.

Last but not least, let me stress the importance of
yet another element that is central to preventing and
managing conflicts: good governance and functioning
State institutions. African Governments have to
continue to develop institutions that are accountable
and responsive to citizens, that promote the rule of law
and ensure political stability. In this context, I would
like to stress that lasting peace will not be possible
without ensuring inclusiveness and the participation of
women and youth in peace processes and political life.
It is our strong belief that African women and youth
can play a vital role in peacebuilding and reconciliation
efforts, as well as in forging the continent's resilience.

We also bear in mind that people with disabilities
are disproportionately impacted by violent conflict
and that it is important to include them in the conflict
resolution and peacebuilding processes. They are able
to bring their unique perspective, share their knowledge
and contribute to peacebuilding activities to ensure
more inclusive and equitable societies, as well as more
just conflict relief, assistance and long-lasting peace.

In conclusion, allow me to once again applaud
Africa on the progress achieved so far in preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Still, in order to
silence the guns by 2020, a lot remains to be done.
An efficient relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union plays an important role in this
regard. Let me assure you, Sir, that Poland will continue
to support the African Union's vision for peace and
prosperity, as well as the prevention and resolution
of conflict and the maintenance of regional peace,
security and stability. In this context, we welcome
today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2457 (2019)
as an important step towards the goal of a conflict-
free Africa.

