Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on the
Special Court for Sierra Leone. It gives us an
opportunity to be briefed on the latest developments
relating to the Special Court and on the difficulties
facing its President, Justice George Gelaga King. I
welcome Justice King to the Security Council and
thank him for his briefing and for submitting the
Court's completion strategy and budget. I also wish to
thank Mr. Stephen Rapp, Prosecutor of the Special
Court, for his comprehensive briefing.

Earlier this week, we saw the beginning of the
most important stage in the work of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone: initial proceedings in the trial of
former Liberian President Charles Taylor at The
Hague. That proves that no one, regardless of his or her
position, is above the law and that everyone, regardless
of the crimes that he or she has committed, has the
right to due process, as stated by Prosecutor Rapp last
January.

The reaching of this stage responds to the
aspirations of the people of Sierra Leone to achieve
justice, now that they have put their conflict behind
them and set out on the path towards building peace
and prosperity with determination and resolve, and
with the assistance of the international community.
However, the effects of the past cannot be erased
without putting an end to the phenomenon of impunity
and implementing the rule of law in accordance with
national and international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

Since the last briefing to the Council, by Justice
Ayoola, former President of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, in May 2005 (see S/PV.5185), the
Special Court has made concrete progress in carrying
out its mandate under Security Council resolution 1315
(2000) and the 2002 Agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone. It has
concluded the trial of members of the Civil Defence
Forces and the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council,
and the trial of members of the Revolutionary United
Front will be concluded soon.

As we just heard, and as stated in the documents
submitted by the President of the Special Court to the
Secretary-General concerning plans and expectations
for the future completion of the Court's mandate, the
Court will continue to carry out its work, including
appeals, until late in 2009. While we recognize that the
Court needs to finish its current work within the
specified time frame and as soon as possible -
particularly since some trials have exceeded the
timelines set for their conclusion - we also stress the
need to strike a balance between compliance with the
time frames and the full, efficient and satisfactory
fulfilment of the Court's mandate, as well as the need
to guarantee the right of the accused to due process in
fair trials.
Because the Special Court for Sierra Leone is an
international criminal court that has been funded since
its inception through voluntary contributions, and
given that the financing available to the Court will be
sufficient only until the end of this year, we call on all
parties to provide the financial contributions necessary
for the Court to continue its work. We commend those
who have already provided financial contributions to
the Court.

We welcome the Special Court's commitment to
accepted legal norms and principles and to
transparency and effectiveness in its work, as well as
determination to bequeath to the people of Sierra
Leone, in addition to the material resources of the
country's legal system, a legacy to future generations
in the country and elsewhere that embodies the resolve
to achieve justice and to eradicate impunity for those
who commit war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Finally, while we regret that the trial of former
Liberian President Charles Taylor is not taking place
on the African continent - owing to the fact that the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda is busy
developing its own completion strategy and because of
the lack of space on its premises and the lack of other
options on the African continent - we also stress that
it is essential that the peoples of the subregion be able
to follow the proceedings of the trial, including
through closed-circuit television. We look forward to
the continuance of the judicial proceedings at The
Hague, since they will help to reveal the truth and to
establish security and stability in Sierra Leone and the
surrounding region.

