Mrs. Barghouti (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
On behalf of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine, I should like to express our deepest regret in
connection with the painful events that took place a
short time ago, and again today, in London. Let me
reaffirm our condemnation of such terrorist acts
targeting innocent civilians. Intensified international
efforts are required to combat such crimes, irrespective
of who their perpetrators are.

At the outset of my statement, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. We are confident that your experience and
wisdom will lead to the success of the Council's
deliberations. And allow me to thank the Permanent
Representative of France for his presidency of the
Council last month.

I should also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto on his appointment as
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
The delegation of Palestine always stands ready to
cooperate with him to ensure the success of his
difficult mission. We thank him for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing to the Council this morning,
which we shall not discuss in our statement because we
wish to focus on the latest and the gravest events.

The Security Council is meeting this morning to
discuss the difficult and deteriorating conditions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. While the international community is
directing its efforts towards the success of Israel's
withdrawal from Gaza and some areas in the northern
West Bank, Israel, the occupying Power, is accelerating
its steps to carry out its expansionist, colonialist plan,
expanding colonial settlements, speeding the building
of the wall and isolating the occupied section of
Jerusalem from the West Bank. The Israeli Government
is exploiting the fact that the international community
is focused on, and desires to see, the success of the
withdrawal from Gaza by accelerating the creation of
facts on the ground, thus imposing an illegitimate fait
accompli in the attempt to undermine all possibilities
of creating an independent, sovereign Palestinian State
within the borders of June 1967.

The Israeli Government's approval on Sunday,
10 July of the route inside East Jerusalem of the
separation wall, which segment is expected to be
completed in the next few months, is a grave
development. It is a direct challenge to the
international community, all the more so because it
coincides with the one-year anniversary of the
International Court of Justice's advisory opinion on the
wall, which ruled that the wall was illegal, that Israel
had the obligation to immediately cease construction
and demolish the parts that had been built and that
Israel must repeal all laws pertaining to the wall. The
Court further emphasized that the United
Nations - in particular the General Assembly and the
Security Council - must consider the additional
measures necessary to put an end to the situation of
illegality resulting from the construction of the
separation wall and from the related regime.

Because of its desire to see the success of Israeli
disengagement from Gaza, the international community
has been reluctant to exert pressure on the Israeli
Government and has been condoning Israel's current
settlement activities, its land confiscations, its isolation
of Jerusalem and its work to complete the wall; that
will not necessarily succeed in reviving the peace
process or the implementation of the road map. To the
contrary, we believe that this situation portends a
veritable catastrophe with dire consequences for the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples, for the region and for
the world, and that it could undermine a final two-State
solution.

Today, the Palestinian people is being subjected to
siege, oppression and killing. The suffering it
undergoes daily is escalating. Economic and social
conditions are deteriorating because Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to violate international law
and international humanitarian law. It flouts United
Nations resolutions and, indeed, international
unanimity. In that way, it poses the greatest of
challenges to the international community and to the
sanctity of international law. It is as if that State were
above the law.

Since September 2000, the occupying forces have
killed more than 3,670 Palestinians. They have
wounded more than 45,000 others. They have wreaked
widespread destruction, including the demolition of
homes and the destruction of industrial and agricultural
areas and infrastructure. In numerous letters, we have
informed the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the General Assembly of the terrifying
developments on the ground and of Israel's violations
of international law and international humanitarian law.
Those violations include the continuing extrajudicial
killings, the killing or wounding of civilians, the
random and excessive use of force, the continuing
closures, the prevention of the movement of
individuals and goods and, more serious still, the
continuing colonization of our lands, the continuing
expansion of illegal settlements and the construction of
the wall. These destroy our present, our future and the
possibility of peace between the two sides and of the
implementation of a two-State solution.

The understandings previously reached at Sharm
el-Sheikh were an encouraging beginning for a return
to the negotiating table and for calming conditions on
the ground. The Palestinian National Authority has
taken a number of steps to meet its Sharm el-Sheikh
commitments. But the Israeli Government has met
none of its commitments, least of all with regard to
withdrawal to the lines of September 2000, the freeing
of prisoners and ending illegal extrajudicial
assassinations, the closures and the siege imposed on
our people.

The Palestinian leadership is committed to
negotiation as a means to reach a peaceful settlement
based on respect for international law and international
legitimacy. In that regard, the Palestinian National
Authority is eager to see Israel's disengagement from
Gaza be successfully carried out in a calm manner, so
that we can move directly to the implementation of the
road map leading to final negotiations. We stress the
importance of the completion of Israel's disengagement
from Gaza and from parts of the northern West Bank
before the end of 2005. It is important that the
international community not permit Israel to use
prevarication and procrastination to distract it while
completing its colonial settlement plan for the West
Bank.

We are very grateful, Mr. President, for the speed
with which you responded to the request for the
convening of this meeting. We hope that the Security
Council will be able to take immediate measures to
address this expansionist policy, which is a flagrant
violation of international law and which violates the
terms of the road map and Israel's commitments set out
in it.

Once again, we reiterate our call to the
international community to abide by the legal opinion
of the International Court of Justice. Here, United
Nations bodies, including the Secretariat, the General
Assembly and the Security Council, should accelerate
the implementation of their obligations set out in the
opinion and in General Assembly resolution ES-10/ 15
with regard to establishing a register of damage and to
following up on the report to the Assembly requested
from Switzerland, in its capacity as repositary of the
Geneva Conventions.

In that regard, we will be calling for a resumption
of the tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly. That, however, does not set aside the
responsibilities and duties of the Security Council as
set out in the International Court of Justice opinion.

We look forward to the day when the
international community, and in particular the Security
Council, will ensure that Israel respects international
law and international humanitarian law, in accordance
with the Court's opinion of approximately one year
ago, and will ensure that Israel respects the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, particularly its right of
self-determination and its right to the cessation of
Israeli occupation of its land.

