Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2016/873) and Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O'Brien for his briefing, even if it leaves us
more anguished than before.

Our delegation once again takes the floor in the
understanding that it is our responsibility, as elected
members of the Security Council, to give our electors,
the membership gathered here, our opinion on the issue
at hand, even if the situation has not changed much since
we last discussed it. People tend to think that a great
deal is accomplished in these sorts of deliberations.
To save time, I could say that my statement last month
(see S/PV.7780) could serve as my statement today, but
I do not think that that is the case, because every time
we meet the situation is more tragic. Four months ago
when we met, I believe it was on the topic of Syria, we
recalled the words of the American poet Robert Allen
Zimmerman and his well-known lyrics:

"How many deaths will it take till he knows that
too many people have died?"
The only positive development over the course of those
four months is that Mr. Zimmerman, that is Bob Dylan,
has been awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. That is
the only good news in that regard.

The scenario is increasingly discouraging. We
continue to see a pitched battle in which thousands
of defenceless civilians have lost their lives, hostages
to a situation where they are neither perpetrators or
accomplices. The situation has simply become their
reality, controlled by those who manipulate their
interests in that part of the world.

The many initiatives for dialogue on Syria have
come up against the inability of the Council to defuse
the situation. The General Assembly has also held an
informal meeting on the subject, and we have seen
a New Zealand initiative, with backing from many
States, aimed at finding points of convergence in order
to improve the situation on the ground in any way
possible. We have sought to find a way to have some
impact - so that the bombing stops, so that people stop
dying unnecessarily.

We will support all of those initiatives since, in the
face ofimpotence, we must do something. It is difficult
to keep repeating our speeches, citing principles of
international humanitarian law but not enforcing them.
It is difficult to keep repeating that hostilities must cease
immediately, that civilians must be protected and that
the principles of humanitarian law must be respected.
A few days ago, a Venezuelan colleague said that the
responsibility for the crisis is shared by all members of
the Security Council, but certainly it lies more heavily
on those who support or finance either of the parties to
the conflict. They bear greater responsibility for what
is going on - a slaughterhouse.

