I would like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Grandi, for his comprehensive briefing today and for the resilient and determined efforts he has shown throughout his work. As refugees and other people displaced by conflict are especially vulnerable to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, we highly commend the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for scaling up the responses in these critical times. Estonia has been a stable contributor to the UNHCR. Since 2001 we have supported the Office with operational grants as well as with direct contributions towards helping to alleviate specific humanitarian crises around the world. Today we are witnessing an unprecedented number of people around the world being forced from their homes by conflict or persecution. We recognize the crucial role of the Council and its member States in seeking to take unified action to address the root causes of displacement. Resolving global security crises and sustaining peace is our joint responsibility. For that reason, we are glad to see international efforts, such as the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, working in close cooperation with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in tackling the growing terrorism threat and transboundary criminal activities such as arms and human trafficking. In the light of the global pandemic, humanitarian aid has become more important than ever. People on the move are much more likely to find themselves in vulnerable positions that can expose them to the risks associated with COVID-19. The situation is worsened when displaced people face barriers in accessing health services and experience food insecurity due to various factors. We need immediate measures as well as contributions to mitigate the unprecedented social and economic impact on refugees and other forcibly displaced people. Given the critical humanitarian situation in north-west Syria, where there are some 2.8 million people in need, we call on the members of the Security Council to support the renewal of the cross-border aid mechanism in July. With regard to the dire situation in Yemen, where more people have been displaced as a result of the continued fighting and where there is the possibility of a cholera outbreak, full access into and within Yemen for international aid workers, medicine and medical supplies must be ensured. Estonia is committed to helping those in need and has financially contributed to help to alleviate the effects of COVID-19 in Syria and Libya and in the framework of the Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan for Refugees and Migrants from Venezuela. As we just heard from the High Commissioner, the global number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) is estimated at around 46 million. It is deplorable that owing to the Russian aggression in Ukraine, which has lasted six years already, there are more than 1.4 million IDPs across the country. The situation of displaced persons in Ukraine is precarious. Women and children residing in rural areas, as well as elderly people, are in especially vulnerable positions. Estonia has contributed to alleviating the IDP situation in Ukraine by supporting the UNHCR's programmes with earmarked funds of $200,000. In addition, the Estonian non-governmental organization Refugee Help has worked towards securing the livelihoods of refugees and IDPs in Ukraine. It has become more evident than ever that we need digital solutions in improving the ability of the international community to collectively respond to crises. The COVID-19 pandemic has proved that digitization is key to securing business continuity and service delivery in global health crises. During the Global Refugee Forum, Estonia pledged to cooperate with the UNHCR on digital identification, and since then we have been taking steps to implement that pledge. Today this has become even more relevant, as there is an urgent need to identify and reach vulnerable people efficiently from a distance during periods of lockdown and travel restrictions while simultaneously guaranteeing their security and privacy. Finally, as this year we are marking World Refugee Day in this time of COVID-19, I would like to underline that the international community should better address the needs of displaced persons during this pandemic, ensuring that they are fully protected by international human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law.
