Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening an open
emergency meeting of the Security Council tonight to
consider the rapidly deteriorating situation in Sierra
Leone. We support that decision, as we believe that the
broader membership of the Organization, in particular the
African States, should have an opportunity to be heard on
this very important subject.

My delegation expresses once again its grave
concern at the outbreak of violence in Sierra Leone over
the past two weeks, and condemns in the strongest terms
the armed attacks perpetrated by the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) against United Nations personnel. We note
with deep regret the losses suffered by the Kenyan
peacekeeping battalion of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), and would like to take this
opportunity to extend our sympathy and condolences to
the families of the fallen peacekeepers and to the
Government of Kenya. Scores of others have been
wounded, and some 500 United Nations personnel,
including personnel from Malaysia, are still being
detained by the rebel forces. This is an unacceptable state
of affairs, and every effort should be made and all
necessary means used to secure their release.

Through a presidential statement on 4 May 2000, the
Council demanded that the RUF cease its hostile actions
and release immediately and unharmed all detained
United Nations and other international personnel. This has
not been heeded by Mr. Foday Sankoh and his followers.
As leader of the RUF, Mr. Sankoh is ultimately
responsible for these deplorable actions, which are in
clear violation of the obligations under the Lome Peace
Agreement. He must be held accountable.

My delegation agrees with the view that among the
immediate priorities are for UNAMSIL to strengthen its
presence by regrouping in larger numbers to enable the
force to better defend itself should it come under rebel
attack. The stabilization of the situation around the
Freetown peninsula is also an immediate priority, and we
look forward with some urgency to the early arrival of the
additional battalions from India, Bangladesh and Jordan
to bring UNAMSIL to its authorized strength. In this
regard, we commend the role played by the British forces
in securing the main airport in Freetown.

 

While we commend Force Commander J etley and
Special Representative Adeniji for their respective roles in
managing the crisis on the ground, we strongly believe that
the time has come for the Council to consider the possible
next steps. At the top of our agenda should be the dispatch
of a rapid reaction force to Sierra Leone for the purpose of
stabilizing the situation and putting the political process
back on track. We commend the Secretary-General for his
frenetic efforts in mobilizing such a force. We urge
countries with the resources to do so to respond promptly
to the efforts of the Secretary-General so that the rapid
reaction force can be dispatched forthwith.

We do not think that a United Nations withdrawal
from Sierra Leone is an option to be considered. That
would be sending the wrong message to the peace-loving
people of Sierra Leone - who have endured so much in
the last nine years - and to Africa as a whole, another
example of the international community abandoning the
continent yet again. That option also risks inviting a run at
Freetown by the RUF. However, we do believe that the
peacekeeping environment in which we envisaged
UNAMSIL to be operating under when we adopted
resolution 1289 (2000) is no longer relevant in the present
circumstances. The premise of having a peace agreement on
the table and having parties to the conflict fully cooperating
in its implementation, including the voluntary disarmament
of armed elements under the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), is in the process
of unravelling, if it is not already unravelled.

We will have to make an immediate, in-depth
evaluation of the situation - both on the military and
political fronts - and take appropriate decisions. We run
the risk of having United Nations personnel being overrun
by the RUF, who are intent not only on destroying the
DDR process - as evidenced in the last few months - but
on challenging the resolve of UNAMSIL in the wake of the
full withdrawal from Sierra Leone of the forces of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). Clearly, the actions of the
RUF have been well timed and orchestrated. A few more
weeks and UNAMSIL would have been strengthened
further with extra battalions, and the disarmament process
would have been consolidated.
My delegation deeply regrets that the RUF has
challenged not only the peace process, but also the largest
United Nations force the Organization has mounted
anywhere. The credibility of the Council is at stake.
Criticisms have been voiced that the United Nations force
deployed in Sierra Leone was ill equipped, or not
adequately mandated, to deal with the demands of the
situation on the ground. The question of whether the
limited Chapter VII mandate at present given to
UNAMSIL continues to be adequate must be promptly
examined in the light of the hard realities on the ground
and in the context of the changed environment from that
originally envisaged. My delegation would like to recall
that we had been willing to go with the limited Chapter
VII mandate then because there was an agreement on the
table and because the cooperation of the parties was
assured to be forthcoming. Clearly, many of us have been
proven wrong and we will have to recalibrate our
response appropriately.

We welcome the decision of the recently concluded
ECOWAS summit in Abuja for its members to use all
means at their disposal, including the military option, to
foil any attempt to take over power in Sierra Leone
through the use of force. Such a rapid deployment will be
helpful, and we look forward to the decision to be taken
at the meeting of the ministers of defence and chiefs of
staff to be held in Abuja on 17 May 2000 to consider the
practical modalities in the event of a new ECOMOG
involvement in Sierra Leone.

Malaysia has consistently advocated that ECOMOG
contributing countries - particularly Nigeria, which has
shouldered a disproportionate burden of ECOMOG forces
in Sierra Leone in the past - be assisted in maintaining
its forces there. The situation has now come full circle,
and ECOMOG is once again poised to play a pivotal role
to assist the international community in restoring order in
the country. The offer must be accepted. However, we
believe that under the present circumstances all countries
deploying troops in Sierra Leone should come under the
United Nations banner and under one command structure.
Adequate resources must be found for this purpose. This
is the responsibility of all Member States, big and small.

The real test of our resolve will come in the coming
days and weeks. The situation calls for a rapid and
cohesive response from the Organization and from the
international community at large. It is our fervent hope
that tonight's deliberations, and subsequent Council
deliberations, will lead to action that will reverse this
sorry state of affairs and re-establish the authority and
credibility of the Organization over the situation in Sierra
Leone. This is imperative because of its ramifications, not
only in Africa but world-wide. My delegation agrees with
the Secretary-General that we must act, and act quickly,
for we cannot afford to fail the people of Sierra Leone;
we cannot afford to fail Africa yet again.

 

