Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Deputy Prime Minister
Covie for his presence at the Council's meeting and for
his statement. We also warmly thank Special
Representative Mr. Steiner for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the recent
progress made by the Provisional Government of
Kosovo in including representatives of various ethnic
groups. We welcome the positive attitude demonstrated
by minorities, including Serbs, in participating in the
political life of Kosovo. We hope that this will assist
the provisional Government's efforts to establish
effective and fair administration throughout Kosovo
and, gradually, a multi-ethnic society under the rule of
law, with the assistance of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
believe that ensuring basic rights and interests, freedom
of movement and normal life for ethnic groups,
especially minorities, is essential to the creation of a
society ruled by law. We hope that UNMIK and the
provisional Government will make further efforts to
ensure local security and to improve the living
conditions of minorities.

The Chinese delegation is concerned by recent
developments in the situation in Mitrovica in northern
Kosovo. We hope that UNMIK will deal appropriately
with the situation, in full consultation with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The attacks on United Nations personnel are a matter
of concern. We support UNMIK in fully implementing
resolution 1244 (1999). All parties and factions in
Kosovo are obliged to accord adequate respect and
cooperation to UNMIK.

At the same time, we are deeply mindful of the
legitimate concerns of people of various ethnic groups
in Mitrovica. We hope that the rights and interests of
all ethnic groups in that city will be duly respected and
addressed fairly. We hope that UNMIK will make
positive efforts truly to accommodate the concerns of
minorities, to promote ethnic reconciliation in
Mitrovica and to create favourable conditions for the
return of refugees in order to lay a solid foundation for
a multi-ethnic society and for long-term stability in the
city and throughout Kosovo.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the positive
efforts of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to solve
the problem of Albanian prisoners of war. We hope that
the Common Document signed by UNMIK and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will be effectively
implemented.

We also hope that UNMIK and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will continue to strengthen
their high-level cooperation so as to facilitate the
settlement of a number of problems such as that of
missing persons, the return of refugees and border
stability.

