The President (spoke in French): At the outset of
this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the Council, to
extend a warm welcome to our new colleague,
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda, Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations. We
are pleased to welcome him to our small family and
look forward to working closely with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire

Nineteenth progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in
Cfite d'Ivoire (S/2009/21)

The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representative
of C6te d'Ivoire to participate in the consideration of
the item on the Council's agenda, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dje'dje
(Cote d'lvoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/49, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France. Members also have
before them document S/2009/21, which contains the
nineteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'lvoire.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1865 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 3.15pm.
09-22 104

