Mr. Dunn (United States of America): We join
our colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien for her thorough briefing this morning. The
United States fully agrees with Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien and Special Adviser Jack Lang that to
address piracy effectively solutions must be found both
on land and at sea, and that there must be judicial
consequences for those involved. In that regard, I
would like to thank the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs (OLA) for rapidly compiling this informative
report (S/2011/360), which discusses the feasibility of
specialized Somali counter-piracy courts both in and
outside Somalia, as well as valuable information on
ongoing enhanced prosecutorial efforts in other States
of the region.

The Secretary-General's report emphasizes the
ongoing work of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and of the United Nations
Development Programme towards establishing courts
in Puntland and Somaliland within the existing
authorities. We commend and support that important
work. With United Nations assistance, trials in
Somaliland and Puntland are expected to reach
international standards, thus permitting the transfer of
suspects to Somalia for prosecution within three years.
Prison capacity, significantly enhanced also to
international standards, is expected in two years.

We believe that building on the ongoing efforts in
Somalia along those lines may be the most effective
and efficient way to help meet the goal of the Lang
report (S/201l/30, annex) for the Somalialization of the
anti-piracy effort. Based on the report's findings, it is
clear to us that an extraterritorial Somali piracy court is
not a viable option due to opposition to the idea from
Somalia itself and the host of constitutional,
procedural, security, financial and logistical issues
identified in the report. The Somali authorities have
been clear that they do not support that idea, as
confirmed in the OLA report. In addition, the report
makes clear that major amendments to the Somali
Constitution, even to the Transitional Federal Charter,
would be required to provide a basic legal foundation
for an extraterritorial court. We believe that such
changes are not realistic, especially given the lack of
support from Somalia for such an objective among the
many competing priorities.

While long-term efforts to improve the judicial
and prison capacities in Somalia are under way, we
must address the urgent need to establish a reliable
venue in the region for the prosecution of suspected
pirates captured by international naval forces. The
United States supports the establishment of a dedicated
piracy chamber or court in one or more States of the
region, applying the national law of the State in which
it sits. If the law of the host State allows, that dedicated
court or chamber can be supplemented with
international personnel, including foreign prosecutors
and judges. With adequate international support, it
could be established almost immediately in one of
several States in the region that already has robust
piracy law in place.

In terms of the next steps, the Seychelles has
offered to host a regional prosecution centre, given
sufficient prison capacity to imprison convicted pirates.
We also welcome the confirmation in the OLA report
that Tanzania is willing to host a dedicated piracy court
on its territory. The international community should
consult with any other State of the region discussed in
the report, or that otherwise might come forward, to
develop a plan to establish in the very near term a
dedicated piracy court or chamber in the region.

As recognized in the Lang report, we must not
forget that incarceration is perhaps the most significant
constraint on piracy prosecutions. In that regard, the
United States urges Puntland and Somaliland to pass
any necessary prisoner transfer legislation. We agree
that if the international community will invest in the
construction and rehabilitation of prisons in those
regions, convicted Somali pirates could be housed
humanely and securely in such facilities.

Finally, the United States is committed to
pursuing the means to disrupt the pirate enterprise
ashore, including by tracking illicit financial flows, in
an effort to identify and prosecute the organizers and
financiers of piracy. To that end, we energetically
support the leadership of Italy, South Korea,
INTERPOL, UNODC and other partners in that regard.

In conclusion, in cooperation with the
international community, the United States plans to

continue to address actively the issue of piracy as we
seek to assist Somalis in bringing stability to their
country. The roots of the piracy problem remain on
land. In that regard, the United States will continue to
support the Djibouti peace process, the Transitional
Federal Government and the African Union Mission in
Somalia to work towards greater stability, governance
and economic viability throughout Somalia.

