Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I congratulate you on your
timely decision to hold an open debate on the situation
in the Middle East. The press has followed suit, as
today's issue of a local newspaper shows on its front
page. The format you have chosen vastly enhances the
relevance and impact of the monthly briefings to the
09-42592

Security Council, as the wider membership is given an
opportunity to convey its views on a subject of such
importance. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his very comprehensive
briefing.

More than seven months have passed since the
ceasefire was agreed in the Gaza Strip, but the
humanitarian situation there continues to be a source of
grave concern. Access to basic goods remains clearly
insufficient, and much-needed reconstruction has not
been started due to the lack of building materials. The
relative tranquillity that we currently observe in the
Strip should not lead us to overlook the continued
plight of its inhabitants. Behind the statistics of the
Gaza war earlier this year, there are real men, women
and children. They no longer suffer daily
bombardments, but are still forced to live in entirely
unacceptable conditions.

Brazil therefore reiterates the urgency of an
international effort geared both at reconstructing Gaza
and at meeting all the humanitarian needs of its
population. Israel must fully abide by the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access and keep the
border crossings open. At the same time, militant
groups in Gaza must keep up the restraint they have
shown recently and refrain from all acts of violence
against the Israeli civilian population, especially in the
southern areas.

With regard to the West Bank, we can only
express satisfaction with recent Israeli efforts to ease
movement and improve access to Israel. Such measures
are positive and must continue. However, more is
needed. It is crucial that Israel freeze all settlement
activities, including those undertaken to accommodate
natural growth, and dismantle the existing ones, mainly
those built after 2001. This aspect is particularly
relevant in East Jerusalem, where attempts to redraw
the demographic map only further complicate an
already very difficult situation. The construction of the
wall - found to be illegal by an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice - must also come to
a halt.

We need to foster social and economic
development throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, while providing ways to defuse tension and
lessen dissatisfaction with the limited possibilities of
everyday life. In this sense, Brazil is making a
contribution. We are currently building a sports centre
5
in Ramallah, together with our partners in the India-
Brazil-South Africa forum, and will bring two of the
most prestigious Brazilian soccer teams to play for
peace. Our experience has shown that sport is a useful
instrument for creating hope and opportunities in
impoverished areas.

In the diplomatic arena, there seem to be
promising developments. The early and active
involvement of the United States in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and its continued support for the
two-State solution are very welcome. Prime Minister
Netanyahu's openness to the idea of a Palestinian State
is also encouraging, although it must evolve in order to
recognize the need to endow Palestine with the
attributes of full statehood. If these promising signs are
to bear the hoped-for fruit, sustained political will and
true statesmanship will continue to be required.

This holds true for Palestinians as well. Brazil
commends Egypt's efforts to promote intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, but if they are to succeed all parties
must work in earnest to find common ground under the
leadership of the Palestinian Authority. On the ability
to overcome internal differences rests the possibility of
building a truly independent and prosperous
Palestinian State. History will not forgive those who
fail to compromise in the search for unity, since
without unity there can be no peace.

Brazil supports the 26 June declaration by the
Quartet on the resumption of negotiations to end the
conflict and reach a two-State solution based on the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Road Map and all previous
agreements. Such a solution is needed today, not
tomorrow. As Minister Celso Amorim said in the Cairo
conference on Gaza in March, it is time for peace, not
for a peace process.

Such views were also conveyed to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Israel, Mr. Avigdor Lieberman,
last week in Brazil. His visit was an expression of the
productive bilateral relationship that exists between our
two countries. It also provides evidence of my
Government's willingness to contribute as much as
possible to the achievement of a comprehensive peace.
To the same end, the Brazilian Special Envoy to the
Middle East, Ambassador Ouro-Preto, recently
concluded another tour of the region during which, in a
wide range of meetings, he expressed yet again Brazil's
6
support for peace and the promotion of mutual
understanding.

In the same spirit, the Brazilian Government,
together with the United Nations Department of Public
Information, has organized the International Media
Seminar on Peace in the Middle East under the theme
"Promoting Israeli-Palestinian Dialogue - a View
from South America", being held today and tomorrow
in Rio de Janeiro. This event is bringing together
politicians, journalists, intellectuals and members of
civil society groups from Israel, Palestine, Brazil and
other South American countries. The seminar is a
gesture that embodies the spirit of openness and
dialogue that needs to be taken up in the political and
diplomatic arenas.

There are approximately 7 million Brazilians of
Lebanese descent. It is therefore no surprise that we
follow developments in that fellow country very
closely. We congratulate the Lebanese political parties
on their conduct of the recent elections and encourage
them to continue the dialogue to form a broad-based
and stable Government. We are particularly encouraged
by the tireless efforts of President Sleiman to build
trust among the main political forces in the country and
thereby consolidate stability.

The arms cache recently discovered in southern
Lebanon constitutes a clear violation of resolution
1701 (2006). It is crucial that all parties, without
exception, abide by the terms of the resolution. It is
also essential that all parties fully cooperate with the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in the
investigation of the incident.

My delegation believes that conditions more
favourable than those of the recent past are being
established to foster significant progress towards a
solution to the conflict in the Middle East. They
present an opportunity we must not miss. Brazil is
willing and ready to do all in its power to help the
parties.

