Mr. Picasso (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Let my
first words be to congratulate you for assuming the
direction of the Security Council during the month of
March, a task that has begun in a highly auspicious
manner. My delegation wishes to thank you, first of all,
for the opportunity to take part in this important
meeting that is a follow-up to the conclusions reached
in the Security Council in its meeting at the level of
heads of State last September on ensuring an effective
role of the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In recent years Peru has followed very closely
how matters relating to the maintenance of peace have
been dealt with in the Organization. The discussion and
reflection have touched upon subjects that deal with the
conceptualization of the basic elements, such as the
establishment and definition of new criteria and bases
for action now that conflicts have become more
complex and peacekeeping operations have a different
scope.

Along these lines, my country has observed with
interest the reaffirmation of basic concepts such as the
unrestricted respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence. These principles are
included in Security Council resolution 1318 (2000),
the contents of which Peru supports and encourages. In
this same sense, my country has welcomed, among
other aspects, the efforts to secure greater participation
by troop-contributing countries. This is both a logical
practical measure and just recognition of those States
that are involved in the most difficult and risky phase
of the peacekeeping operations.

Nevertheless, my delegation has also viewed with
concern the fact that the new principles and criteria for
action in the collective security system of the
Organization -which include, inter alia, the
redefinition of the content, scope and mandate of
peacekeeping operations and the conceptual expansion
of the causes of the conflicts - have been the fruit of a
process of reflection and decision exclusively within
the Security Council. This has left and continues to
leave the great majority of States outside the debate on
the configuration of the new international order in
these matters. Peru also has doubts about the relevance
of many of the new themes being discussed in the
Security Council which naturally fall under the
competence of other forums and bodies of the
Organization.

Your delegation, Mr. President, has wished to
delimit this debate through a useful document that
includes precise and direct questions on the work of the
Security Council. It has attached an equally important
annex that compiles initiatives and comments presented
in the Security Council summit meeting. This section
demonstrates what is known by all, and this is that in
many areas of discussion relating to peace and security
there is not yet a clear consensus on the
conceptualization of terms and principles of action.
This requirement for consensus, in our opinion,
becomes essential for shaping clear rules and criteria
which will, in their turn, gain the necessary support and
consent of the States of the United Nations and prevent
the imposition of concepts that are contrary to the
feelings of the majority.

In our opinion, there is no other body within the
system, aside from the General Assembly, that because
of its universal nature is capable of creating the
required consensus and can rely on a genuine capacity
to contribute and support this. Peru considers that the
Security Council has not yet conducted a broad review
of, nor given adequate consideration to, the important
role that the General Assembly can play in the
reinforcement of its own role as a means of unifying
common action criteria with regard to international
peace and security.

This participation becomes even more obvious
when the matters to be debated are superimposed on its
natural sphere of action. For example, we would like to
emphasize, in this first aspect, that the strategies
developed to handle the causes of conflicts-which
include concepts such as poverty and
underdevelopment - imply in themselves
consideration in and participation by the General
Assembly, as well as a dialogue with the Security
Council to determine a clear form of interaction. We
emphasize the interventions of some members of the
Security Council in the debate last September, when
they stated that not all causes of conflict should be
addressed by the Security Council but that its function
should be to participate with the relevant bodies of the
Organization in drafting general strategies for
cooperation. This same idea must be present with
regard to the expansion sought by some States of the
concept of security that would involve health,
environment and human rights matters.

Peru would also like to recall the full capacity
and relevance of the General Assembly for
consideration, reflection and recommendation in the
maintenance of international peace and security in
accordance with Articles 10, 11 and 14 of the Charter.
They grant it a capacity for recommendation in
situations of a threat to peace, the breach of peace and
aggression. The limit on its action is the imposition of
coercive measures under Chapter VII. This
interpretation has been consolidated with the principle
of the subsequent practice of the General Assembly
through resolutions that are parallel and
complementary to those of the Security Council and
even, at times, performing functions of this body.

In this regard, my delegation considers that the
Assembly is fully empowered to become an important
participant in the establishment of the new
international collective security. This is all the more
true since there are several subjects that await a clear
definition, such as preventive action, several aspects of
peace-building and many areas within the framework
of the peacekeeping operations. We do not need to say
that the Assembly's presence is indispensable when
dealing with matters linked to its natural capacity for
action that we have referred to.

My delegation is convinced that only a higher
level of dialogue and cooperation between the Security
Council and the General Assembly will permit the
obtaining of results that will offer a positive and
successful answer to the questions pointed out in the
document prepared for this meeting.

My country wishes to focus on an important
aspect which, even though it was not considered in
resolution 1318 (2000), nevertheless underlies, in a
fundamental and vital way, the entire problem of the
effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, in a
relationship that will allow the Council to act with the
consensus and support of all States of the Organization,
in the context of the current crisis of credibility that it
is facing, as was indicated by the Secretary-General in
the meeting which we are following up at this time.
The Peruvian delegation would like to conclude its
intervention by summarizing its position as follows.

First, there is the need to restore the nature of the
General Assembly as a forum for debates and broad
and pluralistic discussion of subjects relating to
international peace and security.

Second, there is the need to engage in dialogue
and an exchange of ideas between the Security Council
and the General Assembly to permit the development
of a clear legal framework with precise rules and
criteria, in accordance with the Charter of the
Organization. This would be in line with the new
concepts of collective international security and with
the political independence of States as central actors in
international relations and that ensure their effective
participation in its implementation.

Thirdly, the basis of this participation is found by
ensuring general support for the representational nature
and legitimacy of the General Assembly while the
current composition, rules of procedures and methods
of work of the Security Council are open to question.
These make it the most appropriate forum for the
search for consensus on items of common interest and
application.

Lastly, there is a need to promote a new concept
of collective security based on reciprocal trust, mutual
respect, legal equality and cooperation.

