Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to briefthe
Security Council on how peacekeeping operations have
been implementing the Council's mandates on ensuring
the protection of children in conflict situations. The
report before us (S/2013/245) is a stark reminder that
the situation of children in conflict remains dire and
that our sustained engagement is vital at both the
political and the operational levels. The Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) is committed
to ensuring that child protection, like all protection
mandates, is fully addressed in our missions' overall
political strategies and operational plans, and at all
stages of our engagement. In order to achieve that goal,
deploying dedicated and specialized child-protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations is crucial.

First, those advisers ensure that child-protection
concerns are reflected at all levels of a mission's
strategic planning and operational activities. We are
aware of how important it is to give purposeful attention
to child protection at the earliest stages of operational
planning. DPKO has therefore made the deployment
of a child-protection adviser to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) a first-phase priority. The adviser
will help the Mission to identify key child-protection
issues, as well as the approaches and resources needed
to address them. Where they are deployed, those
advisers ensure that our missions implement the key
priorities of Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict, one of the most important of which
is monitoring and reporting serious violations. Our
peacekeeping missions are fully engaged, through
country-level task forces, in monitoring and reporting
serious violations in South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire.

A second priority is negotiating action plans
aimed at ending the recruitment and use of children,
sexual violence against children, and the killing and
maiming of children. Under the leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, peacekeeping missions
have been contributing both to the negotiation and to
the implementation of such plans. Action plans recently
signed in the Democratic Republic of Congo and South
Sudan have yielded concrete results. In 2012, screening
for children by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo resulted in more
than 1,300 children being released from those forces.
Another 630 children, including 109 girls, were released
by other armed forces and groups in the first quarter of
this year.
In South Sudan, a revised action plan gave the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and UNICEF
access to 71 barracks, from which hundreds of children
were released. Protection is first and foremost a national
responsibility. It is therefore particularly encouraging
that child protection has been institutionalized in South
Sudan through the creation of a child-protection unit
in the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and
the inclusion of child protection in the SPLA training
curriculum. In addition, approximately 22,000 Sudan
People's Liberation Army soldiers from throughout the
ranks have been sensitized on child protection issues.

(spoke in English)

Lastly, child protection advisers advise all mission
components on specific aspects of child protection
relevant to their work. To achieve that, they deliver
in-mission training on child protection issues for
peacekeepers on the ground. Last year alone, 7,878
peacekeepers received training on child protection
in our field operations. That training provides
peacekeepers with key information on the situation of
children in the specific mission context, and therefore
prepares them to respond appropriately to any child-
protection concerns that they encounter in the field.

The Department of Peacekeeping Operations is
committed to ensuring that child protection receives
attention throughout the peace consolidation process.
The political engagement of peacekeeping operations
has helped lay the groundwork for institution-building
while highlighting child protection in national agendas.
Important work is taking place in that regard in Haiti
and Cote d'Ivoire. The United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti continues to provide training to the
Haitian National Police brigade for the protection of
minors and supports legislative reform on important
child-protection issues.

Our efforts in child protection constitute an
excellent example of the kind of action in peacekeeping
that requires a high degree of integrated action by
civilian and uniformed components alike. Embedded
in the heart of the mission, child protection advisers
ensure that a mission's material and political assets
and advantages - from access to authorities to
other capabilities, including uniformed and civilian
expertise - are applied effectively to fulfil the mandate
for child protection.

Given the magnitude of the challenges facing
children affected by conflict, our achievements are no
doubt modest. We are mindful that much more needs
to be done. With that in mind, at the Headquarters
level, we have invested in providing guidance and in
developing training standards on child protection for
peacekeepers.

The United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual
issued by the Office ofMilitary Affairs last year includes
guidelines on child protection, notably a provision
prohibiting the use of schools by peacekeepers for
operational purposes. DPKO also worked with Member
States to finalize predeployment training materials
on child protection for all peacekeeping personnel.
The materials will be piloted at courses in partnership
with the Governments of Malaysia and Uruguay in
September and October.

Awareness of the professional obligations
of peacekeepers to protect children and their
accountability to meet those obligations, in Mali and
in other theatres where United Nations peacekeepers
operate, is critical. As part of the transition from the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, all AFISMA
troops will be subject to predeployment training and
vetting procedures, including in accordance with
the requirements of the United Nations human rights
screening policy, so as to ensure that they meet
force requirements and have the necessary skills to
implement the mandate. In addition, DPKO will deploy
a mobile training team to Mali, which will deliver child-
protection training for AFISMA personnel deployed
there. Similar training is being undertaken for troops
being deployed to the Force Intervention Brigade in
MONUSCO.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to UNICEF,
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Save the Children
Sweden and Member States that have partnered with
us in the training initiative. Their support attests to the
strong global partnership that has been built around
child protection. For its part, I believe the Security
Council can be credited with playing a critical role in
creating and sustaining this partnership for the benefit
of children in the most difficult circumstances.

