Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. Like the previous speaker, the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland, I am grateful for
the opportunity to present the results of the so-called
Bonn-Berlin process.

Today's session is another proof of the high
importance attached to the question of sanctions by the
Security Council. I am sure that we all share the same
goals in this respect: minimizing the unintended effects
of sanctions on the civilian population of the targeted
country and on third countries. The results of both the
Interlaken and the Bonn-Berlin processes are designed
to help achieving these goals by introducing targeted or
smart sanctions - in our case with respect to arms
embargoes and travel bans.

Let me briefly recall the history. In 1998,
Germany declared its preparedness, in close
coordination with the United Nations Secretariat, to
continue the process initiated successfully by
Switzerland. Building on the experience gained by our
Swiss colleagues on financial sanctions, we decided to
involve civil society from the outset. Thus, we asked
the Bonn International Center for Conversion, an
independent organization with considerable expertise
in the field of sanctions, to organize a series of
conferences, seminars and workshops on the issues of
arms embargoes and travel bans. The participants were
diplomats and United Nations personnel, as well as
experts from academia, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. In hindsight, this
proved to be the right mix to tackle a difficult task,
namely, to support the sanctions makers in the Security
Council with model drafting language for resolutions
and checklists for their better implementation.

The two types of sanctions - arms embargoes
and travel restrictions 4 were obviously not selected at
random. Rather, they were identified because they help
to focus the unavoidable coercive element of any
sanctions regime on those most responsible for a threat
to peace and security. Dealing with both issues at the
same time seemed sufficiently concrete and politically
desirable.

I would like to submit today a handbook
containing the practical results of the Bonn-Berlin
process. It will be sent to all United Nations Member
States and sets out model Security Council resolutions
on arms embargoes and travel-related sanctions,
accompanied by an extensive commentary. It also
reflects, in two other documents, national
implementation of those types of sanctions. Finally, a
last report makes suggestions for the monitoring and
enforcement of arms embargoes.

Let me stress here that the Bonn-Berlin process
and the handbook before the Council were construed
not as representing the official view of the German
federal Government, but rather as the result of the
careful deliberations and discussions of various experts
from different backgrounds. At the same time,
however, my Government widely agrees with the
outcome of the process. We are convinced that the
documentation before the Council can be very helpful
in conceiving efficient sanctions regimes and in
minimizing unintended negative impacts on civilian
populations and third States.

The primary aim of the United Nations is to
maintain peace and security in the world. In order to
maintain this goal, the Charter, in its Chapter VII,
mandates the Security Council to impose certain
coercive measures. The experience of recent years and
months has shown that sanctions are and will remain an
important tool of the Council in this context. All
Member States are aware of the fact that imposing
sanctions is a difficult step to take. All Council
members, elected or non-elected, carry heavy
responsibility in this regard. When the Council
members decide to apply sanctions, they speak on
behalf of the whole membership of the United Nations.

Generally speaking, sanctions should not be a
punishment; rather, they should lead to compliance
with the United Nations Charter. Amongst the States
Members of the United Nations, there is consensus that
a sanctions regime should neither hit the innocent
civilian population nor affect non-target nations. It
should focus on those responsible for the threat to
international peace and security. Through sanctions,
these people should become aware that the community
of nations does not tolerate behaviour hostile to
international peace and security, acting across borders
or at home. In order to achieve this aim, thorough
deliberations and careful drafting of resolutions are of
the utmost importance.

I hope that members of the Council will agree
that, in the past, not every sanctions regime has been
successful in this regard. The only measure for success
is a halt to unacceptable behaviour. Some sanctions
have not led to compliance with the United Nations
Charter; others have had disproportionately negative
side effects on civilian populations and/or on third
States and, in the worst cases, a combination of both.
Even the most equilibrated and fine-tuned sanctions
still depend on a prognosis of the aggressor's
behaviour. If a tool proves ineffective, it should be our
obligation to reconsider and re-evaluate whether a
change would serve better. A flexible response to
continued outrageous misbehaviour is a sign not of
resignation, but ofa smarter use of the legal tools.

My country is of the opinion that only targeted
sanctions can achieve their goals. "Targeted" means
concentrated on crucial issues, such as finances or
arms, and focused on a specific group; it also means
regular reconsideration of the sanctions regime and its
consequences.

The model resolutions included in the handbook
that is before members should be regarded as a
valuable point of reference that merits close
consideration by the Council. We would hope that
those texts will help Council members to draft or re-
draft targeted sanctions to improve their efficiency.

I cannot conclude without mentioning that even
the most precise sanctions resolutions can fail if some
Member States lack the political will to implement
them. The recommendations set out in our
documentation are aimed at achieving a better level of
national implementation. But it remains a question of
commitment and willingness on the part of every single
Member State to lead coercive measures to success: to
compliance with the United Nations Charter by the
State concerned.

Let me express my thanks to the Secretariat for
its helpful role and its active participation. I would like
also to thank the numerous Members of the United
Nations that have participated in the process and
enriched it.

Finally, let me thank you again, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to share the results of the Bonn-Berlin
process with the Security Council.

