Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Sir, for honouring us with your presence
today. My delegation would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and Ms. Cliffe for their
comprehensive briefings. My delegation commends the
initiative of the delegation of Nigeria to convene this
open debate. This theme is, indeed, a topic of the
utmost importance to my delegation.

The United Nations Charter has entrusted the
Security Council with the primary responsibility to
maintain peace and security in the world. And it was
only five years ago that world leaders adopted the 2005
World Summit outcome document in which they
reiterated the obligation of States to settle their
disputes by peaceful means in accordance with Chapter
VI of the Charter. They also stressed the importance of
the prevention of armed conflict, the need to have a
coherent and integrated United Nations approach to
prevent such conflicts and the role of the good offices
of the Secretary-General to that end.

Where do we stand today with respect to all these
noble objectives and how are we to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools to achieve them? In this
context, my delegation would like to focus on three
areas. The first is the United Nations and preventive
diplomacy. The complexity of today's world requires
an integrated and comprehensive strategy based on a
multifaceted approach by the United Nations to detect,
intercept and prevent any source of tension, to resolve
conflict and to ensure the consolidation of peace.

My delegation welcomes the four fronts to which
the Deputy Secretary-General eloquently referred in
her presentation, which demonstrate the attempts by
the United Nations to move from reaction to action.
My delegation considers the creation of the Mediation
Support Unit and Mediation Support Standby Team
within the Department of Political Affairs as a positive
step in the right direction. Those two components have
enhanced preventive diplomacy capabilities at
Headquarters and in the field. At the same time, while
we should recognize the good offices efforts of the
Secretary-General and his envoys, additional resources
are needed to expand those efforts. Financial resources
are an essential prerequisite without which an effective
approach, common objectives and enhanced
predictable support capacities will remain a theoretical
paradigm.

Secondly, on the active role of national
Governments in cooperation with the United Nations,
indeed the primary responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with national Governments and other
local actors. National Governments will be able,
through dialogue with civil society, women's
organizations, youth groups and other national actors,
to identify sources of tension and address root causes
of conflicts. Afterwards, those Governments should be
able to assess their needs and priorities and create road
maps to achieve them. If, as Ms. Cliffe stated, 90 per
cent of civil wars recur in countries which have
suffered from civil war, the role of the United Nations
will become more crucial to support and assist
Governments in their efforts to prevent the recurrence
of violence through providing expertise and know-how
and sharing lessons learned and success stories.

In this context, special attention should be paid to
adopting an integrated approach linking security,
justice and development. This integrated approach will
draw from the spectrum of expertise and vast
experience of the Security Council, the Department of
Political Affairs, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and other specialized agencies. This integrated
approach will be more effective if it includes regional
and subregional organizations.

That leads me to my third point: how to enhance
coordination and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. The African Union and its
Peace and Security Council and the Economic
Community of West African States have emerged as
important players in addressing conflicts in Africa and
have thus made invaluable contributions to maintaining
peace and security. They are already working to
implement effective conflict prevention techniques, in
particular through the African Union Border
Programme. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, should continue to strengthen
cooperation with these organizations to effectively
utilize their regional early warning mechanisms,
peacekeeping efforts and peacebuilding capacities.

This cooperation is particularly important as most
armed conflicts in Africa result from a multitude of
causes, which are, inter alia, poverty, corruption, drugs,
misuse of natural resources and the illicit arms trade.
The United Nations can provide assistance when these
organizations are trying to address in a comprehensive
manner the root causes of these armed conflicts. United
Nations bodies should provide their expertise and
resources in finding solutions and contributing towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

In this context, it is worth noting that the
informal interactive meeting which was held last week
between the representatives of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the Security Council
strengthened the path of cooperation that, it is hoped,
will be transformed into partnership. It is only through

that partnership that both councils can face the
challenges in Africa in general, and in Darfur and
Somalia in particular.

It is our collective duty to prevent conflict and
the loss of innocent life whenever and wherever we
can. Successful mediation and settlement of disputes,
including, inter alia, provision of financial resources
and human expertise, is one of the greatest assets we
have in combating violence. Such assets, combined
with our concerted efforts and goodwill, help us not
only to maintain international peace and security but
also to implement policies that will prevent human
loss.

We congratulate Nigeria on the adoption of
today's presidential statement.

