Mr. Shah (India): It is my privilege to address the
Security Council again this month under your presidency.
The unsettled conditions in Afghanistan have a direct and
adverse fallout on peace and security in the region and
affect my country.

India's relations with Afghanistan stretch back into
remote history. Ties of friendship, culture and religion bind
the people of India and Afghanistan together. We have an
abiding interest in the stability of Afghanistan. India gives
its full support to the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan. We therefore supported General
Assembly resolution 50/88 of December 1995 which, inter
alia, laid down the guidelines for the peace process in
Afghanistan. That resolution also provides that the peace
process may be implemented with the assistance of the
United Nations Special Mission.

 

We have followed the recent developments in
Afghanistan with deep concern. The eruption of renewed
fighting in September, which led to the fall of Kabul, has
created a dangerous new situation of great fluidity. The
present round of hostilities began towards the end of
August when the Taliban forces moved against
Government forces. Thereafter, the Taliban forces moved
into Nangarhar province and took Jalalabad on 11
September. They proceeded towards Surobi, which fell on
24 September, and captured Kabul in the early hours of
27 September. They followed the retreating forces of
Commander Masood to the north with the objective of
capturing Panjshir Valley. Recent reports indicate that
hostilities have not ceased and Taliban forces have
reportedly suffered military setbacks north of Kabul.

The Taliban offensive occurred while the Head of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan was
engaged in active parleys with different parties in
Afghanistan to examine ways of bringing them together
so that peace could be achieved. Some other countries,
both from the region and outside, were also engaged in
active diplomacy regarding Afghanistan. The Taliban
offensive resulted in the Security Council's presidential
statement of 28 September 1996, which reaffirmed
support for United Nations efforts to bring peace in
Afghanistan and called upon all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.

Within Afghanistan itself, the Government of
President Rabbani, recognized by India, had taken an
active and sincere interest in promoting an intra-Afghan
dialogue, and it was in pursuit of that dialogue that the
Government itself had been broadened, with the inclusion
of Gulbudin Hekmatyar.

Throughout this period some groups remained
intransigent and refused to engage in any negotiations or
discussions with other groups. Peace can only return to
Afghanistan if all groups accept the proposition that they
cannot achieve their objectives through violent means. A
new system has to be evolved. This can be achieved by
the Afghan parties if they are all committed to the unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. For
its part, India remains fully committed to this fact.

Afghanistan has suffered from foreign interference.
There is ample evidence to show that some Afghan
parties that have engaged in violent activities have been
supported, trained and actively assisted by foreign powers.
It is only through the cessation of foreign interference that
peace and stability can return to Afghanistan.

 

The ideological orientations of the Taliban are a
source of concern. Their wanton disregard of human rights,
especially the rights of women, has given rise to misgivings
all over the world. This also led the United Nations
Secretary-General to issue on 7 October 1996 a statement
on the status of women and girls in Afghanistan. The brutal
murder of Najibullah and his brother was against all canons
of civilized behaviour and has attracted condemnation. India
shares the widespread sense of outrage at this act. The
traditional ethos of Afghanistan must be maintained. Any
authority or group that seeks to undermine this ethos not
only goes against the history of Afghanistan but is bound
to fail.

The Afghan people must find a solution to this
situation by themselves. India fully supports the efforts of
the Secretary- General and the Head of the Special Mission
to Afghanistan, and is willing to contribute to these efforts.
India has had active programmes of economic and technical
assistance in Afghanistan. Even during the unsettled
conditions, we have continued our humanitarian assistance.
As part of this assistance, India organized a programme of
fitting artificial limbs in Afghanistan between 19 August
and 23 September. Over 1100 Afghans benefited from this
programme by receiving artificial legs.

We are deeply saddened by the violence and the
consequent loss of life and suffering. We call for peaceful
negotiations among Afghan parties to settle all outstanding
issues. We once again want to emphasize that the cessation
of foreign interference is necessary for a resolution of the
conflict. My delegation would therefore reiterate India's
support of the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-
General and the Head of the Special Mission to Afghanistan
to bring peace to Afghanistan. India is prepared to play its
full part in these and other international efforts aimed at
bringing peace to Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the hope I
expressed in the Council on 9 April 1996 while speaking on
the situation in Afghanistan. We trust that the outcome of
this debate will help the Council and the Secretary-General
to focus on what must be urgently done in Afghanistan with
a View to restoring peace and stability and promoting
development in that country.

