Mr. Abdymomunov (Kazakhstan): Let me express
my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for highlighting the
need to protect critical infrastructure in the light of the
recent change of the tactics, forms and strategies of
terrorist organizations witnessed today. The challenge
becomes more acute considering the immensely vast
scope and categories of critical infrastructure that
are vulnerable, from nuclear and energy facilities,
commerce, finance and banking to all forms of
transportation, to mention just a few. The problem is
aggravated because digital and modern information and
communication technologies are central to all operations
of more than 20 major systems of critical infrastructure
having national, regional and global implications.

My delegation would like to present how Kazakhstan
is taking precautions on two very important fronts:
first, information and communication technologies of
public resources, and, secondly, nuclear facilities.

Kazakhstan realizes that modern critical
infrastructure is drawing the attention of, and attacks
from, international terrorist organizations. Although
infrastructure protection is a direct responsibility
of our State authorities, we see the need for joint
public- and private-sector efforts, together with
close cooperation with international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, INTERPOL, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO, as well as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization.

We are also taking care regarding potential energy,
business, cross-border and transnational disasters,
because of the interlinkages of these areas through
information and communication technologies. In such
circumstances, we are developing our national system
to counter terrorism on the Internet, entitled "Cyber-
Shield of Kazakhstan".

Currently, the laws of individual Member States
have no common approaches for the understanding of
critical infrastructure, and therefore it is necessary to
harmonize national legislation so as to adhere to United
Nations global norms of critical infrastructure security.
I turn now to another key, critical
infrastructure - nuclear infrastructure. Nuclear
safety is a key collective responsibility today at the
national, regional and global level. Kazakhstan is
therefore taking all the necessary measures to ensure
the security of such facilities located in its territory
and in the region. As a party to almost all international
conventions in this field, we call on others to comply
with them in good faith.

We are also actively striving to promote an
international legal framework to ensure the safe
handling of nuclear materials. We are vigilant
in protecting critical infrastructure, including
infrastructure located on the former Semipalatinsk
test site - now the National Nuclear Centre of the
Republic of Kazakhstan - and on the BN-350 nuclear
facility, with the active assistance of our partners. We
are ready to prepare highly qualified specialists, and
for that purpose we are establishing a training centre
on nuclear safety in Almaty with the support of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United
States Government.

Stringent measures are taken to ensure safety in the
construction of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank
on our territory, and in the transportation of nuclear
materials. In that connection, I would like to emphasize
that Kazakhstan has complied with the requirements of
the four nuclear security summits, especially as they
relate to the safe use of nuclear energy. We are also
adequately securing radioactive sources that terrorists
could use to manufacture dirty bombs.

Every effort was made to ensure security at the
28th World University Winter Games, recently held
in Almaty, by focusing on the early identification
and elimination of threats, and the same is true of the
forthcoming Astana EXPO-2017.

I am pleased to report that we are developing close
cooperation with the European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection, along with the fight against
transnational crimes. The country is also active in the
Critical Infrastructure Warning Information Network
of the European Commission, sharing information on
research regarding infrastructure protection.

Kazakhstan stands ready to develop common
security schemes acceptable to all States, regardless of
their national characteristics and traditions, in order to
keep our world and planet safe from the ever-growing
threats we face.

