Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my gratitude to Cote d'Ivoire
for having convened this debate on regional cooperation
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts. We are
also deeply honoured by your presence here today,
Mr. Minister.

(spoke in Spanish)

We are also grateful for the enlightening briefings
delivered by the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

We wish to underscore the importance of promoting
the greater involvement of States and regional and
subregional organizations and their close cooperation
with the United Nations system, with a View to
preventing and resolving contemporary conflicts
more effectively. We emphasize the need to develop a
comprehensive legal basis comprising administrative
structures and coordination mechanisms with the
United Nations and the Security Council, based on
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
That would promote synergies and complementarities
between the United Nations system and various
regional and subregional organizations, with a view to
institutionalizing and increasing the effectiveness of
the peace and security architecture.

The Council maintains active cooperation with
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community. The same is true of the European Union in
its involvement in various conflict-affected countries.

In that regard, we would also like to highlight
the meeting held last September on the situation in
Nicaragua (see S/PV.8340), at which the members of
the Council were able to provide support to the efforts
of the Organization of American States to contribute to
the achievement of a political solution that would make
it possible to prevent a major conflict in that country.

The nature and extent of contemporary conflicts
reflect the growing vulnerability of many countries to
global challenges such as violent extremism leading
to terrorism, transnational organized crime and the
negative effects of climate change. In that connection,
we stress the importance of having the capacity to
analyse risks and conflicts, as well as to mediate
and, in general, to develop and strengthen inclusive,
transparent and accountable institutions.

That is consistent with the concept of sustainable
peace and with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, in addition
to being an end in itself, development is an effective
and efficient means of tackling the contemporary
proliferation of conflicts by addressing their root causes.

Yesterday, as we considered the importance of
supporting national reconstruction and reconciliation
processes (see S/PV.8413), we highlighted the
Peacebuilding Commission's role in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts by gathering various actors
capable of forging the alliances necessary to sustain
peace and development.

Within the framework of the reforms that are being
promoted, the United Nations system must pay special
attention to the development and strengthening of
regional capacities to support national efforts. In that
regard, we stress the importance of promoting greater
participation by women and young people. We also
stress the need for fluid coordination mechanisms to
enhance the complementarity of the various actors in
their distinct operational and geographical scopes, as
well as the synergies generated as a result of regional
actors' better understanding of the circumstances and
requirements on the ground.

That requires predictable, sustainable and flexible
financing for peace support operations, which, in turn,
requires renewed support from traditional contributors,
the development of innovative financial mechanisms
and greater involvement of the private sector. In
that regard, we believe that, as recommended by the
Secretary-General in his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, the Organization must be able to prioritize
the financing of support missions deployed by the
African Union where the needs are greatest.

We would like to conclude by emphasizing that
investment in the development and strengthening
of regional capacities for prevention presupposes a
more efficient and effective exercise of our shared
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

