Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): The violent incidents
which have recently shaken the Kosovo province, in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, have drawn the focused
attention of the international community. The horrible
remembrances of the not-so-distant events in Bosnia,
which resulted in thousands of innocent victims, the
practice of "ethnic cleansing" and floods of refugees are
still vivid in our memory.
Although we believe that this is an internal affair of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the current situation
in Kosovo cannot but cause grave concern in Ukraine, as
a country which is adjacent to the Balkans. The fact that
these events are accompanied by violations of human
rights, acts of violence and casualties among the civilian
population causes us special concern.

The possibility of further confrontation and the real
threat of the escalation of the situation might lead to the
destabilization of the whole region, where, with the active
involvement of the international community, concrete
measures towards a normalization of the situation are
being undertaken.

Ukraine expresses its hope that in the nearest future
the situation in Kosovo will be settled through existing
multilateral mechanisms by means of peaceful dialogue,
tolerance and mutual understanding. Ukraine welcomes
recent diplomatic initiatives in this regard. For its part,
Ukraine stands ready to facilitate this process by all
possible means, in particular through the efforts of the
Contact Group and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.

My delegation welcomes this timely meeting of the
Security Council, convened today to address the situation
in Kosovo. We hope that the adoption by the Security
Council of the resolution, and in particular the
introduction of the arms embargo, will foster the search
for peaceful solutions to this serious problem. At the
same time, Ukraine remains of the opinion that any
negative consequences which might affect third States as
a result of further restrictions imposed by the Security
Council against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
including Kosovo, should be properly considered by the
Council. It is our hope that soon the Security Council will
be ready to evaluate the real effect of this and other

 

measures introduced by the resolution just adopted, as well
as the mechanism of its implementation.

In conclusion, Ukraine calls upon the authorities in
Belgrade and the leadership of the Kosovar Albanian
community to urgently enter without preconditions into a
meaningful dialogue on political status issues. I should like
to reconfirm the readiness of Ukraine to facilitate this
dialogue.

