Mr. Insanally (Guyana): On 7 February 2006,
the people of Haiti came together in surprising strength
and against all odds to cast their votes for the
restoration of democracy to their troubled land. It was
an impressive display of civic pride and responsibility
that brought fresh faith and hope for the future of Haiti.
The Rio Group, on whose behalf I have the honour to
speak today, applauds their determination and
celebrates their triumph.

The Argentine Republic, as President of the
Security Council, must be congratulated on its
initiative to bring the situation in Haiti to this body for
further deliberation. We are particularly pleased to see
my Minister, colleague, presiding over this important
meeting.

We also wish to commend the Secretary-General
for his guidance of the collective effort to assist Haiti
through a most difficult and challenging period in its
recent history.

To the distinguished Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Juan Gabriel
Valdes, we offer our appreciation for his leadership of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and acknowledge the pivotal role the
Mission has played in the return to constitutional order
in Haiti. His presentation today has certainly informed
and inspired our own intervention in the debate.

We welcome most especially the presence in our
midst today of the President-elect of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Rene Preval. His participation in this
forum is indicative of his willingness to engage and
collaborate with the international community for the
good of his country and its people. On behalf of the
Rio Group, allow me to pledge to him our full support
for the implementation of his mandate.

It is important that at this critical juncture in
Haiti's history the international community give
serious thought to how best it might assist Haiti - a
country that for so long has been hobbled by poverty
and conflict - to make a smooth transition to a stable
and secure society, firmly embarked on the path to
development.

As friends of Haiti, the countries of the Rio
Group are encouraged by the successful conclusion of
the recent electoral process to believe that a unique
opportunity has been created for the establishment of
peace and development in the country.

In our view, the future stability and viability of
Haiti will depend in large measure on our collective
ability to strengthen and entrench the foundations of
democracy. Strong and effective institutions and
machinery will have to be built to guarantee that the
benefits of democracy are delivered to all the citizens
of Haiti without regard to class, colour or creed.
Accordingly, our cooperation with Haiti must be
designed to yield, among other things, an education
system that is relevant to the particular needs of a
largely Creole-speaking population, a strong police and
judiciary to preserve law and order and, indeed, all the
other basic services such as health and housing that are
essential to a decent life.

Equally important, there must be a determined
effort to eliminate the climate of fear and insecurity
that now prevails in Haiti. The internecine violence
that has long plagued that country cannot be tolerated
if democracy is to survive. We note in this context that
President-elect Preval has called for the continuation of
MINUSTAH so that the democratic process can be
preserved and consolidated. The Rio Group supports
the retention of the Mission and would also urge that
its mandate now be amply broadened to include a
stronger humanitarian and development component.
This more comprehensive approach, we believe, will
not only improve the Mission's performance but will
also enhance its credibility and prestige in the eyes not
only of the Haitian people but of the international
community.

Reducing poverty and creating incentives to
economic growth are arguably among the most difficult
challenges facing Haiti today. All who have witnessed
the abject conditions of life in Cite Soleil and other
deprived areas of Haiti cannot but be appalled by the
misery that is allowed to exist today. The human
development indicators of Haiti are well below the
average of the other countries of the region, with a vast
majority of Haitians living in poverty and with little or
no access to adequate health care, education and public
sanitation. The Rio Group is pleased to learn that a
poverty reduction strategy will be put in place to
enable Haiti to reach the Millennium Development
Goals within the specified time frame.
As experience has also taught us, democratic
elections alone cannot guarantee peace and
development. To be truly effective, democracy must be
nurtured and fortified through equitable economic and
social development. The Rio Group is of the view that
the early implementation of some key priority projects
aimed at rapidly improving the standard of living of
Haiti's poor will serve to alleviate the prevailing
despair and give new hope to the nation for economic
recovery and growth.

In this context, I may mention that several
countries of the Rio Group have already established
bilateral cooperation programmes with Haiti in areas of
concern. At the level of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), the heads of Government have already
signalled their readiness to readmit Haiti into the
Community's councils and to provide it with further
material and technical support. We commend the
United States, Canada, the European Union, other
donor countries and international agencies that have
contributed, within the Interim Cooperation
Framework, to several development programmes. We
urge other States and agencies in a position to do so to
respond promptly and fully to Haiti's urgent
requirements by making swift and generous
disbursements of assistance to that country.

The successful transition to constitutional
government that Haiti is now in the process of making
is largely the result of a very close and productive
partnership that has been developed between Haiti and
the international community. We laud the
determination and efforts of all Haitians at all levels to
rise above their present circumstances. Similarly, we
must acknowledge the contributions made by
MINUSTAH, the Organization of American States, the
Rio Group, CARICOM. and other partners to the
strengthening of the democratic process.

It is important and imperative that this
partnership for Haiti now be renewed and reinvigorated
to enable that stricken country to consolidate its recent
gains and move forward to full development. As a
well-known Haitian proverb says: "Men anpil chay pa
lou" - many hands make the load lighter. Acting in
concert we will be able, hopefully, to see and to restore
to Haiti the pride and glory that were born of its early,
heroic struggle for freedom and independence.

