Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): 1 wish to convey to Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, the regrets of Mr. Amadou Ba, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad, who was unable to take part in this important debate due to time constraints. Allow me also to reiterate my warm congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, and to all the new members, on their accession to this prestigious Council, and to express our appreciation for the relevance of this debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for both his very informative statement and for his commendable efforts, which have brought tangible progress in terms of respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly in the context of operations for the maintenance of international peace and security. My delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)) and by the African members of the Security Council (see S/PV.8699). Thecomplexity of today's international environment gives us no choice but to remain faithful to the principles and purposes underpinning the establishment of the United Nations, namely, the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, the peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the use or the threat of the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of a State. Moreover, these purposes and principles are the recipe for the peaceful and secure world to which we so much aspire. Their violation creates conditions conducive to the emergence of various threats, such as armed conflicts, aggressive expansionist policies, terrorism and violent extremism, separatism, intercommunal conflicts and transnational organized crime. That is why the ongoing quest for peace and security challenges all of us and requires from each and every one of us a high level of awareness of the imperative of respecting the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the fundamental law of our planet. However, preserving the Charter requires, above all, the promotion of multilateralism, the foundation on which the United Nations was built. We would like to recall that, acting alone, we cannot meet the challenges of today's world. It is fundamentally the weakening of multilateralism through the proliferation of unilateral actions that encourages repeated violations of the Charter and further undermines the gains made, at the cost of immeasurable efforts and sacrifices, in the area of peace and security since the end of the Second World War. The current situation in the Middle East amply demonstrates that causal relationship. In _ that connection, we express our serious concerns about the escalation of violence and the untold suffering of the civilian population and we call on the parties to show greater restraint and to negotiate with a view to reaching a successful outcome to all the conflicts. We cannot stress enough that multilateralism also means respecting others, accepting differences and recognizing the equality of all peoples, as clearly set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. On that subject, when addressing the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth regular session, His Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal, said: "We must firmly reject populist rhetoric, which manipulates minds, fosters hatred and, ultimately, trivializes racism, xenophobia and _ violent extremism ... That also means that peace is also diversity, that there can be no superior hub of civilization that would dictate to others how to be and act and that all cultures and civilizations are equal in dignity." (see A/74/PV.4) The words of the President of Senegal also reflect another principle that is dear to the United Nations and essential to our perpetual quest for peace - the right of peoples to self-determination. In that spirit, Senegal renews its call for reconciliation between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples and for the realization of the right of the Palestinian people to a viable State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully coexisting alongside the State of Israel, each within safe and internationally recognized borders. In our view, another equally critical requirement is to ban the use of interference and force as the preferred means of settling disputes. The Security Council should do all it can to prioritize peaceful means for the settlement of disputes in situations that do not constitute a threat to international peace and security. In other words, coercive action is only a means and not an end in itself. The success of the Organization therefore depends more on its ability to apply Chapter VI, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, than on its ability to apply the more difficult and challenging Chapter VII. That is why Senegal, as a staunch advocate of preventive diplomacy, favours striking a balance between the most essential elements of those two Chapters. Respecting the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security also requires us to recall the basic principles governing peace operations. The consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-defence must therefore continue to be paramount. To that end, it is important that all parties involved in peace operations have a clear understanding of the practical scope of those principles in order to ensure their effective application. Such an exercise should therefore invite them to reflect in depth on the dialectic underlying peacekeeping since the end of the Cold War - the proper balance between a robust mandate and the non-use of force, between conflict prevention and sovereignty, and between the protection of civilians and impartiality. In view of the significant regional dimensions of most conflicts and the essential role that neighbouring States must play in any peace process, we also believe it is appropriate to place the regional organizations at the heart of peace efforts, in accordance with Article 52(1) of Chapter VIII of the Charter. The examples of successful cooperation on conflict resolution in the West African subregion between the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States serve to illustrate the virtues of that approach, although funding remains an urgent outstanding issue. Peace has no price but it does have a cost, and it is important to continue our efforts to find ways to provide predictable and sustainable funding for peace missions. In conclusion, the consideration of the principles and purposes of the Charter from a peacekeeping perspective also raises the nagging question of the reform of the principal organ of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security - the Security Council - in order to make it more legitimate in its composition and more credible and effective in its action. I would like to thank the outgoing members of the Security Council for their valuable contributions to its efforts to maintain international peace and security, and to assure the States that have just joined this prestigious organ of my delegation's full cooperation.
