Mr. Feltman: Let me also convey, on behalf of
those of us in the Secretariat, our condolences and
our shock to our friends from Sweden on the attacks
in Stockholm. The Secretary-General is following this
with great concern.

The Council has requested the Secretariat to provide
an update on Syria. In addition, the Special Envoy for
Syria, Staffan de Mistura, will brief the Council in less
than a week. I will therefore keep my remarks short.

In the last two months, we have seen the 30 December
2016 ceasefire falter amid a steady escalation of
military activity. In mid-February, Government forces
escalated their military operations in several areas
of Damascus and Homs, recapturing Wadi Barada
and Al-Waer in Horns. Military advances there were
accompanied by the large-scale evacuation of fighters
and their families. The Syrian Government cited the
presence of the Al-Nusra Front in these areas, claims
that were disputed by the opposition. Subsequently,
during February and March, armed opposition groups,
sometimes coordinating with the Al-Nusra Front,
launched offensives in Dar'a Damascus and Hamah.
5

On 4 April, as Government forces were fighting to
regain territory recently lost to opposition offensives
in northern Hamah, alarming reports emerged of an
alleged chemical attack in nearby Khan Shaykhun,
in southern Idlib. Sources on the ground reported
airstrikes. The Council, of course, discussed this at an
emergency meeting on 5 April (see S/PV.7915).

The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has announced that its Fact-Finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is starting to
investigate the alleged Khan Shaykhun attack. The
Secretary-General, in a public statement, shared that
he was appalled by the chemical-weapons attack in
Khan Shaykhun and the deaths of and injury to many
innocent civilians.

This morning at approximately 4.35 a.m., two
United States naval vessels deployed in the eastern
Mediterranean Sea launched a total of 59 cruise missiles
targeting the Al-Shayrat military airbase in Horns
governorate. The United States has stated that this was
in response to what it says was the Syrian Government's
use of chemical weapons from this airbase. The United
States claimed that the missiles severely damaged or
destroyed Syrian aircraft and support infrastructure
and equipment. According to news reports, the United
States said that it had informed Russian Federation
forces of the strike in advance, using the established
de-confliction mechanism, and taking precautions
to minimize the risk to Russian or Syrian personnel
located at the airfield.

A statement from the Syrian General Command
of the army and the armed forces called the attack a
"blatant act of aggression" that had caused six deaths
and "huge material damage". Iran and the Russian
Federation condemned the attack. The United Kingdom,
Australia, Germany, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Italy, Japan,
the Netherlands and New Zealand have expressed some
support for the strikes.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for international peace and security. We hope that the
Council can unite and exercise that responsibility to
investigate the alleged use of chemical weapons in Khan
Shaykhun. It is important that the Council send a strong
collective message that any use of chemical weapons
will not be tolerated and will have consequences.
The Secretary-General stresses that the international
community has a responsibility to hold any perpetrator
of chemical-weapons attacks accountable and to ensure
that chemical weapons are never again used as an
instrument of warfare.

The protection of civilians and accountability
should be at the top of our peace and security agenda. In
the case of Syria, there can be no genuine protection if
the parties to the conflict, Government and opposition
alike, are permitted to act with impunity and if the
Syrian Government continues to commit human rights
violations against its own citizens. Protecting the
Syrian people requires immediate action, action that
is rooted in the principles of the United Nations and
international law. Mindful of the risk of escalation, the
Secretary-General has publicly appealed for restraint in
order to avoid any acts that could deepen the suffering
of the Syrian people. We further urge all parties
involved in military operations to abide by international
humanitarian law and take all necessary precautions to
avoid and minimize civilian casualties.

As the Secretary-General has said, these events
underscore our belief that the only way to resolve the
conflict is through a political settlement. We urge the
parties to renew their commitment to making progress
in the Geneva talks as soon as possible. In that regard,
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) remain the foundation
of United Nations mediation efforts and contain the core
principles for them - and, ultimately, for a solution.

