Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your guidance to limit today's
meeting to questions. I will do so. I have to say that
following our Polish colleague's intervention, that he
has already taken some of my questions. Therefore,
I think that, as you will speak last, Sir, that you will
have a difficult time and will really have to think of
something new.

I also thank the Force Commanders here today.
May I, like my Polish colleague, pay tribute to the men
and women who serve in blue the Security Council and
the United Nations. I pay tribute to those who have lost
their lives in doing so. I also ask the Force Commanders
to please pass on the thanks of the Council to their
own troops for all that they are doing in sometimes
very difficult circumstances. It is very helpful and
important for the Council to hear ground truth from the
Force Commanders. I therefore hope that they will feel
enabled and emboldened to answer all questions fully
and without any need to be diplomatic.

With regard to my questions, I would like to
ask a general question to either one or both of the
Force Commanders, which is what impact they are
seeing on the ground from the support provided from
Headquarters as a result of the Secretary-General's
reforms of the peace and security architecture. My
second general question involves the great deal of focus
placed on improving the performance of uniformed
components in missions. Do they have access to the data
that they need to be able to drive forward performance
improvement efforts based on evidence?

Echoing the question that my Polish colleague
asked, I would like to ask General Ngondi specifically
to elaborate on the cooperation between the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the Sudanese authorities since the removal of President
Al-Bashir. I also want to ask him the following question:
After the looting at the camp in El Geneina, what
lessons-learned exercises were carried out and what has
he taken away from that, recognizing, of course, as he
says, that there has been a suspension of handing over
of team sites for now?

Finally, with regard to the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), General
Pearce mentioned the work that UNFICYP does in
liaising between the two sides. The most recent mandate
calls for the establishment of a mechanism for direct
contact between the two sides to resolve security and
other issues, as is fairly commonplace in other United
Nations mission settings. I wonder if she could tell
us anything about how those efforts to establish that
are progressing or, if they are not, what the blockages
might be.

