Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I am grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
organized this important debate on the situation in
Haiti. Like previous speakers, I welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti.

My delegation is pleased to participate in this
important debate on the situation in Haiti, specifically
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), described in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200). A key point
about the report is that it was written at a time when
the international community's solidarity with respect to
the reconstruction of Haiti is at its apex.

The day 12 January 2010 will live in our
collective memory as a day on which humankind faced
one of the most devastating tragedies in its history.
Many dreadful and poignant images remain etched in
our minds and remind us of the unimaginable scale of
the human and material losses caused by the terrible
earthquake. This unspeakable disaster reduced to
nought all the country's development efforts.
My delegation wishes to focus on three main
points: the international community's response to the
tragedy; the reconstruction of Haiti; and the role of
MINUSTAH in this new, evolving political,
institutional and security environment.

On the first point, my delegation wishes first and
foremost to pay tribute to the memory of the 101
United Nations staff members who died when the
Mission's headquarters collapsed. We think in
particular of Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Luiz Carlos da
Costa, his Deputy. Their heroism in death obliges us to
continue their mission: to work for the transformation
and development of a new Haiti, a Haiti looking
towards the future.

The international community's response to the
tragedy was swift and proactive. In particular, my
delegation welcomes the leadership shown by the
United Nations on the ground in the immediate
aftermath of the earthquake. Here, we hail the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations team in Haiti, in
particular by Mr. Edmond Mulet, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who is
working tireless in sometimes extremely difficult
conditions.

We also appreciate the role of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in having so
diligently deployed a team to identify priorities and
coordinate logistical support for humanitarian efforts.
Hundreds of humanitarian aid agencies and national
and international non-governmental organizations,
along with a great many individuals, have worked
tirelessly with the United Nations to meet the needs of
victims, especially of vulnerable individuals such as
children, women, the elderly and the disabled. Those
efforts have been complemented by the financial and
in-kind contributions that a great many countries,
including my country, Gabon, have made to Haiti. This
generosity, expressed on a global scale towards the
Government and the people of Haiti, demonstrates not
only the solidarity of the whole world, but also the
determination of the international community to bring
Haiti into a process of political, economic, institutional
and security reconstruction.

My country welcomes the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti,
developed by the Government with the assistance of
international institutions such as the World Bank, the

Inter-American Development Bank and the European
Union. The Action Plan, which will require an
estimated $11.5 billion, was presented to international
donors on 31 March in New York. As part of an
unprecedented wave of solidarity, donors have pledged
some $9 billion for the comprehensive Haitian
reconstruction effort, including $5 billion for the
period 2010-2011. This international commitment, to
which Gabon fully subscribes, augurs a better future
for that country, which continues to face a very fragile
political, security and humanitarian situation.

The political environment was marked by
President Preval's 27 January decision to postpone the
legislative elections that had been scheduled for
February 2010. Even though this is temporary, my
delegation welcomes the Senate's adoption on 15 April
of a law extending the state of emergency for a period
of 18 months and creating the Interim Haiti
Reconstruction Commission. My delegation considers
that, to create a climate conducive to free, fair and
transparent elections in Haiti, different conditions must
exist. In that regard, we await the return from Haiti of
the assessment mission led by the Department of
Political Affairs, jointly with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Overall, the security situation remains stable, in
spite of some incidents that have had an impact on
humanitarian efforts in the field. The report of the
Secretary-General refers to an increase in crime,
including kidnappings, sexual violence and drug
trafficking and in new threats by armed gangs, whose
members escaped from Haitian prisons following the
earthquake. Here, we welcome the decisive role that
MINUSTAH has played in efforts to reduce security
threats in that country.

The Security Council's increase of military and
police personnel, by its resolution 1908 (2010) of
19 January 2010, responds to these concerns. Indeed,
MINUSTAH has thus far fulfilled its mandate by
providing security support for humanitarian operations;
conducting a preliminary damage assessment;
providing support for State institutions such as the
judicial system; ensuring respect for human rights,
especially the protection of women and children; and
integrating the HIV/AIDS dimension into the
emergency response. But the role of MINUSTAH must
be redefined in the light of new challenges in the way
of the reconstruction of Haiti.

Security, protection and reconstruction issues are
likely to have an impact on the future of Haiti in
coming months. The international community should
support the Government and Haitian institutions as
they fully shoulder their responsibility as part of the
development process. The efforts of the United Nations
and other major international actors must focus on
strengthening political stability, continuing the
coordination of humanitarian efforts and supporting the
rule of law, respect for human rights and justice.

MINUSTAH has a central role to play in realizing
that vision. Indeed, as recommended in the Secretary-
General's report, MINUSTAH must lend greater
technical, operational and logistical assistance to the
Government and institutions of Haiti. It must
especially work on the country's preparations for
presidential, legislative and municipal elections. The
organization of these elections will determine the
future political stability of Haiti and the reconstruction
process in a country that was so cruelly affected by the
tragedy of 12 January.

I would be remiss to conclude without expressing
our profound admiration for the dignity and stoicism
with which the people of Haiti have dealt with this
terrible tragedy. That people has demonstrated to all
humankind its fighting spirit and inextinguishable faith
in the future.

