Mr. Cosme (Spoke in French): I wish to associate
myself with the statement made earlier by
Mr. Rodolphe Adada, President of the Council of
Ministers of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and with all the statements
made by the Ministers of our subregion.

The convening of an open meeting by the
Security Council on strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations system and the Central Africa
region in the maintenance of peace and security attests
once again to the willingness of the entire international
community to help our Central African subregion to
break out of the vicious circle of incessant conflict that
seriously undermines any initiative aimed at
sustainable development.

I should, therefore, like to tell you, Sir, that we
are gratified at seeing you presiding over the Council.
It is a matter of pride, not only for your country,
Cameroon, but also for our whole subregion of Central
Africa, and we rejoice in it. We are particularly pleased
because among the five new non-permanent members
of the Council, there is another country of our
community, Angola. We congratulate that country,
along with Germany, Chile, Spain and Pakistan.

Furthermore, our Community welcomes the
ruling issued by the International Court of Justice at
The Hague in the Bakassi Peninsula case, involving
Cameroon and Nigeria. That ruling, accepted by both
parties, symbolizes once again the international
community's ability to eliminate, through peaceful
means, the causes of tension in that part of our
continent. In other words, peace is gradually being
established in Africa for the benefit of its peoples and
through peaceful means.

The ECCAS area, known for its potential,
stretches across 11 countries of Central Africa, is a
troubled region, as we have heard. Some of its States
have known several decades of conflict. I could cite,
for example, the case of Angola. That is one of the
reasons why our Community is concerned with peace
and security and with post-conflict issues.

Our subregion's strategic position makes it a
nexus between Northern and Southern Africa, on the
one hand, and between Western and Eastern Africa, on
the other. In other words, the peace and security of our
subregion affect the stability of all the other
subregions, and thus of the entire continent. It was in
that context that our heads of State or Government,
supported by the United Nations system, decided to
give first priority to the political and security
dimensions, as a prelude to the subregion's
development.

It was on 28 November 1986 that, confronted
with the dual need of working towards establishing an
atmosphere of peace, cooperation and prosperity, on
the one hand, and of following up and strengthening
the multifaceted efforts of the United Nations in
Central Africa, on the other hand, the heads of State or
Government of ECCAS presented the Organization
with a programme aimed at defining and implementing
a number of measures aimed at strengthening trust,
security and development in our subregion. Similarly,
from 15 to 19 November 1988, the first conference
devoted to the issues of security, development and
confidence-building among ECCAS States was held at
Lome under the auspices of the United Nations.

I would also like to take this opportunity to recall
that it was in that framework that, on 28 May 1992, in
implementation of General Assembly resolution 46/37
B, of 6 December 1991, and on the request of ECCAS
members, the Secretary-General established the
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. In the same vein, in September 1993
our heads of State or Government unanimously adopted
at Libreville the non-aggression pact that was signed
on 8 July 1996 by nine of the 11 countries that make up
ECCAS. That was followed by a protocol pertaining to
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
and a Mutual Assistance Pact, which was signed by our
heads of State at Malabo on 24 February 2000.

The Council for Peace and Security (COPAX) is
the key element of our peace and security architecture
in Central Africa. The Council is a prevention
mechanism designed to maintain and build peace and
security at the regional level. COPAX is equipped with
three organs; to put them into operation we particularly
need the international community's support. The first is
the Defence and Security Commission, which is
responsible for reviewing all administrative, technical
and logistical issues involved in maintaining peace in
Central Africa and for evaluating the attendant needs.

In that connection, I wish to say that our chiefs of
staff are currently preparing a joint military exercise,
which has been dubbed "Biyongho 2003" and which is
to take place in Gabon in June of that year. In that
regard, an initial planning conference took place in
Franceville and Libreville from 7 to 12 October 2002.
The main planning process is scheduled to take place in
February and April 2003. Once again, in this regard we
shall count on the support of the Security Council to
ensure the success of the exercise, given that it
represents a first step towards the establishment of the
Central African Multinational Force.

That force constitutes the second organ of
COPAX. It will be made up of contingents from
national armies, police and gendarmerie personnel and
civilian units from ECCAS member States. The role of
the force will be to carry out peace, security and
humanitarian assistance missions. Regular training for
these ECCAS stand-by forces will ensure that they are
adequately prepared for any mission entrusted to them
and that they can be deployed quickly whenever
needed. It is in that context that we view the assistance
from the World Bank and the European Union to be
provided under the Multicountry Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme (MDRP). We also believe
that the training process will serve to promote effective
efforts to combat the illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons.

Finally, the third organ is the Central African
Early Warning System, which is a monitoring
mechanism aimed at preventing crises and conflicts in
our subregion. It is entrusted with collecting and
analysing information regarding all events in the
subregion in order to sound warnings. In order to carry
out its work, the System has been given a central
structure with its headquarters at Libreville, which has
been made available free of charge by the Republic of
Gabon. In that connection, ECCAS would again like to
express its gratitude to the Minister for Defence of
Gabon, who is present here, as well as to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of that country, for all their hard
work. In addition, assistance in strengthening the
mechanism's institutions has just been approved by the
European Development Fund in the context of regional
cooperation between the European Union and African,
Caribbean and Pacific countries.

In addition to those instruments, the heads of
State or Government of ECCAS have equipped our
central architecture for peace and security in Central
Africa with various other tools. These include a Mutual
Assistance Pact whereby States undertake to provide
mutual assistance to defend one another against any
threat of aggression or actual armed aggression; the
Network of Central African Parliamentarians, which is
the forerunner of a subregional parliament; and the
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy
in Central Africa, which is headquartered in Yaounde,
Cameroon.

In order to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the Economic Community of
Central African States, the General Assembly granted
observer status to ECCAS in its resolution 55/161, of
12 December 2000, one month after the terms of
cooperation between the United Nations and ECCAS
had been set out in resolution 55/22, of 10 November
2000. As a result, ECCAS is associated with all the
debates taking place at, and decisions emanating from,
the United Nations.

ECCAS is also aware of the numerous United
Nations and subregional initiatives which have greatly
contributed to the gradual improvement our subregion
has witnessed in the area of peace and security. In that
regard, ECCAS welcomes the positive developments in
the situation in Angola, in particular the signing of a
Memorandum of Understanding addendum to the
Lusaka Protocol regarding a cessation of hostilities and
the settlement of pending military issues. These new
provisions, which have made it possible for all of the
country's political actors to participate in the
management of State affairs, are hopeful signs for the
strengthening of national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Angola. With respect to Burundi,
ECCAS hopes that the round of negotiations under way
in Dar es Salaam between the Government of Burundi
and the last two rebel movements will be the last one
and that it will result in the signing of a ceasefire so
that at last the people of Burundi can enjoy the peace
of which they have been deprived for almost a decade.

The Community welcomes the significant
progress made between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda and encourages them to respect
their commitment and to normalize their relations in
order to restore mutual trust to enable their two peoples
once again to experience the joys ofa peaceful life.

ECCAS also rejoices at observing the overall
improvement in peace and security issues in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the holding of
an inclusive national dialogue. This is attested to by the
gradual return of refugees and displaced persons, the
continued collection of weaponry, demobilization, the
reintegration of former military personnel and the
holding of peaceful general elections that led to the
establishment of new republican institutions.

ECCAS also commends the Central African
Republic and Chad and encourages them to continue to
strive to find a negotiated solution in order to settle the
dispute between them by giving effect to the
recommendations of the meeting held in Libreville on
2 October under the mediation of President Bongo.

Nonetheless, ECCAS is still concerned at the
upsurge of violence in the conflict between the Chadian
Government and the Movement for Democracy and
Justice in that country. It calls on the parties to comply
with the commitments undertaken and urges the United
Nations to do its utmost to ensure that the outcome is
understanding and reconciliation.

Lastly, ECCAS requests that the United Nations
maintain the development programmes in countries that
are not directly affected by war and at the same time
begin the funding of programmes of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement of
former combatants in countries that are in a post-
conflict situation.

We have succinctly described our peace
architecture and the main related needs. We therefore
urge that links between our two institutions be
strengthened by heightened cooperation. We also need
to establish close cooperation, and for this we must
work together to close the distance that separates us,
that between New York and Libreville, by stepping up
our communities' activities and by drawing on real
support from the structures in the various departments
of the United Nations, as well as on the contribution of
assistance of the whole international community.

Finally, we wish to express the hope that similar
meetings of this kind will be held on a regular basis so
that we may together appraise the progress achieved in
the quest for peace and security in our subregion.

