Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, we would like
to thank His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on recent developments in Kosovo. We congratulate
him on his appointment as Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and assure him of our
full support. We are confident that he will bring his
wealth of experience as former Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United
Nations to bear in the performance of his duties. We
also thank His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their
statements.

Nigeria takes positive note of the continued
progress in technical talks between the parties, within
the framework of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. We encourage both sides
to utilize that crucial bilateral platform to address and
resolve all outstanding issues related to the Agreement.

We welcome the adoption of the legislation on the
establishment of the specialist court. It is a positive
development in the administration of justice in
Kosovo. Deliberate efforts should be made to support
the activities of the court in the quest for justice and
accountability.

We are concerned, however, by the recent violent
actions by opposition groups that have disrupted
parliamentary action on the autonomy of the Serb-
dominated areas of Kosovo. The territorial delineation
agreement as related to promoting regional cooperation
between Kosovo and Montenegro remains a contentious
issue among some factions of the Parliament. We urge
all those concerned to express their disagreements in
an orderly, constructive and democratic manner.

The five-year strategy for the prevention of violent
extremism and radicalization is a laudable step in the
fight against terrorism. The law prohibiting individuals
from joining armed conflicts outside Kosovo is crucial
to addressing the threat of potential foreign terrorist
fighters. We commend the authorities of Kosovo for
their commitment to combating all forms of extremism.

Reconciliation remains crucial to strengthening
cohesion and laying the foundation for peace and
progress in Kosovo. The confidence-building projects
initiated by UNMIK have been appropriately designed
to achieve that objective. They are facilitating
dialogue - not only between faiths, but also between
cultures - and, in our View, are already yielding
positive results. We encourage further reconciliatory
efforts in the overall interest of peace and stability.

With regard to the issue of missing persons, we
are concerned that the non-appointment of the Chair
of the Pristina delegation is hampering the work of the
Belgrade-Pristina Working Group on Missing Persons.
As 1,670 persons are still listed as missing as a result
of the Kosovo conflict, it is important that that post be
filled without further delay.

Finally, we wish to note that the role of UNMIK
remains vital to the promotion of security and stability
in Kosovo. With the Mission's focus on institutional
reform, as well as the right to truth, justice and
reparations, we are hopeful that reconciliation among
the different communities in Kosovo will be attained
and sustained.
