Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to express
my satisfaction at seeing you, Madame, presiding over
the Security Council this month. You represent a
country, Brazil, with which the Democratic Republic of
the Congo enjoys excellent relations based on mutual
respect and esteem. I take this opportunity to join you
in thanking your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
masterly manner in which he led the work of the
Council last month, as well as for his zeal, expertise
and competence in discharging his duties.

In reiterating my best wishes for his success, I
pay a well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Roger
Meece for his work in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General at the head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). I thank him for his exhaustive briefing
and introduction of the Secretary-General's report in
document S/201 l/20, before the Council today.

The Council has heard the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General describe the good relationship
between my Government and MONUSCO as it fulfils
its mandate, which I can confirm. The joint assessment
has yet to suggest the need for a new configuration of
MONUSCO's mandate or deployment. That in itself
speaks volumes. While a great many things have been
accomplished, significant challenges remain, as the
Special Representative eloquently stressed.

Eleven years ago, during the Security Council's
debate of 10 January 2000 on the impact of AIDS on
peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.4087), although
I was not yet Ambassador I drew the Council's
attention to and denounced the use of rape as a weapon
of war in my country. As I recently stressed at the first
regular session of the Executive Board of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, held from 24 to 26 January,
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo violence
against women remains a real scourge, a dark reminder
and a sinister legacy of a decade of ruptured
international peace and security, of which my country
was the expiatory victim.

The third International Action of the World March
of Women, held in Bukavo from 13 to 17 October 2010,
and the opening just a few days ago, also in Bukavo, of
the City of Joy for Congolese women who have escaped
sexual violence are among the significant indications
that it is time to put an end to that barbaric practice. I
reiterate once again the unfailing commitment of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to eliminating the
scourge of sexual violence.

The fight against violence against women,
particularly sexual violence, is a shared but
differentiated responsibility of the international
community and the United Nations, whose
management of the Great Lakes crisis a decade ago
was not one of its shining moments. It is, of course,
also the responsibility of the Congolese Government,
which is primarily responsible for security, the
protection of civilians and ensuring respect for the rule
of law, international humanitarian law and human
rights in our country.

I am quite optimistic and confident about the
outcome of the visit now under way by Ms. Margot
Wallstrom, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, particularly
regarding the preparation of strategies for preventing
and deterring sexual violence against women.
However, these crimes against humanity, by whosoever
committed * nationals, foreigner or even messengers
of peace - call for reparations. They require us to put
an end to this impunity. We should also stress that,
despite these shortcomings, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains one of the rare countries where
senior officers have been prosecuted and incarcerated
for acts directly related to sexual violence.

The assistance provided to us by MONUSCO,
particularly in apprehending perpetrators and setting up
early warning systems with a view to preventing
possible cases of rape, should also be highlighted. In
that regard, I am very reassured by the fact that the
process aimed at providing a response to the report of
the mapping exercise documenting the most serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed between March 1993 and
June 2003 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made substantial progress.

The judicial architecture to be established, while
delivering justice to the millions of Congolese who fell
victim to the rupture in international peace and
security, will certainly be built in such a way as to
enable us to know which cases of rape are still being
committed. The return of peace, of total peace, is the
best guarantee for putting an end to these acts that we
deplore. That is why, in areas where insecurity persists,
the fight against foreign and Congolese armed groups
must be pursued, with the support of MONUSCO and
other interested partners.

In the northern part of the country, the fortunate
developments in the Central African Republic and the
Sudan should enable us to better coordinate to
effectively combat the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
Those developments will also help us in the eastern
part of the country, in the North and South Kivu
provinces, in the fight against the remnants of foreign
armed groups, most of Rwandan origin, and against
those of my Congolese countrymen who have become
outlaws.

The fight against armed groups must be waged in
tandem with security sector reform. Organic laws to
reform the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), the organization
and functioning of the armed forces and the
organization, funding and functioning of the Superior
Council of Defence, as well as a draft organic law on
the police, were recently enacted by Parliament. We
should now expedite the security sector reform process
with a view to meeting the requirements of a national,
republican and apolitical army that is subject to
constitutionally established civilian authority at all
levels of power. That authority should respect and
protect the dignity and fundamental freedoms of the
individual, particularly of women, while also taking
into account the country's geopolitical and geostrategic
importance. Everyone agrees that such reform is
essential to the stabilization and post-conflict
consolidation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

1 would now like to briefly review the
humanitarian situation. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/20) is quite detailed in that sense,
particularly in regard to the eastern and southern
provinces. Overall, the situation remains a source of
concern, although we should recognize the work of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and MONUSCO. The situation is particularly
worrisome not only in the east, but also in the west.

In the north-west, the Government signed a
tripartite agreement with the sisterly Republic of the
Congo and UNHCR, and adopted a timetable
establishing 20 April as the date on which operations
would begin to repatriate my country's displaced from
northern Republic of the Congo. The rainy season has
made the living conditions of the displaced quite
precarious. The UNHCR requires additional resources
to help both Congos to provide assistance to the
displaced.

Further to the west, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo recognizes the sovereign right of all
countries to manage their immigration policies as they
deem fit. However, as we do with other countries on a
daily basis, particularly those in the northern

11-2264]
hemisphere, we would ask that the expulsions of
Congolese nationals be carried out with dignity and in
accordance with the relevant commitments made more
than 10 years ago.

The year 2011 will certainly be an election year
in Africa. The Democratic Republic of the Congo plans
to hold elections in late November. All Council
members have followed the discussions that led to the
constitutional review. It is important to emphasize that
no one in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
questions the constitutionality of that review.
Regardless of the real or alleged intentions of those
who initiated the review, it is worth emphasizing that
they did so in full compliance with articles 218 and
219 of the Constitution of 18 February 2006.

It is equally useful to recall that the debate on the
review of the Constitution dates back to 2006, when it
was promulgated by the President of the Republic. The
hardliners still hope that Parliament - which was
newly elected at the time and on which the people, the
supreme leaders, will be voting again this year - will
review the entire Constitution, which was the result of
trade-offs, negotiations and even bargaining among
non-elected entities during the political transition
period. The minimalists, for their part, are in favour
of making adjustments as and when necessary as
institutions grow stronger and reassert themselves.

In any case, the Government is firmly convinced
that the review will enable it to assume its historic
responsibility to adjust the ambitions of our young
democracy, which is still finding its voice, to match its
own resources and to learn from other African
experiences.

Moreover, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, my Government has made a
commitment to covering the majority of the election
costs. This is a sovereign decision, dating back to
2006, that was presented to and accepted by the
Steering Committee. Given our current economic
difficulties, this is a significant sacrifice that will be
useful and necessary if one day we wish to organize
elections as they are organized in all democracies
worthy of that name.

The Congolese Government will be responsible
for the security of candidates, polling stations and
results. We have already requested logistical support
from MONUSCO. It is thanks to MONUSCO that we
have already begun to distribute various electoral

materials. My country has assumed the fuel and
maintenance costs of the distribution. We are now
awaiting detailed instructions from the newly
established Independent National Electoral
Commission on how to organize the electoral process,
in particular voter registration, electoral lists, voting
operations and ballot counting. In short, we ask the
Commission to shine a light on our path towards these
elections.

These are the few points that I wished to raise in
this morning's meeting. I cannot conclude, however,
without first expressing my gratitude to you, Madame
President, in your other, high capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Relations between my Government and the
various groups of experts we have seen since 2001
have rarely been contentious and have been
characterized by respect for the scope of action of all
actors involved, despite our differences. Often, and this
was again the case last year, the reports of the Group of
Experts have largely strengthened the peace process.
One can readily identify the modest contribution of the
Group of Experts in the resolutions and decisions
adopted at the summit of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region on mineral resources
management and certification, which was held in
Lusaka, Zambia, on 15 December 2010. The
collaboration between the Group of Experts and the
Government, through the Ministry of Mining, is far
from over.

We hope to continue benefiting from the Group's
expertise, particularly this year, during which the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will chair the
Kimberley process. The same holds true for other
areas, such as the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, in which the Group's
ideas have certainly held our attention. In other words,
my country hopes to continue to work closely with the
Council and the Group of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1952 (2010) in a spirit of mutual respect.
That is our request.

