Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting. We
once again welcome the presence of Minister Parenti
and the other high officials participating in this open
debate on a such a topical and relevant theme. We also
thank this morning's briefers - Mr. Achim Steiner,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay
Getschel - for their valuable presentations.

This debate enables us to discuss the tasks
and competencies of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security
through a broad multidimensional approach to security.
In this context, it is important to address climate-related
risks to human security, which, according to scientific
evidence, will increase as a result of global warming
and climate change. These risks have the potential to
lead to humanitarian crises, conflicts and disasters
that, because of their scope, could pose threats to
international peace and security. The consequences
certainly transcend the mandate of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and could
require a response from the Security Council in
the context of its responsibilities related to conflict
prevention and resolution.

We welcome the fact that in recent months the
Security Council has recognized the adverse effects
of climate change on conflict situations in different
regions, particularly in Africa, including the Lake Chad
region, Somalia, West Africa and the Sahel, Mali and
Darfur. Similarly, we recall that the Council has been
able to react in a timely manner to natural disasters,
such as the earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010, by
reinforcing the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti personnel to deal with that emergency.

We also underscore that the International Law
Commission decided to include in its agenda the issue
of sea-level rise in relation to international law. We
stress the particular importance of that issue, given its
serious consequences and legal implications for small
island developing States, such as is the case of your
nation, Mr. President. We hope that those steps in the
right direction will lead to specific responses on the
part of the international community, and especially the
Council, based on an appropriate assessment ofthe risks
and strategies to address them, in line with the reforms
promoted by the Secretary-General and the increasing
focus on the prevention of conflict and the promotion
of sustaining peace. We believe that these functions
should be undertaken, bearing in mind the mandates
and purviews of different bodies of the system. That
is why it is important to develop synergies among the
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, as well as with those competent bodies
and agencies of the United Nations system with a view
to having early warning systems for climate-related
risks and other multidimensional threats.

Peru is highly vulnerable to climate change and
natural disasters. The retreat of the Andean tropical
glaciers and the increasingly frequent droughts and
floods lead to food insecurity, which undermines
our development agenda and, at the same time, raises
challenges to maintaining peace. Climate change and
related disasters also lead to massive human movement
with the potential of generating instability, new
demands and challenges.
We conclude by stressing the importance of
working on these issues with regional and subregional
organizations, financial institutions, the private sector,
academia and civil society, around holistic, coherent
and efficient strategies, including the implementation
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.

