Mr. Duale (Somalia): Ithank you, Madam President,
for allowing me to make a few points here. I also thank
the members of the Security Council. Mr. Nicholas Kay,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, has
given a thorough briefing, which I believe gives the
best picture, as far as I can see, with regard to the
current situation in Somalia. I fully agree with most of
the points in his briefing and the issues raised.

What I can now affirm is that our Minister for
Foreign Affairs has expressed his commitment to the
requirements set out in resolution 2142 (2014). An
assessment team is now going to or has perhaps already
left for Mogadishu to assess the issues and difficulties
facing the Somali Government in complying with
its requirements, as set out in paragraphs 3 and 7 of
the resolution. It is hoping to assist in improving the
capacities of the Federal Government of Somalia in
implementing the requirements for the safe, transparent
storage, distribution and management of weapons and
military equipment, including on monitoring and
verification.

We also believe that, as Nicholas Kay has already
mentioned, the trust fund is now needed as soon as
possible and all pledges should be provided in a timely
way. That will help the Somali Government and forces
to be able to fulfil their obligations. As Mr. Kay also
mentioned, there are a number of areas that have been
liberated from A1-Shabaab. Whenever Al-Shabaab
members are in a critical situation, they may run away
to certain areas that ais free, such as Puntland. We now
know what has happened there. Mr. Kay has already
mentioned that. We are afraid that they may infiltrate
regions and areas that are now safe unless, of course,
the Government and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) have the means to predict their
movements and make sure that Al-Shabaab cannot spill
over into any of the safe areas.

Furthermore, we have listened to Mr. Kay. I agree
with him and we endorse his appreciation of what
AMISOM. has done. I also wish to thank, on behalf of
my Government, the militaries that are providing the
forces of AMISOM. I also thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia for their support to Somalia. The real support
that we now need is the capacity to be able to fulfil our
obligations with regard to the resolution, adoptedjust a Council members to informal consultations to continue
few days ago. our discussion on the subject.

