Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France has long been drawing the attention of the
Security Council to the situation in Darfur. The events
in that region of the Sudan are deeply troubling, and
our greatest concern is for the plight of the people
there. They are, as we all are aware, the primary
Victims of this conflict. Furthermore, and this is even
more serious, they are its primary targets.

The reports that the Secretary-General has been
submitting every month to the Council have provided a
detailed picture of those atrocities. Entire villages are
being attacked, plundered and destroyed, and their
inhabitants are being brutalized, massacred and
forcibly driven from their homes.

The Security Council therefore is in duty bound
to take action. As we have continually reiterated, its
policy must include three elements.

First, there is a need to assist the African Union
in strengthening its monitoring and protection system.
That is what our Council began to do by adopting
resolution 1590 (2005) last week, and that is what we
must continue to do speedily and with resolve.

There is also a need to continue to exert pressure
on the warring parties to make them fulfil their
obligations and to ensure that they arrive at a political
settlement of the conflict. That is what our Council did
several days ago by adopting resolution 1591 (2005).

Finally, there is a need to put an end to impunity.
That was the Council's remaining task.

Alarmed by the magnitude of the atrocities
perpetrated in Darfur, the Council had asked an
International Commission of Inquiry to investigate the
situation. The Commission's report, made public two
months ago, confirms that mass violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law have taken
place. It denounces the crimes against humanity and
the war crimes that have occurred. It recommends,
given the circumstances, the referral of the situation to
the International Criminal Court, which is the sole
body with jurisdiction which can impartially,
effectively and rapidly bring to trial those who bear
major responsibility for those crimes.

The Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights pressed the Council
to urgently provide a favourable outcome following
that recommendation. France, too, believed that
referral to the International Criminal Court was the
only solution - both because we believe that it is our
duty to do right by the victims and because taking such
action will prevent the violations from continuing. That
is why France took the initiative on this problem and
voted in favour of the resolution just adopted by the
Council.

France welcomes the historic resolution that has
just been adopted. For the first time, the Security
Council has referred a situation to the International
Criminal Court. Thus, it has sent a twofold and very
forceful message not only to all those who have
committed or might be tempted to commit atrocities in
Darfur, but also to the victims: the international
community will not allow those crimes to go
unpunished.

The resolution also marks a turning point, for it
sends the same message beyond Darfur to the
perpetrators of crimes against humanity and war
crimes, who until now have all too often escaped
justice. The Security Council will remain vigilant to
ensure that there is no impunity.

To achieve that result, my country was prepared
to recognize - regarding the situation in Darfur and
under certain conditions - a jurisdictional immunity
vis-a-vis the International Criminal Court for certain
nationals or personnel of States not parties to the Rome
Statute. Here, I must emphasize that the jurisdictional
immunity provided for in the text we have just adopted
obviously cannot run counter to other international
obligations of States and will be subject, where
appropriate, to the interpretation of the courts of my
country.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm France's
confidence in the International Criminal Court and to
express the hope that the suspicions - which we
believe to be unfounded - will soon fall away
regarding that institution, the symbol of such hope for
the victims of atrocities.

