Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, which serves as
an opportunity to examine the issue of the rule of law,
a concept that is at the very heart of the stated mission
of the United Nations.

In recent years, the United Nations has increased
its efforts to address the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict situations. A consensus has emerged
that the rule of law should be promoted at both the
national and the international levels. It should be based
on the Charter of the United Nations, on the norms
of international law and on the principles of good
governance. We also believe that increased efforts to
fight impunity at the national and international levels
are essential. It is commendable that the Council
continues to focus on the responsibility of States to end
impunity and prosecute persons responsible for grave
violations of international humanitarian law so as to
avoid their recurrence and seek justice and peace.

Armenia attaches the utmost importance to the
promotion ofjustice and the rule oflaw, as those values
are indispensable for the maintenance of international
and regional security and the protection of human
rights. Moreover, systematic breaches of the rule of
law contribute to violations of basic human rights
and fundamental freedoms, including the principle of
peoples' right to self-determination, which are among
the major and immediate causes of regional conflicts.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
latest report on the subject (S/2013/689), the prevalence
of impunity in many States that have experienced
conflict allows serious human rights violations to
thrive, damages the fabric of societies and prevents the
development of lasting resolution to conflict.

We remain extremely alarmed by the fact that,
since 2004, the heinous crime of Azerbaijani army
officer Ramil Safarov, who slaughtered with an axe
an Armenian officer in his sleep during the NATO-
sponsored programme in Budapest, simply because he
was an Armenian, continues to receive public praise
at the official level and, these days, also at a societal
level, in a neighbouring country. Today, the murder by
Safarov is being cited as an example of patriotic action
for Azerbaijani youth by Government officials, which
proves that the Azerbaijani side continues its reckless
behaviour of spreading more hate propaganda against
Armenia and Armenians worldwide. Azerbaijan has
thereby opened the door for the recurrence of such
crimes. Future murderers will be well aware as a result
of the impunity that they can enjoy for murder driven
by ethnic or religious hatred.

That is yet another fact that reveals the absence
of and disrespect for the rule of law, the very concept
of which is the diametrical opposite of the culture of
the rule by force that is unfortunately being cultivated
in Azerbaijan these days. That alarming behaviour of
the authorities of Azerbaijan contradicts not only the
humanitarian purposes of international law, but also
the relevant international instruments, and it challenges
the whole system of human rights. In that context,
Armenia aligns itself with the statements made by
previous speakers recognizing the important role of
justice and the judiciary and the establishment of peace
and security in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Countries affected by conflict have to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. Implementing binding
resolutions that call upon all States to adopt national
legislation for the prosecution ofindividuals responsible
for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
is of the utmost importance. Therefore, enhancing
compliance with international legal obligations by
parties in a conflict should be viewed as a key element
of the Council's responsibility to maintain international
peace and security, which will require a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.

Let me reiterate Armenia's commitment to human
rights, the rule of law and democracy, as those values
are interlinked and interdependent. We must recommit
to that approach and actively stay engaged, including
at the domestic level, by promoting inclusive and
accountable political processes. Armenia remains
committed to post-conflict peace initiatives andbelieves
that the Council should seek to further advance the
development of initiatives by supporting the rule of law
in institutions and peacebuilding mechanisms that help
countries emerging from conflicts in their recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction efforts and in creating
foundations for sustainable peace and development.
The successful implementation of that agenda requires
a basic level of political will and determination on the
part of all players as preconditions for peacebuilding.
With those political conditions in place, the ability of
the United Nations, or any other intergovernmental and
bilateral actor, will be enhanced and supported.

