Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me at
the outset to thank the President of the Security Council
for having generously invited the Haitian delegation
to share its views and comments on the report
(S/2018/1059) submitted by the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), in accordance with resolution 2410
(2018). My delegation has given its utmost attention
to the findings, observations and recommendations of
that report.

While taking into account the difficulties and
problems encountered, such as the recent unrest in the
country, the Secretary-General also details the progress
made by the Government of Haiti in achieving, as it
has pledged to do, the various objectives, targets and
deadlines jointly established under the Council's
mandate for MINUJUSTH. The Secretary-General's
report highlights the significant improvements and
successes in the transition to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence in Haiti. They also build on the major
progress made by the country in recent years in all the
areas that are considered vital to strengthening the rule
oflaw - be theyjustice, security, corrections or human
rights protection. The results speak for themselves.

The Secretary-General rightly underscores the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police (HNP),
which has demonstrated its ability to professionally
manage the mass protests throughout the country, as
seen on 17 October and 18 November.

The adoption of the legal aid law is
certainly another important milestone
in improving access to justice. Critical steps have
been taken in other areas, as evidenced by the
measures taken to strengthen human rights protection
mechanisms within the executive branch, as well as
the improvement of the managerial and operational
capacities of the penitentiary system. The decline in
the homicide rate is one noteworthy indicator. The rate
decreased by 4.2 per cent to 6.22 homicides per 100,000
inhabitants, one of the lowest levels in the Caribbean,
as noted in the report. Meanwhile, elsewhere in Latin
America and the Caribbean, homicide rates are 10 to 20
times higher than the global average, at more than 80
per 100,000 inhabitants, according to a recent study by
the Inter-American Development Bank.

There are certainly grounds to welcome the progress
achievedthankstothejointeffortsoftheHaitianauthorities
and the United Nations Mission. However, with regard
to certain indicators considered to be essential to the
strengthening of the rule of law, the delays clearly
underline the urgent need to redouble efforts at
various levels. The Government is fully aware
of that. Indeed, much remains to be done, as the
Secretary-General points out, to fully achieve all the
objectives agreed for the MINUJUSTH exit strategy.

The Government has taken note of those concerns
and renews its firm commitment to doing its utmost
to honour all its commitments, accelerate change and
complete the agreed reforms in order to remedy the
persistence of the noted shortcomings, failures and
delays, particularly with regard to the dysfunctions
of the justice system; the issue of prolonged pretrial
detention, and its corollary, overcrowded prisons; the
effective implementation of the national police strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021, including
through an improved mobilization of resources at both
the national and international levels; and allegations
of human rights abuses by State institutions and law
enforcement officials.

The Secretary-General also echoes some concerns
about the overall situation in Haiti and the corresponding
risk of destabilization. Everyone agrees that the country
has been sorely tried of late. Beyond the allegations
related to the PetroCaribe case, the turbulence of the
past four months undoubtedly reflects a deterioration
in the economic situation, exacerbating the difficulties
faced by the vast majority of the population, which
suffers extreme poverty. In addition, the prevailing
humanitarian situation is complex, as evidenced by
the tragic lack of essential infrastructure, the impact
of the cholera epidemic, and the massive repatriation
of tens of thousands of Haitian migrants from the
Dominican Republic, not to mention the consequences
of the environmental crisis and the country's extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters.

Fortunately, the crisis is being contained through
the Government's dialogue with key stakeholders.
My delegation reiterates its deep appreciation for
the international community's unwavering support
following the recent events, especially in the light of
the unreasonable demands ofa fringe of the opposition.
My delegation highly appreciates the support provided
by the United Nations system and other partners in
the area of security, including in the disarmament of
gangs and the reintegration of individuals who have
not committed violent crimes. It should be stressed that
neither political stability, nor democratic achievements,
nor the rule of law, to which the Haitian people remain
deeply attached, have ever been threatened.

The President of the Republic, Mr. Jovenel Moise,
has solemnly pledged to undertake the necessary
reforms, including by waging a relentless fight against
corruption. That fight has begun to bear fruit. The recent
actions taken by Prime Minister Jean Henry Ceant and
the judicial authorities leave no doubt of the Haitian
Government's unwavering resolve to fully investigate
allegations of mismanagement of PetroCaribe funds
and to ensure that justice is rigorously and impartially
carried out in the full respect for the rule of law. A
calm social environment within the framework of
growth and the creation of economic opportunities is
essential to the consolidation of the rule of law and
democratic achievements.

My delegation has repeatedly sounded the
alarm about the adverse effects of the sustained
decline in official development assistance to Haiti in
recent years, especially at a time when problems are
particularly acute. Humanitarian aid is no exception.
The Secretary-General rightly deplores the fact that
the 2018 humanitarian response plan, which earmarks
$252 million in assistance to more than 2 million people
in need, has so far been funded only to 11.2 per cent.

The same applies to the new United Nations
approach to cholera. At this critical stage, it must be
recognized that assistance to victims and their families,
as well as the provision of essential health, sanitation
and drinking water infrastructure, remain severely
underfunded. The Secretary-General's appeals for
adequate funding for the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund have remained
largely unanswered. This situation is a cause for
concern. The Haitian delegation has therefore endorsed
the Secretary-General's renewed call on all relevant
actors, including Haiti's cooperation partners, to take
short-term measures to meet the immediate needs of the
Haitian people and to alleviate their difficult situation.
A renewal of international solidarity is crucial at
this juncture.

Beyond humanitarian assistance and above all,
the country needs a real international mobilization of
resources to ensure stable, substantial and predictable
financing for its development; the rapid revival of public
investment in infrastructure and social programmes,
which have stalled for too long; and the rebound of
strong growth, which will help to reduce poverty. That
is undoubtedly a prerequisite for achieving the long-
term political and institutional stability desired by the
Haitian people and the international community.

The Secretary-General's midterm review of
MINUJUSTH highlights the important milestones
achieved over the past 14 months in the long-term
process of strengthening the institutions that guarantee
the rule of law and the protection of human rights in
Haiti. At the same time, the Secretary-General's report
also highlights the magnitude of the problems, needs
and short- and long-term challenges facing the country.
There is total agreement between the Government of
Haiti and the United Nations system on the scope of
the task ahead and the efforts required to achieve the
agreed targets and benchmarks established as part
of MINUJUSTH's exit strategy. Happily, none of the
remaining obstacles is insurmountable.

For its part, the Government reiterates its
commitment to ensuring that it will overcome
the obstacles that may have delayed the carrying
out of certain scheduled activities, resulted in the
postponement of certain deadlines or hindered the
achievement of certain benchmarks that the Secretary-
General has correctly identified as essential. New and
significant challenges lie ahead in the coming months.
In particular, next year's parliamentary elections will
be a major test of the maturity, consolidation and
stability of our institutions. The Government is already
doing everything in its power to enable the nation
to successfully meet that challenge. In that regard,
it is counting on the full cooperation of the United
Nations system.

Lastly, the Government assures the Council that
it will take the necessary action to follow up on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General. It will
spare no effort to strengthen the population's trust
in the institutions of the Republic of Haiti, pursue
priority reforms, intensify cooperation with the
Parliament and the country's political actors in order
to meet the immediate needs of the people. It will
remain determined to work to strengthen the rule of
law and maintain a stable political climate, thereby
ensuring a smooth transition to a post-MINUJUSTH
era in Haiti - no longer on the basis of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations on peacekeeping,
but on that of the Haitian people's just aspirations for
sustainable development by 2030.

