Mr. Babacan (Turkey): This is the first official
Security Council meeting that Turkey is attending as a
non-permanent member. I would like to pay tribute to
the French presidency.

Let me also welcome President Mahmoud Abbas
and the Ministers of the Arab League delegation, who
are here to brief us about the current situation in Gaza.

We are confronted with a tragic situation. Today
is the eleventh day of the attacks against Gaza and the
fourth day after the launch of the ground assault. As
Israeli forces continue to operate in Gaza, the crisis
further deepens in scope and impact and civilians

continue to take the brunt of the misery. Every step in
escalation takes us further away from peace.

The situation in Gaza is indeed very grave. In this
regard, we deeply regret the loss of civilian life. It is
highly regrettable that civilians have become victims.
Just today for instance, a United Nations-run school in
a Palestinian refugee camp in Gaza was hit by Israeli
missiles, killing more than 40 people who were using
the school as a shelter. The people of Gaza are also
faced with a severe shortage of all basic needs,
including food and medical supplies. Infrastructure is
almost entirely damaged. Thousands of people have
lost their homes. In short, what we face in Gaza is a
human tragedy. Israel's military operations against
Gaza constitute a disproportionate and excessive use of
force and must therefore be immediately stopped.

Such punitive measures, which harm the well-
being of the entire population, can serve nothing but
fomenting further resentment. Let us not forget that the
Palestinians, who are being bombed and attacked
today, will be Israel's neighbours forever. In the same
way, it is impossible to understand the closure of the
crossings to humanitarian assistance for weeks and
months, leaving the Gaza people in total isolation and
deprivation.

Given all these facts, we cannot allow the
situation to continue any longer. The international
community and the Security Council cannot stand idly
by while innocent civilians lose their lives. We must try
to put an immediate end to the ongoing tragedy in the
region. Otherwise, the responsibility of inaction and
indifference will be impossible to bear.

Moreover, the tragedy in Gaza could have very
negative implications on the whole region. Efforts
towards stability and a durable peace have already
taken a serious blow. Bearing in mind all of this, and
bearing in mind the dire consequences that we may
face, we urge all the sides to act with restraint and in a
responsible manner. No one has anything to gain from
this dangerous scenario.

It is within this approach that Turkey continues
its active diplomatic efforts, trying to contribute to a
course of action which will help bring peace, security
and stability to the region. To that end, our Prime
Minister has visited Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Saudi
Arabia to meet with his counterparts, including
President Mahmoud Abbas. We also hosted the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Executive

Committee of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference last Saturday. Based on those visits and our
extensive contact with all other interested parties, we
believe that at this stage the priority must be to ensure
an immediate halt to Israel's military operations and a
full cessation of hostilities, to agree on a sustainable
ceasefire and to open the border crossings to Gaza so
as to end the blockades.

In parallel, we should also do all that we can to
address the pressing humanitarian and economic needs
of the people in Gaza. This is an equally urgent need,
as the people in Gaza are faced with grave shortages of
food, fuel and medical supplies. Turkey, for its part,
has already stepped up its efforts in that direction, but
more should be done. Israel must be cooperative in
allowing unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
and in reopening all border crossings.

In addition to those two most urgent steps, the
achievement of unity among the Palestinians is also of
paramount importance in this course of action. Without
such unity, it will be very difficult for the Palestinians
to achieve their goal of an independent, peaceful and
prosperous future.

Finally, Israelis and Palestinians should be
brought back to the negotiation table and encouraged
to work toward a comprehensive and lasting peace on
the basis of the principles set out by the Quartet and
the Annapolis Joint Understanding and the Arab Peace
Initiative. After all, only through a meaningful and
effective dialogue can we achieve our ultimate
objective of comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

These, we believe, are the elements of a course of
action that needs to be urgently put into effect for the
cessation of hostilities and return to normalcy. Within
this framework we can, and maybe should, also
consider deploying an international monitoring mission
to the region. In light of the publicly expressed views
of the parties to the conflict, it is our understanding
that the acceptability and viability of a ceasefire, as
well as a sustainable end to the blockade, depend on an
international commitment to guarantee it.

The international community must act, and must
do so quickly and with clear ends in mind. The risks of
inaction are enormous and are getting bigger every day.
Turkey, for its part, will continue its endeavours to help
restore calm in the region so as to open the way for
full-fledged efforts for a lasting and comprehensive
peace. We believe that the Security Council should also
play its due role in this regard and live up to its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter by
helping to bring this crisis to an end.

