Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to welcome
the presence here this morning of Her Excellency
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, President of the Republic of
Chile. We congratulate her delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We know
that the leadership of the brotherly nation of Chile,
a member of the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, augurs well for the success of the
Council's work.

We also welcome the presentations made by
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate.

We welcome the new Council members Angola,
Spain, Malaysia, New Zealand and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of South Africa on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

This debate is taking place during a historic year
for the United Nations, in which we will negotiate the
post-2015 development agenda. That agenda should
set us on a consensus-based path towards ending once
and for all the scourges we face today, namely poverty,
hunger, disease and climate change. In short, we need
an agenda to save humankind from the many scourges
we face. In this debate, it is important that we take as a
starting point the functions, powers and responsibilities
of each of the United Nations bodies and their respective
mandates, in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

When we speak of development in the Security
Council, we cannot set precedents, and we must preserve
and refrain from altering the major intergovernmental
agreements that have been reached by consensus,
including the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 66/288, annex) and the
Sustainable Development Goals, which are the basis for
the upcoming post-2015 development agenda we must
approve.

Our work on security matters must move towards a
commitment to the promotion of human development,
which must be understood as sustainable development.
The complexity of peacekeeping operations entails a
need for a focus that is different from the current one,
in accordance with the needs of each State or region
where peacekeeping forces are being deployed, and
not attempts to implement a single policy for different
situations. The full approval and involvement of the
States concerned and respect for their sovereignty and
territorial integrity is crucial. We must also continue to
strengthen the Peacebuilding Commission and achieve
effective and efficient coordination between States,
particularly in the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the high-level political forum
on sustainable development.

Development, peace and security are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. However, we must prioritize
inclusive and sustainable development as essential
requirements for ensuring security and stability. To
contribute to peace and security, our efforts must
focus on inclusive development that reinforces the
commitment of all to eradicating poverty and achieving
sustainable development in which environmental,
economic and social concerns are integrated in a
balanced manner.

For Nicaragua, the commitment to security includes
a commitment to the promotion of human development,
which must be understood as sustainable development.
Such development is human-centred and implemented
in an environment of good governance, with direct
citizen participation and social equity. Those are
elements necessary to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals and, beyond them, the Sustainable
Development Goals.

The interplay between security and development
must take into account the economic and social reality
prevailing in conflict and post-conflict situations. That
will help in the development of a strategy in which
development programmes are the first instruments that
we must consider and wield, before weapons for security.
The order of priorities should often be reversed. It is
sustainable development that will strengthen security
and stability and therefore peace in the world.

We have seen conflict situations in which the
approach based purely on security considerations,
undertaken in places where it is generally acknowledged
that the problem is socioeconomic, has not yielded the
desired results. On the other hand, it is enough to glance
at the resources allocated to peacekeeping operations
and those earmarked for development to realize that
the difference between the two is both gaping and
truly inexplicable. Therefore, an objective and realistic
approach is to learn from past experiences and enable
resources to be mobilized to confront and resolve the
root causes of the problem. In so doing, it is essential
that developed countries fulfil the commitments they
have undertaken. Security is certainly required, but it is
the security of decent work, food security, the security
that comes with adequate housing, security for working
families to live in dignity, the security of a life without
poverty, and the security and resources to combat the
trafficking in drugs and arms.

If attention is not paid to such necessities for our
peoples, or if it is not adequately paid, it will lead to
citizen insecurity, violence and situations that could
end up before the Security Council. We must take care
to not place conditions on the sustainable development
agenda by trying to impose concepts that undermine
our peoples' sovereignty. Such concepts have not
been agreed at the intergovernmental level and thus
violate the basic social, economic and environmental
commitments that we need to address on a priority
basis.

In conclusion, we agree with the statement in the
concept note (S/2015/6, annex) circulated by Chile,
which states that numerous conflicts have their root
causes in situations of exclusion or discrimination,
including socioeconomic exclusion. Given those
aspects, the answer must obviously not be military
in character, but rather of assistance to development,
without conditions of any kind, under strict respect for
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
