Mrs. Syrota (Ukraine): We thank the United
States, Japan and the Republic of Korea for initiating
the Council's urgent briefing on the recent missile
launch of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
as well as the presidency for promptly convening such
a meeting. I also thank Assistant-Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenca for his briefing on this alarming issue.

Indeed, the beginning of 2017 has already become

another unprecedented period of North Korean
destabilization and unlawful actions. The recent launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) on
4 July contributed enormously to the growing nuclear
threat in the region. Despite immense political and
diplomatic efforts to halt the North Korean weapons-
of-mass-destruction programmes, we have seen no
Sign whatsoever that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's intends to change its behaviour. The
irresponsible North Korean policy has already seriously
undermined the non-proliferation regime as a whole.

The current developments on the Korean peninsula
raise three rhetorical but essential questions. Does
Pyongyang hear the signals from the Security Council?
Are those signals strong and clear enough? How much
time is left before a North Korean ICBM. is equipped
with a nuclear warhead and successfully deployed?

Needless to say, the Council should use
every instrument at its disposal to ensure the full
implementation of its decisions. At the same time,
we cannot but recognize that the existing sanctions
regime appears to be inefficient in preventing
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea from
acquiring the technologies, materials, equipment and
financial resources for the further development of its
nuclear programme.

I wish to recall Ukraine's previously stated
position that the Council should find ways to increase
international pressure on the North Korean regime
to respond to its reckless behaviour, which continues
unabated. We believe that only robust decisions and
steps on the part of the Council can put an end to the
systematic and brutal violations of international law and
eliminate the growing nuclear threat on the continent.
We also fully believe in the necessity of further
fostering neighbouring States' defence capabilities
against that threat.

We cannot wait until the next nuclear test or missile
launch. Challenges related to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's nuclear and missile ambitions
should be addressed collectively, decisively and
without further delay. We should not allow Pyongyang
to continue discrediting the role of the Security Council
in the context of global non-proliferation efforts.

Ukraine remains ready for constructive work with
all delegations on this issue, including on a new draft
resolution with more robust and operational measures,
to ensure positive changes in the current situation
and to move closer to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.

