Mr. Essonghe (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
The Council is meeting today to discuss the essential
subject of the maintenance of peace and security and post-
conflict peace-building.

This debate, if it needs to be recalled, is inspired by
one of the relevant questions addressed in the important
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. In holding this debate, the Security
Council wished to promote reflection on the activities and
role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, most particularly in the
area of peace-building.

Since the first peacekeeping operation, 50 years ago,
the United Nations has considerably improved its methods
and strategies in this area, despite the shortcomings that
have been noted in some cases. This evolution is due to the
emergence of new kinds of conflicts and the desire to
achieve greater effectiveness in United Nations
interventions.

Thus, after the cold-war period the United Nations
devised and began undertaking multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, the role of which is to monitor the
implementation of the often complex peace agreements
between Governments and dissident political movements.
We would like to commend the realism and pragmatism
shown by the United Nations, particularly in Africa, where
the Organization has undertaken 13 of the 33 peacekeeping
missions it has conducted throughout the world. The
example of United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINURCA) is an illustration of this new type of
operation.

For its part, Africa, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, has - particularly by
means of regional and subregional arrangements -
undertaken with remarkable success courageous
peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Sierra Leone and,
recently, in Guinea-Bissau.
Peacekeeping is not an end in itself. This is why we
welcome the combination in these new types of operations
of conventional peacekeeping tasks with political and
humanitarian activities, as noted in a joint study of the
International Peace Academy and the Organization of
African Unity. This new approach to settling conflicts is
a commendable innovation leading to post-conflict peace-
building, which is the most critical stage in securing
progress in the restoration and maintenance of peace.
Indeed, without peace-building the efforts to achieve
lasting settlements of conflicts remain superficial, fragile
and precarious, because the causes and roots of the
conflicts are not addressed.

In his 13 April 1998 report on the situation
regarding conflicts in Africa, the Secretary-General
defined post-conflict peace-building as:

"actions undertaken at the end of a conflict to
consolidate peace and prevent a recurrence of armed
confrontation". (S/1998/318, para. 63)

These actions must be integrated and coordinated
measures directed at eliminating the deep-seated causes of
the violence, whatever their nature. Post-conflict peace-
building must thus be considered a long-term strategy.
Accordingly, we welcome the comprehensive measures
that were adopted within the framework of the conflict
settlement in the Central African Republic, where the
United Nations Mission formulated a number of measures
that took into consideration the most essential political,
security and economic priorities. Specifically, MINURCA,
together with other partners, proposed and recommended
certain steps for rehabilitating the political landscape,
security forces and the economy.

We should, however, also recall and consider here
the role of the United Nations bodies, each in its own
area of competence. While the Security Council is
mandated by statute with the maintenance of international
peace and security, tasks involving measures related to
peace-building in areas such as human rights, refugees or
development fall within the purview of other United
Nations bodies. It would also be desirable if peacekeeping
and peace-building operations could be conducted within
the strict framework of agreement and coordination, in
harmony with the country concerned, and with scrupulous
respect for that country's sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity.

During the first few meetings of the ad hoc Working
Group established by resolution 1170 (1998), the Group
was not able to reach a consensus on including post-
conflict peace-building on its list of priority topics for
discussion. Some delegations considered the question a

 

complex one that did not fall within the purview of the
Security Council. Others, on the basis of experience gained
- particularly in the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia and MINURCA - maintained that the Council did
have a role to play in post-conflict peace-building.

While emphasizing the limits of the authority of each
organ of the United Nations, my delegation believes that
good harmonization and proper coordination could give the
Council the role of counsellor in post-conflict peace-
building.

