Mr. Feltman: When we last met to discuss Ukraine
on 16 April (see S/PV.7157), there was a glimmer of
hope within the Council for the first time in weeks as
we waited for the outcome of the four-party talks that
were to be held in Geneva the following day, aimed at
de-escalating the crisis.

Today, we regret that the emerging spirit of
compromise of 17 April appears to have evaporated.
The implementation of the Geneva statement has stalled
as parties have sought to give different interpretations
of what had been agreed upon. Unhelpful rhetoric on
the part of many has further escalated the already high
tensions. Meanwhile, the situation in parts of eastern
and southern Ukraine continues to deteriorate.

On 25 April, a group of military monitors from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and accompanying Ukrainian staff were captured and
detained. Although one monitor has since been released,
the rest remain in detention. As the Secretary-General
stated yesterday, the United Nations strongly condemns
this act and urges those responsible to release monitors
and staff immediately, unconditionally and unharmed.
I urge all those with influence on this situation to assist
urgently in resolving it. Lives are potentially at stake.
Groups of militia and armed civilians are increasing in
number and springing up in more and more cities across
the region, seizing buildings, mounting roadblocks and
shutting off whole towns and communities from the rest
of the country. There are increasing reports of torture,
kidnappings and violent clashes.

Earlier today, self-declared separatist groups
reportedly began an operation to take control of
Lugansk. Just a few hours ago, they stormed the police
headquarters in the city, opening fire with automatic
weapons and throwing stun grenades at police officers
still inside the building. Earlier in the day, they seized
a number of other buildings, including the regional
administration building and the prosecutor's office.
The State security building in Lugansk, seized in early
April, continues to be under the control of these groups.

Yesterday, 27 April, Hennadiy Kernes, the mayor of
Kharkiv, was shot in the back by unknown assailants.
he remains in critical condition. on the same day, self-
declared separatists seized a local Government building
in Kostiantynivka, also in Donetsk oblast, while in
Donetsk itself a pro-unity rally turned violent when
separatist elements reportedly attacked the group with
clubs and chains. Also on 27 April in Kharkiv, clashes
between about 400 opponents and 500-600 supporters
of a unitary Ukraine broke out and resulted in a number
of injuries.

What I just described are developments that have
occurred only in the past four days. These developments
should alarm us all.

In terms of the role of the United Nations and the
international community, the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission provides fact-based and
publicly available information on the state of human
rights in Ukraine. The Secretary-General has continued
his high-level engagement with world leaders. He is the
Council's partner in using his good offices to help bring
about a return to diplomacy and a peaceful resolution.
In this spirit, he has asked me to return to Ukraine next
week.

As the Secretary-General stated yesterday,

"we must find a way back to the spirit ofcompromise
exhibited on 17 April in Geneva. A diplomatic and
political solution to this crisis is both imperative
and long overdue".

Time is of the essence. Let us work concertedly and
expeditiously towards peace and stability.

