Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic):
First, I would like to congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative
of the Kingdom of Morocco, and to wish him and
his delegation every success in their conduct of the
Council's work this month. I would also like to thank
His Excellency Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri,
Permanent Representative of India, and his delegation
for their outstanding success and wise leadership of the
work of the Council last month.

I am also pleased to thank the President and all
the members of the Council for the interest they have
shown in what is taking place in my country, as well
as for their commitment to the success of the political
settlement in Yemen, as well as the country's unity,
security and stability. We would also like to express
our sincere appreciation to Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
continued efforts to reconcile the parties and to prepare
the environment for the National Dialogue conference,
as well as for his strenuous efforts to present us his
valuable and comprehensive briefing, which I hope will
command the interest of the Council.

The Council has no doubt closely followed the
situation in my country and understands the difficulties
that Yemen has been facing for over a year. Its members
must therefore be well informed of the reality on the
ground and be in a position to promote the trust of our
people in its cultural history and in the wisdom of its
leadership to overcome those difficulties.

In his briefing, Mr. Benomar referred to the
progress achieved in the ongoing political process
and the obstacles that need to be addressed. There is
no disagreement on the grave difficulties faced by my
country with regard to completing the second phase
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative.
Despite the complexity of the situation and the
gravity of the challenges before us, the Government of
National Unity has achieved great progress in a short
period, in particular in restoring many services that
were interrupted last year, such as electricity and fuel
supplies and other basic daily necessities for the people.
In that context, I would refer to a statement by the
President of the Republic that was made a few days ago
in Sana'a at the celebration commemorating the signing
of the GCC initiative. In it, he stressed the ability of
Yemenis to achieve their aspirations as they did when
the GCC initiative was signed. The peaceful transfer
of power and the success of the early presidential
elections last February confirmed that ability. I would
take this opportunity to express our sincere thanks
and appreciation to United Nations Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and to the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, Mr. Abdul-Latif Bin Rashid
Al-Zayani, for having participated in the ceremony
and for their commitment to the implementation of
the initiative, which is proof of the region's and the
international community's commitment to assisting
Yemen to succeed in its endeavours and to create the
new future to which it aspires.

Today, having listened to Mr. Benomar's briefing, I
believe that we are all working for one purpose, namely,
to make political transition in Yemen a success. That
requires the international community to support the
efforts made by President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity.

We are now in the second phase ofthe GCC initiative.
I would therefore like to draw the Council's attention
to some of the efforts made by the political leadership
in my country, with a view to implementing the GCC
initiative and resolutions of the Security Council. The
Military and Security Committee continued its work to
foster security and stability with a view to normalizing
the situation through direct supervision and activity in
the field. The Committee has achieved tangible success
in the capital, Sana'a, and in other capitals of Yemen's
governorates. Moreover, President Mansour has taken
many important decisions. For example, he has begun
to separate certain military units from others and has
guaranteed leadership rotation for key positions in the
security apparatus. Secondly, he has established an
independent investigation committee to look into human
rights violations that occurred in 2011. Thirdly, he has
established the Supreme Commission for Elections and
Referendum. I would also like to note that, recently,
a branch of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights was opened in Yemen, as was a Yemeni
office for the GCC.

I would like to stress that President Mansour
and his Government of National Unity will continue
to make efforts to complete the second phase of the
GCC initiative and its mechanisms, foremost of which
is the holding of the National Dialogue Conference,
which we are determined to have begin on time. It is
also noteworthy that the President wants to foster the
necessary environment for the National Dialogue and
to ensure the necessary conditions for the success
of that historic undertaking so that everyone can
contribute with transparency to obtaining tangible
and positive results in the form of domestic peace,
multilateral democracy, the protection of human rights
and good governance - all of which is in response to
the aspirations of Yemenis. Undoubtedly, the recent
agreement on the allocation of seats among political
parties and other political forces, including civil
society organizations, youth, women and other social
components, in the National Dialogue Conference is
an extremely important step forward. The technical
preparatory committee for the National Dialogue has
almost finished its work and will submit its final report
to the President in the next few days. He, in turn, will
take a decision to begin the Dialogue, after having
selected candidates from all the parties.

The President reiterates his full commitment
to the drafting of a new constitution and the holding
of a referendum on it without delay, as well as the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections on
schedule. Undoubtedly, the international community
should continue to support the efforts by the President,
particularly with regard to the National Dialogue
Conference.

The political crisis is but one aspect ofthe situation
in Yemen. Other aspects include humanitarian and
economic difficulties, which can be attributed to various
causes. The most threatening of them is terrorism, of
which Yemen has become a victim. Despite our limited
resources and weak national economy, we continue to
fight that scourge relentlessly - with international
cooperation - in order to eliminate it from our country.
There is no doubt that the problems encountered by
Yemen during the past year have adversely affected the
economic and humanitarian situation in the country.
Extreme poverty has spread and unemployment has
increased, which has weakened the national economy
as a whole, which, in turn, threatens the security and
stability of our country. Furthermore, it threatens the
stability and security of the entire region and could
impact the international community. Yemen is also
bearing a colossal burden as a result of the unrelenting
waves of asylum seekers from nearby countries in the
Horn of Africa.

It is no secret that the economic situation in
Yemen could become an insurmountable obstacle to
all political progress. Indeed, our economic difficulty
represents 70 per cent of all the challenges we face.
Permit me to appeal to all our brothers and friends at
the United Nations to continue to support Yemen in its
crisis so that we can build a modern State with strong
national institutions. The international community
must also show patience in dealing with Yemenis in the
light of the grave and numerous challenges they face.
They should encourage them to find solutions.

I would like to express our thanks to all those who
have stood by us, starting with the donors' conference in
Riyadh in June through the Friends of Yemen meeting
held here in New York in September. That support
is extremely important to us. It comes at a historic
moment, when we look forward to a better future and
greater prosperity for Yemen. I would like to urge all
those brothers and friends who have made pledges to
fulfil them as soon as possible in order to help alleviate
the Yemeni citizens' economic burden and to support
the various economic and humanitarian programmes of
Yemen's Government of National Unity, with a View to
making the country's political transformation a success.

I would like to conclude with what I said earlier: we
in the Yemeni Government are working together with
the international community in support of the political
transition process towards the 2014 general elections,
in a way that realizes the aspirations of the Yemeni
people, particularly their dream of a stable, democratic
society and a modern civil State of law and order,
justice, equality, democracy and human rights.

