Mr. Yap (Singapore): At the outset, we would
like to express how honoured we are to see you, Sir, in
the chair for today's public meeting on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Your chairing of the meeting clearly
shows the importance that Norway attaches to the
issue.

We are also honoured by the personal
participation of the Secretary-General and thank him
for his important statement.

We would like to welcome Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein and Mr. Javier Solana
to the Council and thank them for their useful
briefings. What they have told us today gives room for
optimism as the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
moves forward on various fronts. We are certainly
pleased that there has been further progress in bringing
greater stability to the country and integrating it with
Europe. Preparations for the first general elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under local responsibility,
scheduled for 5 October this year, have made progress.
Police restructuring and reform have made much
headway. Last year saw an increase of 36 per cent in
minority returns over those in 2000, and Bosnia and
Herzegovina moved one step closer to joining the
Council of Europe when the Council's Political Affairs
Committee voted overwhelmingly in favour of the
State's membership.

At the same time, however, we are concerned
about the slow progress in a number of crucial areas.
The Republika Srpska authorities have not advanced
much the process of reconciliation among the three
constituent peoples. Although the Republika Srpska
passed a law on cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic remain at large because of
the Republic's refusal to help arrest them. Judicial
reform is still wanting and, in the economic area, the
pace of reform continues to be sluggish.

Hence, while there is light shining through, dark
clouds still hover over Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
situation in the territory is far from being fully
stabilized, which is clearly evident from there not
being one single army. In the public meeting on Bosnia
and Herzegovina six months ago, we noted
Ambassador Kolby's remark that progress in the
country was incremental and not fundamental. This,
unfortunately, still holds true. As we also stated then,
the underlying causes of the slow process of change for
the better must be addressed. We hope that, with the
efforts being made by all those involved, faster
progress will be made at the fundamental level.

We are therefore encouraged that concerted
efforts have been made to streamline the international
civilian implementation efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We note that the Task Force Model
endorsed by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council at its meeting on 28 February
2002 would raise the efficiency and effectiveness of the
international presence and strengthen the role of the
High Representative. The four Task Forces on the rule
of law, institution building, economic policy, and return
and reconciliation, under a cabinet of lead agencies
chaired by the High Representative, provide the
necessary focuses for tackling the underlying causes of
the slow progress in the various aspects of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. With the state authorities aptly integrated
into these structures, we look forward to closer
coordination and greater improvements in the country's
situation. Ultimately, it is the parties involved in the
problem that must take ownership. We encourage the
parties to maintain their sights on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's joining the European Union (EU) and to
use it as a motivating force to pursue an all-inclusive,
multi-ethnic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board's acceptance of the EU offer of an EU
Police Mission to take over from the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) when the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) expires at the end of this year. An early
decision would certainly facilitate a smooth transition
from the IPTF to the EU Police Mission. We urge
UNMIBH, the EU and the High Representative to
make maximum use of the time available to ensure this.
A seamless transition would bring to a fine conclusion
the clear and well-planned exit strategy that has been
established for UNMIBH. We again congratulate Mr.
Klein and UNMIBH on their farsightedness in laying
out a proper exit strategy that ensures that the rule of
law will continue to be enhanced even when the United
Nations leaves the scene. It is clear that, while there is
no longer active conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the situation there has not reached the level of security
and stability that would allow external security
presences to leave the territory. As much as the EU
Police Mission is required, the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) also has to remain in the country when
UNMIBH winds down.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is fortunate to have the
support of the EU, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. However, these organizations,
too, cannot maintain their presence indefinitely. We
note the EU's direction that the EU Police Mission
should achieve its goals by the end of 2005. We also
understand that there are pressures on SFOR to
downsize. The onus is therefore on the leaders and
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to attain the
fundamental progress needed to establish a fully Viable
State integrated with Europe.

Before I conclude, allow me to convey our
appreciation and commendation to Mr. Petritsch for his
commitment and efforts in advancing the peace process
and improving the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In difficult circumstances, Mr. Petritsch
has achieved substantial results during his term as High
Representative. We would also like to join our
colleagues in congratulating Lord Ashdown on being
designated to take over as High Representative when
Mr. Petritsch steps down from the post. As with Mr.
Petritsch, we will give him our full support as he takes
on this demanding and challenging assignment.

