Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin
to the Council today and to thank him for sharing his
views with us. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing this
morning.

Let me take a moment to express our deep
gratitude to outgoing Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura for his dedicated service and able leadership in
Afghanistan. Mr. De Mistura will be missed. We are
indebted to him and his staff for the important work
done under considerable hardship for the benefit of the
Afghan people on behalf of all Member States. I would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General's decision
to appoint Jan Kubis as the next Special Representative
for Afghanistan. Mr. Kubis has a distinguished record
in international affairs and we assure him of the full
support of the United States.

Today, I would like to discuss how the
Government of Afghanistan is increasingly exercising
its sovereign authority. I would also like to say a few
words about the United States-Afghan bilateral
relationship and how the work of the international
community has affected the lives of average Afghans.

In the past few months, we saw noteworthy
Afghan leadership in the establishment of the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation and in
chairing the Bonn Conference. We support the Istanbul
Process and note the important role of the United
Nations in backing regional efforts to implement the
commitments and confidence-building measures agreed
to in Istanbul. In Bonn, 86 countries and 15 international
organizations affirmed their commitments to help
Afghanistan set out a blueprint for a transformation
decade in post-transition Afghanistan. We applaud the
international community's resolve to help Afghanistan
secure the gains of the past 10 years and to make
transition irreversible. It is especially important that, in
both Istanbul and Bonn, the region and the broader
international community pledged their support to
Afghan-led reconciliation that is inclusive and
represents the legitimate interests of all the people of
Afghanistan, regardless of gender or social status. The
international community also underscored that
reconciliation must include the reaffirmation of a
sovereign, stable and united Afghanistan, the
renunciation of violence, the breaking of ties to
international terrorism, and respect for the Afghan
constitution.

As we look towards the NATO summit in
Chicago in May 2012, the international community
will continue efforts to support the Afghan people as
they begin the second tranche of a security transition.
The NATO summit and the foreign ministers' meeting
to be held in Tokyo in July will be important
opportunities to review progress and clarify plans for
supporting Afghanistan into the transformation decade.

From a bilateral perspective, we look forward to
further progress on the United States-Afghan strategic
partnership document. The post-2014 United States
presence will be determined in close consultation with
the Afghan Government, but, to make two points clear
in advance, the United States is not seeking permanent
military bases in Afghanistan, and our strategic
partnership is not aimed at any of Afghanistan's
neighbours.

As we look forward, let us not forget that much
has already been accomplished to help improve the
lives of Afghan citizens. The recent release of the
Afghanistan mortality survey shows very encouraging
signs about the work of the World Health Organization,
the United States Agency for International
Development and other international partners. More
children are living past their fifth birthday than at any
time in the past. The percentage of women seeking
medical care and advice for their newborns increased
from 16 to 60 per cent between 2003 and 2010.
Improved maternal health has led to a decline in female
adult mortality of about one-third over the past decade.
Household living standards have improved, with more
Afghan families reporting access to clean water and
electricity and to better sanitation facilities. Life
expectancy at birth has increased to 62. The death rate
among men aged 15 to 59 has approximately been
halved over the past 10 years. With donor support,
most Afghans now live within two hours' walking
distance from a health facility.

We look forward to the comprehensive review of
the work of the United Nations in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
want to continue to improve and consolidate service
delivery from all United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan and to strengthen UNAMA's support for
the country through transition and beyond. UNAMA's
role will continue to evolve as Afghan ownership
increases, but there can be no doubt of the continuing
importance of the work of the United Nations. We
welcome Special Representative Kubis's input on his
priorities and vision for the mission and look forward
to discussions on how the international community can
best support UNAMA.

During the past few months, Afghanistan has
demonstrated its vision for the nation's future as a
stable country ready to move from transition to
transformation and to contribute to peace and stability
in the region. The United States remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in continuing our partnership
through 2014 and beyond.

