The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Ministers from Estonia, Indonesia, Ireland,
the Philippines, Romania, Slovenia, South Africa and
Tajikistan, as well as the other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, the Central African Republic,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand, the Netherlands,
the Republic of North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea,
President of the Financial Action Task Force; and
Ms. Mercy Buku, an expert in anti-money-laundering
and countering the financing of terrorism.

Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Buku are joining today's
meeting Via Video tele-conference from Rome and
Nairobi, respectively.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robert
Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations; Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative
of the International Criminal Police Organization to the
United Nations; and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/239, which contains the text ofa letter
dated 14 March 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration

Members of the Council have before them
document S/ZOl9/268, which contains the text ofa draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Costa Rica, C6te d'Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Djibouti, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, the Republic of North Macedonia, Norway,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2462 (2019).

I now give the floor to Mr. Voronkov.


