Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Before getting to the point of my statement, I must pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, for the seriousness,
competence and spirit of self-sacrifice with which you
are so honourably carrying out your difficult
responsibilities as President of the Security Council.
Like your predecessor, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, to whom we would like to reiterate our
sincere congratulations, you have brought your own
style to your mission by essentially giving pride of
place to such issues of major interest as the situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone
and Western Sahara, as well as to the problem of
peace-building and the question of relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations. I need
not dwell on the quality of relations between your
country and mine, Mr. President. Those relations have
always been quite excellent.

This meeting of the Security Council is being
held to consider the final report of the Monitoring
Mechanism on sanctions against UNITA. As we know,
some of the report's conclusions concern my country.
After reading the report carefully, it did not seem to us
absolutely necessary to go into great detail or to
indulge in any sort of polemics. We would therefore
simply like to take note of the report, as we did with
regard to the report of the Panel of Experts on Sierra
Leone - especially because we feel everything has
been said through our various exchanges with the
United Nations.

In order to clarify matters for the Council, it may
be worth highlighting the fact that my country has
worked harmoniously and in close cooperation with the
Panel of Experts led by Ambassador Juan Larrain. The
team itself can certify that during its two visits to
Burkina Faso it carried out its activities with full
independence and without any obstruction or
hindrance. By working in that way we wanted to show
and attest to the fact that our decision to cooperate
fully with the United Nations was not taken lightly but
was a genuine commitment on our part to help to
resolve not only the question of Angola but all other
crises that seriously compromise international peace
and security.

Furthermore, that commitment has been
supported by a series of concrete measures undertaken
by the Government of Burkina Faso as a guarantee of
its good faith and full readiness to cooperate.

Indeed, immediately after the appearance of the
first report on Angola, an inter-ministerial committee
was set up by presidential decree to follow up on
sanctions against UNITA, with the express mission "to
work towards the follow-up and implementation of
United Nations sanctions against UNIT ".

Article 1 of the order implementing that decree
bans the entry into Burkina Faso of any Angolan
nationals who are not on official mission under
instruction from the Angolan Government. On the basis
of a list of names provided by the United Nations,
article 2 of the order prohibits the entry of 83 UNITA
officials. Subsequently, again on the basis of a list
provided by the United Nations, a further order added
six more UNITA officials to the initial list of
undesirable persons. This refutes the claims in
paragraph 95 of the report. The suggestion that, despite
the steps taken by the Government, certain UNITA
officials are still in Burkina Faso, remains in the realm
of hypothesis.

Other measures that I could mention include the
governmental communique of 12 March 2000, firmly
condemning UNITA; the decree of 27 October 2000
banning, throughout the territory of Burkina Faso,
transactions in precious stones and metals that
originate in conflict zones; and the creation of a high-
level authority to monitor the import and use of arms
by the Government of Burkina Faso, which is under the
supervision of the United Nations. Furthermore, I have
had the opportunity to study the report (S/2000/ll95)
on Sierra Leone, which also refers to that monitoring
mechanism, which was greatly welcomed and hailed as
exemplary. I should like to thank those friendly States
that have expressed their readiness to help us in its
implementation and functioning.

I have undertaken a minor exercise that has led
me to form an idea of the number of countries referred
to in the report of the Monitoring Mechanism: those
that are clearly implicated and those that are referred
using the subtle euphemism, "sensitive" countries, of
which there are about 40. If we add to that observation
the judgement of the Panel of Experts on Sierra
Leone - a judgement that, by analogy, can be equally
applied to the case of Angola - it should not be so
easy to accuse any particular country. Indeed, in
paragraph 165 of the report in S/2000/1l95, the experts
state that

"Throughout its work, the Panel was struck
by the widespread breaking of Security Council
sanctions on both weapons and diamonds."

Consequently, instead of continuing to accuse
certain Member States, the Security Council, as the
guarantor of international peace, should, with the
cooperation of regional and subregional organizations
and based on lessons drawn from the two reports, on
Sierra Leone and on Angola, organize better
monitoring of the traffic in diamonds, arms and related
materials. We believe that the suggestions made by the
Panel of Experts are worthy of interest.

The Security Council, through resolution 1336
(2001) of 23 January 2001, decided to extend for three
months the mandate of the Monitoring Mechanism. We
are not against this, a priori, but we remain convinced
that other investigations are pointless as long as we do
not set up a permanent international mechanism that
could guarantee continuous monitoring for follow-up
of sanctions as decreed by the Security Council. In its
final recommendation, the Panel of Experts came to the
same conclusion, a point which many speakers have
made here.

Burkina Faso fervently hopes that this
recommendation will receive the closest attention.

In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of my
country and my Government, to pay tribute to the
Security Council for its foresight and wisdom in the
exercise ofits work.

