Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting
the Secretary-General's report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2011/514). We welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and we share his
views. We listened with attention to the words of
Mr. Hoxhaj.

Russia's position of not recognizing the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo has not
changed. We support the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. Resolution 1244
(1999) retains its full force and remains obligatory for
all international legal approaches for a settlement in
Kosovo and for ensuring security in the region.
Moreover, the Security Council should continue to play
the leadership role in resolving tensions in Kosovo.

We are deeply concerned about the swift
deterioration of the situation in the northern region.
The provocative acts on the part of the Kosovo
authorities - especially the taking by force on 25 July
of the border crossing points Brnjak and J arinje on the
Serbian border - destabilize an already tenuous
situation and only further enflame tensions. We agree
with Mr. Jeremie that the situation in northern Kosovo
should return to its pro-25 July status. Otherwise the
outcome will be to reward the unilateral use of force.
The international presence, in particular the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR),
should increase their efforts to restrain such dangerous
and destructive ambitions.

The questions raised by Mr. J eremie on the events
of 25 July deserve a response. We consider the use of
KFOR helicopters in July for the transfer of Kosovo
police to be a flagrant violation of the neutral status of
the Force in Kosovo. In this context, we are concerned
about the declaration of the border crossings of Jarinje
and Brnjak as military protected zones where KFOR
has been given authorization to use force. We call on
the Force Commander to act responsibly and refrain
from extreme measures that favour one side. The
United Nations Mission should maintain close contact
with KFOR and ensure that it fully complies with
resolution 1244 (1999).

In our View, a compromise is needed on the
temporary plan for controlling the administrative
borders in the north of the Serbian autonomous region
of Kosovo. It is important that such an agreement
reflect the interests of those people for whom it is
drafted - in this case the residents of the region.

We have a few words to say about the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. There have
been instances of a blatant hands-off policy regarding
the authorities in Pristina. That contradicts the neutral
status of that Mission and undermines its authority.
EULEX must strictly comply with resolution 1244
(1999), which means behaving with neutrality, taking
into account the interests of both sides, under the
leadership of UNMIK. That is not merely our wishes in
the matter; it is what was defined in 2008 by the
Secretary-General as one of the conditions for the
deployment of EULEX in the area. That was endorsed
by all members of the Council.

A sustainable solution to the Kosovo situation is
possible only through negotiations among interested
sides on the basis of the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999). In accordance with its Security Council
mandate, UNMIK should play an important role in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

In reality, with all respect to Mr. Zarif, we must
note a genuine lack of leadership at UNMIK. The
Mission is ignored by other international presences,
and it has failed to respond to recent events in the
northern region. The time has come to appoint a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo to head UNMIK. We do not understand why
the Secretariat is delaying in resolving this crucial
issue. Action should be taken immediately.

Moreover, the Secretariat said that a reduction in
the financing of UNMIK would not undermine the
Mission's activities, but today, taking into account
Mr. Zarif's presentation, it is clear that that is not in
fact the case. The situation must be rectified.
We insist on a full and objective investigation of
crimes in Kosovo, including illegal trafficking in
human organs revealed in the report of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe by
Dick Marty. We believe that the establishment of a
special group by EULEX to conduct an investigation
has been needlessly delayed. The appointment of the
American specialist at its head underscores yet again
that investigations of this kind should be international.
In that vein, we reiterate our support for the proposal
by Serbia for the Security Council to create a special

international investigative mechanism, answering to
the Council. That would guarantee its reliability and
political impartiality.

We call attention to the inadmissibility of Kosovo
leaders participating - outside the UNMIK format -
in international forums, including the United Nations
and its specialized bodies. We do not accept attempts to
legitimize Kosovo by making it a member of
international structures.

The situation regarding the return to Kosovo of
internally displaced persons continues to be
unsatisfactory. Unfortunately there is an ongoing
neglect of multiple cases in which Kosovo Serbs are
forced to sell their property and leave the region. That
bears witness to the absence of any growing inter-
ethnic tolerance in Kosovo. On the contrary, the trend
is actually one of regression. The territories of large
Serbian enclaves are gradually shrinking and will
finally disappear.

One of the Council's important achievements in
Kosovo is the fact that after 1999 we succeeded in
preventing a full-fledged bloodbath in the region. That
was to a great extent made possible by a shared
understanding of the inadmissibility of the use of force
to resolve disagreements. The tragic events of the end
of July in northern Kosovo clearly demonstrated that
the situation in the region is far from being stable and
continues to be explosive.

In these conditions, the Russian delegation
proposed for consideration by members of the Council
a draft presidential statement that was intended to
provide a clear and unequivocal message to all sides on
the need to refrain from unilateral actions and the use
of force and to employ dialogue to overcome
differences in opinion. Taking into account the known
differences in opinion on the Council regarding the
issue of Kosovo, we drafted a document that was
utterly balanced. However, given the obstructive
position taken by the quintet in the Council, that draft
has been blocked. We express our regret and
disappointment at that.

