Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has been closely
following the complex political and humanitarian
situation in the Sudanese province of Darfur. We share
the assessment of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Jan Pronk, with regard to its complex
development.

The Government of the Sudan has achieved a
certain amount of progress in implementing its
obligations under Security Council resolution 1556
(2004), particularly in the humanitarian area. However,
much remains to be done to normalize the security
situation, including disarming the Janjaweed and other
outlaw armed groups. We need to ensure the reliable
protection of the civilian population in Darfur. Here,
the main responsibility still lies with the Sudanese
authorities. The rebels too must implement their
obligations.

The Security Council is called upon to respond to
the request of the members of the African Union and to
fully support their efforts to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1556 (2004) and the
agreements reached with the United Nations. We note
progress in the dialogue between the African Union
and Khartoum on that issue, and we hope for the swift
achievement of concrete results. It is also important
that we continue to support the Abuja and Naivasha
negotiating processes in order to achieve a
comprehensive peaceful settlement in the Sudan.

The Russian delegation participated
constructively in work to reach agreement on a draft
resolution containing those points of principle. We are
convinced that threatening sanctions is far from the
best method of inducing Khartoum to fully implement
its obligations to the United Nations. In order to do
that, we should use approved diplomatic methods.

We also feel that it is counterproductive to link
the possibility of introducing sanctions and the peace-
building efforts of the African Union. We should abide
strictly by the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
on cooperation with regional organizations.

Unfortunately, the sponsors of the draft resolution
did not take those main concerns of ours into account,
although the text was improved in the course of
consultations. Faced with that situation, the Russian
delegation was unable to support the document. Russia
will continue to work actively to promote - including
within the Security Council - the swift stabilization of
the situation in Darfur and in the Sudan as a whole.

