Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): This
public meeting, which is being held on the eve of the
joint mission of the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council to West Africa, is most timely. The
mission will provide us with the opportunity to assess
the unresolved problems confronting Guinea-Bissau so
as to enable a direct, frank and constructive dialogue
with players at all levels.

I wish to thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Head of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau; the
Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau of the Economic and Social Council, the
Ambassador of South Africa; and the Ambassador of
Gambia, the Chairman of the Group of Friends of
Guinea-Bissau, for their important statements this
morning on the situation in that country.

As the most recent report of the Secretary-
General indicates, the situation in Guinea-Bissau, ever
worrisome, has further deteriorated since the holding of
free and fair general elections. It indicates above all
that major and varied problems confront the authorities
in the pursuit of the democratic process.

In this regard, my delegation notes that, in spite
of certain aspects that have been described, this
gloomy picture is attributable first and foremost - let
us not forget - to the legacy of a war of liberation and
successive conflicts arising, inter alia, from difficulties
linked to the slow implementation of the programme to
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants.
Moreover, the impact of a wrecked economy that
depends solely on revenue from mahogany must be
taken into account. In other words, the international
community has not massively intervened in Guinea-
Bissau to consolidate the new-found peace and to assist
in reconstruction by creating a viable programme to
accompany the democratization process.

It is now recognized that these are
complementary stages in a country in a post-conflict
situation. Progress made at one stage has a bearing on
the success of the following stage. We must bear that in
mind in the case of Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation remains convinced of the urgent
need for Guinea-Bissau to take courageous political
measures and believes that those measures must be
accompanied by the palpable improvement of the
country's economic situation, through adequate
financial assistance from the international community.
The restructuring of its institutions depends upon it,
and the holding of new free and legitimate elections
justifies that reasonable request.

Therefore, my delegation would like, here and
now, to renew its appeal to the donor community, in
particular the Bretton Woods institutions, to show more
flexibility in their understanding of how to solve the
ongoing problems in Guinea-Bissau.

In our opinion, a realistic plan for recovery must
be designed to assist Guinea-Bissau, based on planned
and coordinated assistance and requiring equally
realistic results.

