Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): 1 thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting.

Lithuania condemns in the strongest terms the
invasion of Ukraine's territory by the armed forces of
the Russian Federation as an open and blatant violation
of Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and a serious blow to peace, security and
stability across the entire region and well beyond.
For months we have watched countless violations
of Ukraine's unity and territorial integrity - first
Crimea's annexation, then the war initiated by Russian-
supported fringe separatist groups in eastern Ukraine,
then provocative manipulations of humanitarian aid
with semi-empty humanitarian trucks, then soldiers
lost on the other side of the border and now Russian
forces on Ukraine's sovereign territory.

Within the past day, as reported, troops from the
Russian 98th Guards Airborn Division from lvanovo
have taken over the Ukrainian city of Novoazovsk. New,
previously safe areas of Ukraine have been affected,
expanding the zone of conflict. "There are active
soldiers fighting among us who preferred to spend
their vacation not on the beach, but with us, among
their brothers, who are fighting for their freedom",
says Aleksandr Zakharchenko, a rebel commander and
the self-proclaimed prime minister of a non-existent
Donetsk People's Republic, boasting in an interview
on Russian State-run television, adding that there were
some 3,000 to 4,000 Russians among the separatists
ranks.

A member of the Russian President's advisory
council on human rights, Ella Polyakova, said on
Thursday that she believed Russia was carrying out an
invasion of Ukraine. "When masses of people, under
commanders' orders, on tanks, armoured personnel
carriers and using heavy weapons, are on the territory
of another country, across the border, I consider this an
invasion."

Such actions by the Russian Federation are in
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular Article 2, paragraph 4, and other fundamental
principles - as we have said in the Council many times
before - and norms of international law, including
the Helsinki Final Act, the 1997 Treaty between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, whereby Ukraine renounced its
nuclear weapons in exchange for security guarantees.
Specifically, Budapest Memorandum articles 1 and
2 impose clear-cut obligations on Russia to respect
the political independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its existing borders of 1994, and not
threaten it or use force by any means.

By now the Council has held close to 30 meetings
on Ukraine. We have heard numerous assurances by
Russia, here and elsewhere, regarding its desire for
a solution to the crisis in Ukraine. All of this time,
however, instead of seeking that solution, Russia has
been escalating the situation, as the flow of weapons,
equipment, mercenaries and now troops has continued
across Russia's borders into the territory of Ukraine.
Let us be clear: weapons do not fall into the
hands of rebels out of the blue sky. Had it not been
for Russia's continuous, active support, the illegal
separatists i a clear minority in the region they claim
to represent - would have long ago run out of steam
and weaponry. Eastern Ukraine would have been
getting back on its feet, flows of internally displaced
persons (lDPs) would have stopped and reversed, and
no more lives would have been lost.

This conflict has already claimed too many lives.
Even moderate estimates show that over 2,000 have
been killed since April. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has noted over 200,000 lDPs
and about 3.9 million people affected by conflict as of
15 August. People are dying in Ukraine because of the
criminal acts carried out by the illegal separatists and
their Russian supporters. Soldiers who are citizens of
Russia are also now losing their lives in this criminal
war against the State of Ukraine. As reported by
various sources, the mothers of Russian soldiers are
seeking answers regarding their children, at least four
hundred dead. Journalists who are trying to investigate
and report on soldiers' graves in Pskov have been
threatened and harassed.

How many more lives need to be lost and people
maimed for Russia to realize its folly of aggression
against Ukraine? Ukraine does not need any more
Russian so-called humanitarian convoys. Ukraine does
not need more Russian tanks, troops or rearmament of
separatist bands. What Ukraine needs is a most urgent
return by Russia to the internationally accepted norms
of behaviour, compliance with international law and
respect for the Charter of the United Nations 4 for
which Russia, as a permanent member of the Council,
bears a special responsibility.

Lithuania calls on Russia, in the strongest of terms,
to return to its senses and to comply with the purposes
and principles of the Charter, immediately withdraw
its military forces, weaponry and equipment from the
sovereign territory of Ukraine, secure its borders, cease
the shelling of Ukraine from Russian territory, and
urgently end all support to the illegal armed separatist
groups in the east of Ukraine.

President Poroshenko's peace plan must be
urgently implemented. As for the Geneva statement,
whose non-implementation is so often lamented by
Russia, that statement, as well as any ceasefire, must
be implemented by all sides, including the illegal
separatists and including Russia itself. Anything less
than that is equivalent to a cynical demand for Ukraine's
unconditional surrender. Like any sovereign Member
of the United Nations, Ukraine has the right to defend
itself, as per Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations. That right cannot be taken by anyone.

For too long now we have watched Russia's creeping
attack against Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. And because it was happening one step at a
time, our response has been like that of the proverbial
frog in boiling water.

Once international laws been brazenly broken, as
they are vis-a-vis Ukraine, it would be naive to think
that such disregard for international norms of behaviour
will stop at that and will not creep even further. Are we
really ready to take such risks?

