I would like to start by joining others in welcoming the Secretary-General's tenth report (S/2020/1177) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also thank the Secretariat for its continued professionalism and support to the Secretary- General in enabling the issuance of this report. I would also like to thank Belgium for its role as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and for the latest Facilitator's report (see S/2020/1244). The United Kingdom remains resolutely committed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We have frequently stated our unequivocal regret and concern about the United States decision to leave the agreement and to reimpose sanctions on Iran. We understand the continued impact that has had on Iran and on the Iranian people. The joint statement by the JCPOA's remaining participants at yesterday's Joint Commission meeting, held at the ministerial level, is the most recent expression of our commitment. Since May 2018, we have worked tirelessly to preserve the JCPOA and have fully upheld our commitments. We have taken on the role of co-Chair of the Arak Modernization Project in order to bring about a proliferation-resistant facility, and we have developed the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges, which is ready to play an important role supporting legitimate trade with Iran. Recent Iranian criticism of the approach of the E-3 - France, Germany and the United Kingdom - is therefore regrettable. It is also deeply regrettable that, since 2019, Iran has taken nuclear measures contrary to its JCPOA commitments. As the Secretary-General's report notes, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Iran has continued to install cascades of IR-2M centrifuges at Natanz and to expand its uranium enrichment programme and stockpile beyond the limits of the JCPOA. Those actions seriously undermine the non-proliferation benefits of the agreement. Along with our French and German colleagues, we are also deeply worried about Iran's recent announcement that it intends to install three cascades of advanced centrifuges at Natanz, and about the recent law passed by the Iranian Parliament, which, if implemented, would substantially expand Iran's nuclear programme and limit [AEA monitoring access. Those measures are incompatible with the JCPOA and Iran's wider nuclear commitments. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-General's recognition, in his report, of the vital role of the IAEA, whose monitoring and verification is essential to securing international confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. While we recognize that Iran has not conducted any test launches during the reporting period, we remain concerned about Iran's development of advanced ballistic missile technologies. We note Iran's announcements, in August, of two new ballistic missile systems and, in November, of a missile system located in an underground facility that is capable of multiple launches. The Secretariat has an important and ongoing role monitoring and reporting on the restrictions on Iran's ballistic missile programme that remain in place under annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). The United Kingdom therefore opposes any proposal in the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly that aims to reduce the 2231 budget beyond that recommended by the Secretary-General. This year has seen a continuation of Iran's destabilizing activity around the Middle East. We are concerned by the Secretariat's findings on imagery of four anti- tank guided missiles in Libya, one of which has been found to be consistent with weaponry manufactured in Iran. There is also broader evidence of continued Iranian transfer of missiles to armed groups, including the Houthis in Yemen, in violation of several Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 2216 (2015) and 1540 (2004). Such proliferation is destabilizing for the region and escalates already high tensions; it should stop. The circumstances of Iranian nuclear scientist Mohsen Fakhrizadeh's death remain unclear. To date, no State or non-State actors have claimed responsibility, but the United Kingdom has repeatedly and consistently condemned extrajudicial killings whenever and wherever they take place. Iran is no exception. I would like to conclude by reiterating our concern about current tensions across the region. Escalation would be in no one's interest. We once again welcome the joint statement issued by the JCPOA's remaining participants at yesterday's Joint Commission meeting held at the ministerial level. We hope next year will see the United States rejoin the JCPOA and Iran return to compliance with the agreement. A return to diplomacy represents the best means of bringing greater security to the region, upholding the nuclear non-proliferation regime and preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. Finally, although I am the newest member of the Security Council, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all my colleagues for their warm welcome, and join those paying tribute to our departing colleagues from Belgium, South Africa, the Dominican Republic, Germany and Indonesia. In the words of Shakespeare, "parting is such sweet sorrow." I look forward to continuing to work with all my colleagues.
