Ms. Gbowee: I am honoured to be here today. As a
peace activist and a grass-roots person, I doubt ifI will
ever come back here again. So let me have my say.

I would like to express gratitude to Chile for
inviting me here today.

Fourteen years into the Liberian civil war, a group
of women, some of whom had experienced the worst
impact, came together to form the famous Women of
Liberia Mass Action for Peace. Their ultimate goal was
to achieve peace in a nation that had been ravaged by
war. The women were from diverse ethnic, political,
economic and social classes. They also had a diverse
military agenda - due to the fact that many of them
came from ethnic groups that were deeply involved in
the civil war. When it became clear that, regardless of
on which side of the divide they stood, selfishness and
greed would constantly override the genuine need for
peace, those women were prepared to make the ultimate
sacrifice by using non-violent tactics and dialogue to
negotiate a peaceful settlement. The rest is history, and
we all know how it ended. But there are few lessons that
I would like to humbly share with the Council - lessons
that I learned as a leader of that group.

First, for the women of Liberia, achieving peace
was key before maintaining it. The reason I raise this
is that in our world today we find ourselves at a place
where the need for international peace is greater than
ever before in the history of the world. Regardless of
where you come from and of your nationality, race
or political ideology, we all - in this Chamber and
outside - live with a deep sense of fear. All of the
things that made life meaningful to us are gradually
being taken away by insecurity. The joy of getting on an
airplane is gone. The freedom to worship when, where
and how we choose is gone. Education, especially for
girls, is under serious threat. Depending on the space
in which you find yourself, as a woman there is nothing
like bodily autonomy. The freedom of expression and
the freedom of the press, as we saw in Paris, is also a
thing of the past. Militarism is viewed as the primary
solution to every local, national and international
problem - regardless of what the problem is. Several
years ago, if you had said the words "Boko Haram",
people would have said, "What?". But today ifyou even
say Boko Haram in Russia, someone would recognize
what it is. The simple and significant things that made
us feel as if we lived in a peaceful and secure world
have been taken away from us. International peace,
security and inclusive development are therefore things
we must all work for.

The second lesson I bring to this body that I learned
from the group of women has to do with the spirit
of unity with which they carried out their mandate.
They decided to band together and wage a common
struggle. The idea of such a struggle is no stranger to
this body: it is enshrined in the Charter that established
it. Today we see division even when there should be
a consensus. Exclusivity is the order of the day, even
in the process of attaining peace and security. I could
sit here and spend hours making cases for women's
inclusion in peacebuilding. Every time there is lobbying
and petitions, at the end of the day we are left out of
processes, and sometimes only added as afterthoughts.

For international peace and security and inclusive
development to be achieved - and, as I said, I may never
come back to the Security Council again, so let me have
my say - I would ask this body to undertake some deep
self-reflection. Seventy years ago, the rationale to name
five permanent members made sense, as most of the
countries in this Chamber were either colonized by the
five permanent members or did not have independence.
Today, as we talk about inclusive development, it is
my hope that we can expand the number of chairs to
seven, adding two more to that number. The dynamics
of our world are different. The things we did before
have changed. In order for us to achieve international
peace and development, we need to change the systems
and structures that make it impossible for others to try
where others are succeeding. Our world has changed in
many ways than we ever imagined. It is time that we
change some of the systems and structures that make
it impossible for us achieve international peace and
security.

My fellow Nobel Laureate Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr., summed up very well the need for united and
collective action and inclusiveness in this quotation,
with which I will leave the Council today: "We all may
have come in different ships, but we are all in the same
boat now."

