Mr. Ag Oumar (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to associate myself with previous speakers in thanking
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on the
situation in Kosovo, in order to consider the report of the
Security Council mission that went to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in response to Mr. Kouchner's invitation to
go and view the situation on the ground. The mission made
it possible not only to observe the developments in the
situation in Kosovo, but also to transmit the message of the
Council to all those concerned. I also wish to thank
Mr. Chowdhury for transmitting this message to its
audience and for introducing the report, which my
delegation greatly appreciates.

The findings made by the mission on the ground are
significant, and provide an opportunity for my delegation to
make the following comments. The ethnic communities told
the mission of their desire to live in peace together, but
they remain deeply divided, and the wounds will take time
to heal. My delegation therefore hopes that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will become more involved in restoring
confidence among the ethnic communities. We believe this
is an essential aspect of UNMIK's mandate.

Despite the continuing improvement in the general
situation with regard to violence and crime, attacks
against minorities are still taking place and this requires
ongoing special protective measures to be taken. In this
respect, my delegation believes that it is important to
speed up the training of police officers. The precarious
nature of the material, social and economic security
situation is cause for concern and constitutes a major
obstacle to the reintegration of the ethnic minorities into
public life, and also impedes the return of displaced
persons, mainly Serbs and Roma people.

The reciprocal general apologies made by the Serb
and Albanian communities are an important sign on the
path towards reconciliation and participation in the future
development of the community. However, the state of
progress on the path towards peaceful coexistence remains
fragile. In this connection, the mission noted the firm
support expressed by the ethnic communities for the
appointment of a special envoy for detainees and missing
persons, which my delegation firmly supports.

To remedy the culture of impunity, which is
undermining the foundation of the judicial system, there
is a need for the recruitment of international judges and
prosecutors, as well as for considerable voluntary
assistance, in the form of personnel as well as material
resources, so that UNMIK can enhance the efficiency of
the judicial apparatus in Kosovo. As I said earlier, it is
imperative that UNMIK speed up its training programmes
to cope with the lack of police resources.

With regard to the forthcoming municipal
consultations, efforts should be made by UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), with the firm support of the
international community, to encourage the participation of
Serbs, including those who were displaced from Kosovo,
to create conditions to that end and also to encourage
contacts such as those that the leaders of the two
communities have undertaken in Mitrovica with respect to
community programmes.

My delegation supports all of the proposals of the
mission directed at improving the strategic approaches of
UNMIK in carrying out its mandate, including
encouraging economic recovery through confidence-
building measures and reconciliation at the local level and
UNMIK's setting of priorities for economic investment so
as to ensure that the available funds are used as
effectively as possible. My delegation supports the
mission in its belief that in the case of the implementation
of resolution 1160 (1998), KFOR should communicate all

 

information on its activities to the Committee established by
that Security Council resolution in order to preserve the
transparency advocated by the Security Council.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that, as UNMIK
has been deployed for less than a year, we must be
realistic. We need time to bring about reconciliation among
communities that have just emerged from conflict. The
international community must be patient and persist in its
efforts. UNMIK and KFOR have made remarkable progress
in carrying out their mandates, and my delegation
congratulates them for their efforts, often undertaken in
difficult circumstances. The task is enormous, and the
continuation of efforts to ensure the complete
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) remains the
absolute priority of the Security Council. Finally, my
delegation wishes to pay tribute to the Security Council
mission for its detailed report, which responds to many of
the questions Member States have been asking themselves
in the search for a solution to the problem of the Balkans
in general and to Kosovo in particular.
