The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola, document
S/l997/74l.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1997/750, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revision to be made to the
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1997/750, in its provisional form.

In operative paragraph 2, the reference should be to
paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1997/750)
before it, as orally revised, in its provisional form. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution, as orally revised, in its provisional form,

has been adopted unanimously as resolution 1130 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

