Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and the representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Tanin, for their statements.

As Mr. Kubis recalled a moment ago, Afghanistan
has just experienced an intense phase of electoral
activity. Despite the threats and violence, many voters
went to the polls, showing their desire to contribute to
Afghanistan's democratic future.

We understand that discussions are ongoing
between the two main candidates on the formation of
a national unity Government, and we hope that those
talks will lead very quickly to a compromise that is
acceptable to all, in the interests of the country and the
Afghan people. It is crucial that the new Government
be able to get to work as soon as possible. The election
audit, which was conducted under the supervision of
the United Nations, with many international observers
participating, was recently completed. We hope that the
election results will be published soon.

Beyond the political process, the signs pointing
to a stabilization in the situation in Afghanistan are
somewhat encouraging, but many challenges remain.

Security remains a particular challenge. Violence
is still very much a reality in the country. The recent
attacks against civilians, Afghan security forces or the
staff of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) are of particular concern. Those incidents show
the insurgency's desire, at a time when the international
community is developing its presence in the country, to
lead Afghans and their partners to doubt the robustness
of the progress achieved.

We must not waver in the face of such attempts at
intimidation. While Afghanistan is in transition, the
support and efforts of regional partners will be crucial.
The next ministerial conference of the Istanbul Process
must be an opportunity to move in that direction.

It is clear that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will now be at the forefront
of the international community's involvement. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2014/656),
UNAMA has already begun to take on that role, as the
transition away from ISAF has entered its final phase.
In particular, it plays a central role in the electoral
crisis, which we recognize today.

In future, UNAMA will be in a more central,
but also more complex, position. The Special
Representative must, through his good offices, embody
the international community in his dialogue with the
Afghan political authorities. The Mission's mandate
should clearly identify its priority tasks and consolidate
its successes, including the protection of human rights.
To provide the best support to the new Government
in strengthening Afghan sovereignty, support for
the consolidation of the rule of law and democratic
governance must be the first priority in the Mission's
mandate.

UNAMA's mandate must also take into account
the major challenges for the country's stability. In that
regard, the emergence of an illicit economy linked to
drug trafficking will be a point of particular attention
insofar as it is a significant destabilizing factor in the
country, in terms of not only corruption and security
but also public health and development. We believe
that the fight against drug trafficking must be a central
element of the political dialogue between UNAMA and
the Afghan authorities without prejudice to the work of
other United Nations entities in Afghanistan, such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

In that regard, I would like to recall that France,
along with Russia, is also one of the originators of the
Paris Pact, which is the primary multilateral framework
for projects related to the fight against heroin trafficking
from Afghanistan. Phase IV of the Pact was adopted in

March 2013 and covers programmes of action for the
period 2013 to 2016, which are focused in particular on
the fight against illicit financial flows from trafficking
and on strengthening regional cooperation.

In conclusion, I too would like to pay tribute to the
work of Mr. Kubis and, beyond him, to all of the staff of
UNAMA, who are working in very difficult conditions
in Afghanistan. They have brought the United Nations
work in Afghanistan to a level of excellence that does
credit to the Organization. We believe that the United
Nations and UNAMA will have a major role to play in
Afghanistan in the coming years under the leadership
of Nick Haysom, and we welcome the fact that he will
assume that role shortly.

