Mr. Prendergast: With your permission, Mr.
President, I shall review briefly the political, security
and humanitarian developments in Somalia since my
most recent briefing to the Security Council, in
informal consultations on 23 May.

Members of the Council will recall that on 22
September last year, President Ismail Omar Guelleh of
Djibouti put forward his plan for peace in Somalia in a
speech to the General Assembly here in New York.
Consultations followed with a wide range of Somali
leaders, and on 21 March, he convened a meeting of 50
Somali intellectuals, who were invited, in their
personal capacity, to advise on the peace process.
Following those discussions, the Somalia National
Peace Conference was formally opened in Djibouti on
2 May.

The delegates to the Conference consisted of
elders, traditional leaders and politically active
Somalis. All elders, with the exception of about three
quarters of the elders of the Issak clan from the self-
styled "Somaliland", took part in that phase of the
Conference. From May, until it ended on 13 June, the
meeting of the elders focused on reconciliation among
the clans and on working out an agenda and a list of
delegates for phase II of the Conference. The final list
of delegates includes a large number of political
leaders, former government officials, Somalis from the
diaspora and prominent members of civil society.

In spite of efforts by Djibouti and other members
of the international community, a number of political
leaders refused to take part in the Conference or even
to send observers. Most prominent among them were
Mohamed Ibrahim Egal of Somaliland and Hussein
Aidid, Osman Hassan Ali Atto and Muse Sudi
"Yallahow" of the Hawiye clan. Some leaders who
stayed out complained about what they saw as a lack of
adequate consultation. Others appeared unhappy about
the procedure by which delegates had been selected.

In connection with those who remain outside the
process, by far the most serious obstacles are presented
by the absence of the two "building blocks" - the self-
styled Somaliland and "Puntland". The latter's leader,
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, recently announced the
withdrawal of the support of Puntland from the
Conference. As regards Somaliland, Mr. Egal has
reiterated his position that all options remained open
provided that he could negotiate as Somaliland with
legitimate leaders from what he termed the "south".
The picture regarding Puntland seems a bit more
complex. There have been popular demonstrations
against the Yusuf administration and in support of the
Conference in some five towns in Puntland. Moreover,
some members of the Puntland delegation refused to be
summoned back to Puntland, and Mr. Hassan Abshir
Farah, former mayor of Mogadishu and former
Minister in the so-called Puntland administration, was
unanimously elected co-Chairman of the Conference.
On the other hand, Hassan Mohamed Noor of the
Rahanwein Resistance Army, who initially said he
would not participate, subsequently joined the
Conference. Djibouti is continuing its efforts to
persuade certain faction leaders, particularly the
Hawiye clan in the Mogadishu area, to revise their
hitherto hostile attitude towards the Conference. There
remains, therefore, the possibility of further changes in
the list of participants at the Conference.

With regard to up-to-date information on the
Conference and plans for the immediate future, I shall
defer to the Permanent Representative of Djibouti,
Ambassador Roble Olhaye, who, I understand, has
travelled from the Conference site in Djibouti for this
meeting. I therefore propose to limit myself to making
a few key points about the Conference.

The total number of delegates to the second phase
of the Conference, which opened formally on 15 June,
is 920, with each major clan, as well as the Alliance of
Minorities and women allocated a certain number of
seats, as was agreed in the elders' meeting.

Secondly, the major issues on the agenda of the
Conference include security, arms control and
disarmament, the future of Mogadishu as capital and
the transitional arrangements. A special committee
made up of representatives of each participating group
has been tasked with drafting documents, including a
transitional charter for Somalia. Delegates established
another special committee that has discussed
mechanisms for future economic and social
development. It was agreed that all assets should be
returned to their rightful owners through a procedure to
be formulated by future authorities.

Finally, on this score, we understand that the
leadership of the Conference asked, and Djibouti
agreed, that the deliberations be extended for a further
two weeks, until 15 July. The aim of the delegates, we
understand, would be to come up by then with an
interim charter and to select the delegates for a
Transitional National Assembly, which will, in turn,
select the members of a Transitional National
Administration for Somalia.

Turning to the humanitarian aspects of Somalia,
during the long, dry jilaal season, Gedo, Bakool and
northern Hiran regions were considered the worst
drought-affected areas of southern Somalia. Three
weeks of heavy rainfall from the end of April through
the second week of May led to good crop potential,
improved access to water and pasture regeneration in
most areas. However, there has been little, if any,
rainfall since then. Without more rain, drought
conditions may again prevail. Crop development would
falter, leading to poor harvest levels. Already, 750,000
people across Somalia are highly vulnerable following
three consecutive years of below-normal rainfall and
dwindling household resource capacities. Crop failure
and/or renewed conflict could place fragile livelihoods
at risk and generate acute humanitarian crisis in some
regions. The situation in the Gedo region is the most
alarming.

Water safety in Somalia has always been of
paramount importance. Under what in Somalia are
termed "normal" conditions, only 25 per cent of the
population have access to safe, potable water, but
recent rains are expected to ease the severity of the
problem. Harvested water contributes some 60 per cent
of drinking water, with river water and boreholes
accounting for a further 25 per cent and 15 per cent,
respectively. However, in drought-affected areas such
as northern Gedo and Bakool, boreholes will remain an
important source of water. At the moment, it is
estimated that only 35 per cent of Somalia's boreholes
are functioning, due to lack of maintenance, poor
construction or conflict-related destruction.

Nine nutritional surveys conducted over the past
year have reported malnutrition rates of over 20 per
cent. I would just like to mention to the Council that a
level of 15 per cent is generally accepted as the
emergency threshold. Most recently, a survey by the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in the Gedo
region identified 21.5 per cent of children as
moderately to severely malnourished. High
malnutrition rates indicate poor prospects for
livelihood sustainability in the face of crop failure or
renewed conflict. So the foundations for future acute
crises are being laid. In order to reduce malnutrition in
the worst hit areas, the World Food Programme,
UNICEF and the World Health Organization need more
resources so as to enhance field assessment capacity
and integrate interventions to address the multiple
needs of the population at risk.

The 2000 United Nations Consolidated Appeal
for Somalia, which requested $50.5 million, has
received less than 30 per cent of that figure to date.
That is a stark figure.

If I may turn for a moment to security, United
Nations agencies continue to monitor the security
situation in Somalia as part of early warning and
emergency preparedness efforts. In order to provide a
safer operational environment, the United Nations
agencies are enhancing efforts to monitor and prevent
future incidents through increased field coordination
and community liaison and the implementation of a
humanitarian principles programme to structure
relationships with de facto authorities.

Personal safety and security remain part of the
risk of humanitarian assistance delivery in Somalia and
continue to affect all aspects of those activities. I regret
to say that the lives of humanitarian staff continue to
be lost or put at risk and that, given conditions in
Somalia, this is often with impunity. In the most recent
fatal incident, on 6 June this year, Mr. Dieter
Krasemann, a German national who was working for a
German non-governmental organization called
Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Technische Zusammenarbeit
(GTZ), was killed in Burao, Somaliland. Mr.
Krasemann, who was the GTZ project manager for a
demobilization project, was reportedly stabbed in the
neck by someone who was called a madman. The Egal
administration promised to investigate the killing and
requested assistance in having an international
psychologist examine the individual, who is under
arrest.

On 8 June, a European Commission Humanitarian
Office (ECHO) flight was fired upon and struck in a
wing as it landed in Merka. The elders in the area claim
that this was the act of a disturbed young man with an
AK-47. ECHO flights to Merka were immediately
suspended. On 11 June, the United Nations announced
the suspension of all United Nations common air-
service flights to Merka and transferred the common
air-service refuelling and transit operations to Baidoa.

I should like to end by making a number of
observations. While some personalities and so-called
warlords have stayed away from the Somalia National
Peace Conference, Djibouti has made commendable
efforts to assist the people of Somalia to resolve their
conflict by peaceful means. What is taking place in
Djibouti is a unique political experience for Somalis.
This is the first time that Somali elders from all parts
of Somalia have met; it is the first time that
representatives of the grass-roots of almost all clans
have discussed ways and means of rebuilding their
country in a process based on consensus-building from
the bottom up; and it is the first time that Somali
women have been actively involved. Although Djibouti
is acting as host and facilitator, it is clear that the
process is Somali-owned. That, it seems to me, is very
important. The Djibouti initiative, which has relied on
Somalia's traditional system of clans in organizing the
Conference, appears to be very much on the right track.

There have been many false dawns in relation to
Somalia over the years, but the international
community - and, I would suggest, the Security
Council in particular - must not fall prey to cynicism
or despair, or give up on Somalia. On the contrary, it
will be important to encourage as wide a participation
in the Conference as possible by giving renewed
support to the Djibouti initiative and to the Conference
at this stage and by calling on all Somalis to take part
in the Conference. We believe that the support of the
Council would offer the best deterrence against
obstruction that may come from some circles whose
privileges and capacity to profit from disorder are
threatened by a move towards peace.

We understand that, so far, the Conference has
been almost entirely financed by Djibouti. This is
placing an intolerable burden on a small State. Again,
we would suggest that it is time for the international
community to consider seriously how best to assist
Djibouti in its peace initiative for Somalia, especially
in material ways. No doubt, the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti will elaborate on this aspect
during his statement.

Given the worrying humanitarian situation in
Somalia, the less than enthusiastic response to the 2000
United Nations Consolidated Appeal for Somalia is a
cause for serious concern. I hope that this open debate
will contribute to the sensitization of the donor
community to Somalia's acute needs and will
encourage a more generous response in the near future.

