Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office,
Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and
Mr. David Scharia, Officer-in-Charge of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
for their informative briefings.I would like to take
this opportunity to speak as Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), focusing
my remarks in the framework of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture.

The international community is facing a multitude
of challenges from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and from Al-Qaida and their respective
networks. Terrorist groups continue to adapt in
response to global counter-terrorism efforts, and the
Taliban remains a serious threat to the peace, stability
and security of Afghanistan. The Committee continues
to administer measures that include assets freezes,
travel bans and arms embargoes targeting designated
individuals and groups associated with ISIL, Al-Qaida
or the Taliban.

If the sanctions regimes are to operate effectively,
it is crucial to ensure that the Committee's work goes
in lockstep with the evolving global threat posed by
these groups. In that regard, the Committee's work is
supported by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2368 (2017) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, which continues to provide updated threat
assessments andmonitors the measures' implementation.
The Monitoring Team closely coordinates its work
with CTED and the Expert Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and
participates actively in all relevant activities under the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It
also regularly contributes to the Secretary-General's
reports on the threat posed by ISIL and the range of
United Nations efforts supporting Member States
in countering that threat. The Committee and the
Monitoring Team stand ready to work closely with the
new United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism in
executing its overarching mandate.

To fulfil the Committee's mandates, it is
also important to coordinate effectively with key
specialized agencies such as the International Air
Transport Association, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the World Customs Organization,
INTERPOL and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as with regional organizations such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The Monitoring
Team also plays a key role in this matter. In order to
see how the sanctions regime can be implemented more
effectively and to understand the national and regional
challenges to implementing the Council's measures, I
organize regional visits aimed at raising awareness of
the Committee's mandate. Such visits serve to share
the best practices employed by national authorities in
combating terrorism, as it relates to the mandate of
the Committee. In that regard, the Chair plans several
visits in the near future to Afghanistan, Uzbekistan and
the Russian Federation.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on
Member States to continue their engagement with the
work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team,
as it is essential to the maintenance of an up-to-date
and dynamic sanctions list. The Monitoring Team
updates list entries based on information provided by
Member States. I therefore encourage Member States
to keep the monitoring team informed. I also urge
those Member States that have not done so to submit
their implementation reports mandated under the
relevant resolutions.

It is also imperative that the Committee continues
to promote due process in its work, in particular
through the work of the Office of the Ombudsperson.
As Chair, I would like to thank all Member States for
their continued willingness to cooperate constructively
with the Committee, its monitoring team and the Office
of the Ombudsperson.

