Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): Lithuania welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). More
should be done to put an end to the suffering of the
millions of civilians trapped in the vicious Syrian civil
war. There is no higher value than human life. We all
must act in order to guarantee that aid is delivered in
a prompt and efficient manner through the most direct
routes, across all relevant border-crossing points.
We commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and all humanitarian partners for
their work.

It is the responsibility of the parties to the conflict,
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
to protect the civilian population and unconditionally
guarantee to those in need unhindered and immediate
access to aid.

When a Government is no longer in a position to
guarantee the safety and basic needs of its citizens
then it must not stand in the way of international relief
organizations to do so. Over the past three years, the
crucial principle has been repeatedly violated by all
parties to the conflict in Syria. However, the primary
responsibility lies with the Syrian Government.

Today we are witnessing in Syria massive and
brutal violations of human rights, some of which can
be characterized as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Aerial bombings of civilian areas and
starvation have become weapons in a war without
rules or restraints. Denying essential medical and
surgical supplies has become tactics. Every conceivable
abuse occurs daily in Syria. Children, women, the
elderly, Palestinian refugees, every religious or ethnic
minority - nobody is safe. Whole generations of
Syrians are at risk of being lost.

The Syrians are waiting for our help. We commend
neighbouring States, in particular Lebanon and Jordan,
for keeping their borders open for Syrian refugees,
including Palestinians. Resolution 2165 (2014) is only
a partial and temporary measure. The ultimate goal
remains a peaceful settlement of conflict through
political process. We welcome the appointment of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura. We hope that peace will be restored in Syria.
Peace is the only hope for the people of Syria.

The Syrian conflict is no longer a regional problem.
It has become a global threat to international peace
and security. The Council must not fail to take Article
41 measures in the event of non-compliance with
resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) by any Syrian
party, including by referring the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court.

