Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union. The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union- Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia- and the
associated countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his excellent
briefing.

If, as he has underscored, the ceasefire has held
for several months in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, developments on the ground have in part been
disappointing since the Council's July debate. There is,
however, a glimmer of hope to be seen in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement: the success
of the preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, recently held in Gaborone. That success has
been highlighted by most of the speakers.
The European Union would like once again to
emphasize the importance of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, which is a key element for the re-
establishment of the rule of law, democracy and
national sovereignty in the Congo. That the meeting
was attended by President Joseph Kabila, political
movements and representatives of civil society shows
the Congolese people's resolve to take charge of their
own future and to work together for the establishment
of a new political order. The success of the meeting
also crowns the preparatory efforts of the facilitator,
Sir Ketumile Masire, and his team. We hope that the
spirit of Gaborone will give impetus to the peace
process.

Admittedly, Gaborone is only a first step. It is
important that it now be followed up in practice and
that the dialogue proper, which will start on 15 October
in Addis Ababa, go hand in hand with and stimulate
other aspects of the Lusaka Agreement. The parties
have displayed a constructive spirit. They need to
maintain it and to show political courage and creativity
if this historic opportunity for national reconciliation is
to be seized and fully utilized. As the representative of
the United Kingdom pointed out, the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, must
stand by the Congolese people throughout the process.
The European Union and its member States have
already contributed to facilitation work and are
prepared to continue their support.

We cannot congratulate ourselves on similar
progress on the question of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR). While the exercise is indeed
complex, it remains one of the pillars for resolving the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
European Union, as the representative of France
pointed out, is convinced that a solution to this delicate
problem would be within reach if a sincere and
courageous bilateral dialogue between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda were developed.
Despite discreet contacts between President Kabila and
President Kagame, we have the impression that a
climate of mistrust continues to prevail between the
two countries. We therefore invite the Secretary-
General- as other speakers have done, notably the
representative of the United States- to call upon
President Kabila and President Kagame during his trip
to step up dialogue and seek mutually acceptable
solutions. In the meantime, it is of the utmost
importance that negative forces not receive any
material or logistic support.
It is equally important for the overall settlement
of the Congolese issue that President Kabila and
President Buyoya discuss the presence of Burundian
rebels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The European Union emphasizes that the
international community's action on DDRRR needs to
be coordinated, and it is up to the United Nations to
take the lead. The United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is already authorized to assist with DDRRR
within the limits of its resources. According to how the
situation evolves, the configuration, mandate and
strength of the mission will have to be adapted so that
it can provide decisive support in the implementation
of a precise and detailed plan for that purpose.

For the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement,
innovative arrangements and formats have been
established for consultation and cooperation between
the United Nations, the Organization of African Unity
and the countries of the region. The meeting between
the Security Council and the Lusaka Political
Committee in February 2001 proved productive. We
understand that a similar meeting is planned in the near
future. The European Union welcomes this and hopes
that cooperation in New York will be matched on the
ground by creative initiatives such as the co-location of
the Joint Military Commission (JMC) and MONUC
headquarters in Kinshasa.

The European Union reaffirms once again that
only a political solution can bring peace to the Congo
and lay the foundation for the reconstruction and
economic recovery of the region. Abandoning the
military option will make possible an increase in aid
and international cooperation. The European Union has
declared its readiness to mobilize sizeable resources.
Such assistance, which could amount to as much as 120
million euros, will be made available in the light of
tangible progress in the peace process and in the inter-
Congolese dialogue.

As we stated here together a month ago following
Ambassador Morjane's briefing, the peace process has
not become irreversible. The intervening month has
proved particularly disappointing in this regard. Suffice
it to mention the situation in Kisangani, which has still
not been demilitarized, in spite of the Council's
resolutions, or the incomplete state of disengagement,
or certain problems encountered by MONUC, such as
the unacceptable attack on a MONUC helicopter in
eastern Congo. We again call on the parties to honour
in full the commitments voluntarily entered into by
them in signing the Lusaka Agreement and the other
agreements that followed.

The international community - and the Security
Council in particular - must continue to keep a close
watch on developments on the ground, seize upon any
openings as they arise and step in when the situation
threatens to get out of hand. The Secretary-General's
visit is a significant sign of his personal involvement
and of the attention which the Organization continues
to pay to the conflict in the Great Lakes region. The
European Union wishes the Secretary-General every
success in that important mission. We also wish every
success to Mr. Ngongi, the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who in the next few days will
be taking over the tasks of Ambassador Morjane,

whom I would like once more to congratulate and
thank.

For its part, following bilateral visits in August
2001 by the French Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Hubert Vedrine, and the United Kingdom Secretary of
State for International Development, Clare Short, the
Union will be sending to the region, in September
2001, its current President, the Belgian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Louis Michel, and the European Union
High Representative, Javier Solana. That visit will
reaffirm the European Union's strong commitment to
the peace process and its solidarity with the region's
long-suffering people.

