Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Whatever pretexts
terrorists may employ to justify their murderous acts,
there can simply be no justification for what they do.
Terrorism is nothing less but an assault on our very
humanity. Horrific events, like the massacre of school
children in Peshawar three days ago, reinforce the
sense of dramatic urgency for the Council to continue
focusing sharply on and acting with resolve against
threats posed by international terrorism.

In that regard, the initiative of the Chadian
presidency to take forward the Council's counter-
terrorism agenda by highlighting the linkages of
terrorism with transnational organized crime is
commendable and highly pertinent, as it provides a
better understanding of how terrorist groups manage
to sustain their activities by collaborating with
transnational criminal groups, and sometimes by
mimicking them.

As the concept note (S/2014/869, annex) suggests,
from Afghanistan and Syria to West Africa and the
Sahel, the linkages between terrorism and transnational
crime act as a force multiplier. They strengthen terrorist
groups by generating funding and providing logistical
support, sharing skills and tactics, to such a degree that
that at times the dividing line between them is extremely
blurred. These interrelated security threats not only
take advantage of instability, but are themselves drivers
of conflict. Their combination amplifies the challenges
to broader conflict-prevention and -resolution efforts
and demands a comprehensive and multidimensional
response, as most representatives who spoke before me
have stressed.

Let me focus today on three key areas, the targeting
of which can disrupt those linkages and significantly
diminish terrorists' ability to sustain their activities.
The firstis countering money-laundering and illicit
financial flows. Various illicit techniques are used to
mask the origins and recipients of funds, as well as
to divert funds to terrorist groups. States' abilities to
effectively identify and prevent the illicit cross-border
movement of cash, to tackle head-on the emerging
trends and sources of illicit financing, which are often
linked to specific criminal activities, to set adequate
regulations for alternative remittances, and to stem the
abuse of charities and non-profit organizations for the
purpose of terrorist financing is a crucial component of

counter-terrorism efforts. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the importance of the full implementation
of the comprehensive international standards set forth
by the Financial Action Task Force, as well as enhanced
engagement with similar regional bodies.
The second key area is countering illicit activities
that are used as a self-sustained means to raise funds.
Terrorist organizations increasingly rely on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, drug smuggling,
human trafficking for coerced labour and sexual
exploitation, kidnapping for ransom, and illegal
trade in antiquities, ivory, and wildlife, all of which
are typically attributable to transnational criminal
networks. Given the diversity of the activities and the
environments in which they take place, it is important
that law-enforcement measures not be disconnected
from those contexts and that they take into account the
particular routes, commodities and other specificities.

The third area is countering the illicit movement
of terrorists, arms and equipment. Over the past few
years, we have seen unprecedented mobility and flow
of foreign terrorist fighters to theatres of conflict. Their
recruitment strategies and methods seem to evolve
faster than our responses to the threat, and their reach
seems to have no boundaries. On the other hand, the
much-too-easy access to illicit arms and weapons and
the unhindered flow of such weapons in and across
conflict-affected areas suffering from borders that
are poorly protected, if at all, is changing the security
environment and placing civilians under increasingly
higher risk of harm. Effective physical border controls,
information sharing and analytical capability at border
crossings, as well as effective sanctions and arms-
embargo implementation are required in order to
disrupt such transboundary flows.

We would also like to note that, even if the threats
posed by terrorism and transnational organized crime
are distinct, the means to counter them are often closely
related, be it securing borders, tracking money flows,
disrupting illicit ventures or curbing the movement
of criminals and terrorists. This reinforces the need
for a coordination and coherence in international and
regional efforts to respond to these threats, both within
and between organizations. That applies to the United
Nations system itself, whose entities have developed
vast expertise on dealing with these two phenomena
separately but need to engage more closely and build
on one other's work, especially with regard to capacity-
building. The United Nations presence on the ground
should be an integral part of these efforts, and the
Council should take that into account when designing
mandates for peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and in the work of country teams.

With regard to disrupting terrorist networks and
undercutting their action base, the One United Nations
principle is as valid as can ever be. Fragmentation
of efforts in a typical silo manner will help neither
counter-terrorism nor conflict resolution, nor ultimately
development efforts on the ground.

Given the scope and nature of the terrorist threat
and existing linkages with the criminal underworld, the
importance of regional approaches cannot be stressed
enough. The African Union-led Regional Cooperation
Initiative, the Nouakchott Process, and the activities of
the Economic Community of West African States are
good examples of regional cooperation in West Africa
and the Sahel. The open debate that took place in the
Council two days ago under the Chadian presidency
(see S/PV.7343) was a good opportunity to reflect on
how the cooperation between the United Nations and its
African regional partners could be further advanced,
including in countering terrorism.

Before I conclude, let me express my delegation's
hope that resolution 2189 (2014), which was adopted
today and co-sponsored by Lithuania, will make a
tangible contribution towards mobilizing efforts at
all levels to address the phenomenon. In that regard,
we look forward to the Secretary-General's report
with recommendations of concrete options both for
strengthening Member States' capabilities, as well as
United Nations activities needed to disrupt the nexus
between terrorism and transnational organized crime,
and to further discussions on this issue.

Finally, Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to
be made later today on behalf of the European Union.

