Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Like
others, I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Annadif for his briefing, which
is always excellent, and also Ambassador Skoog for
leading the mission to Mali and for his briefing today.
I would also like to join others in welcoming Foreign
Minister Coulibaly back to New York. It is great to
see him here committed to moving forward on the
peace process in Mali and undertaking the security
challenges there.

Like others as well, I take this opportunity to
express our deepest condolences and sympathy to the
families of the three peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) who made the ultimate sacrifice in
the name of peace during last week's attacks, as well as
to the Governments Chad and the Niger. We also wish
those injured in the attacks a very speedy recovery.

Foreign Minister Coulibaly vowed to the Security
Council in January (see S/PV.8163) that his Government
was committed to making progress on the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In addition,
also in January, the signatories to the Agreement
agreed to a revised timeline - or "chronogram", as
it is referred to - which promised major gains in the
Peace Agreement implementation by March. Now, in
mid-April, there is still no substantive progress in the
implementation of the Agreement. The United States
has expressed concern many times in this Chamber,
and the Council has made similar declarations in its
statements and resolutions, that time is running out for
the peace process in Mali. Yet we see little progress
from the parties, despite our repeated sounding of
the alarm.

In January the Security Council unanimously
declared its intention, absent progress on the timeline,
to respond with appropriate steps. Our tools include
the sanctions regime we have authorized for political
spoilers who engage in obstruction, including through
the purposeful delay of the implementation of the
Agreement. That also includes spoilers who obstruct
through collusion with transnational organized
criminals or those who plan or conduct attacks,
regardless of affiliation. We look forward to working
with our Council colleagues to identify, in a careful
and balanced way, individuals who fit that criteria and
proceed accordingly.

There is truly no more time to waste, because Mali
faces a desperate and worsening security crisis. We
are alarmed about the deteriorating security situation
in central Mali, in particular where violent extremists
exploit absent State authority by increasing their control
over disputed territory, restricting traditional practices,
forcing the closure of schools and threatening civilians
with violence if they cooperate with the Malian
authorities. We should also recognize that violent
extremists build their own community relations and
administration in the absence of Government.

The dangers continue to grow, as the number of
improvised-explosive-device attacks affecting civilians
have increased dramatically. The recent doubling of
lethal attacks against MINUSMA and Malian defence
and security forces is also extremely troubling.
However, the lack of State authority is not the only
problem. When the State moves into territories, it must
be seen as a positive thing for the local population.
MINUSMA's support to deploy Malian armed forces
in order to establish State presence in central Mali is
crucial, but the operations must respect human rights,
promote accountability and engage local communities.
We are particularly concerned about the reports of
possible extra-judicial killings in Diora last week, as
well as other outstanding allegations of human rights
abuses and violations by security forces. We look
forward to the results of Government and MINUSMA
investigations into such allegations, including
appropriate steps to ensure accountability.

As others have done today, the United States
commends the conclusion ofthe technical and financial
agreements among the United Nations, the European
Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel, and we
applaud the ongoing operationalization of the Joint
Force. With half a billion dollars in pledges at the
February donors conference in Brussels, a technical
agreement to provide the Force with logistical support
and continuing regional efforts with partners to find
holistic solutions to the region's problems, it is clear that
Mali has dedicated partners that contribute their time,
resources, political support and, in some instances,
their lives to counter the violent extremist threat. It is
all the more reason for Mali's signatory parties to the
Peace Agreement to do their part.

We look forward to the results of the Secretary-
General's strategic review of MINUSMA next
month and urge the review team to make specific,
clear and achievable recommendations for the
Council's consideration, with the inclusion of specific
recommendations for specific actors to undertake.

The situation in Mali is critical. The brave and
courageous peacekeepers in MINUSMA and the Malian
people deserve better than what the signatory parties to
the Peace Agreement are delivering. MINUSMA cannot
solve the current conflict in Mali. The Government of
Mali and the signatory parties must chart the way to
resolving Mali's underlying conflict so the country can
turn its full attention to providing for its citizens and
addressing the terrorist threat. We look forward to their
immediate progress on the most recent road map.

