Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire thanks the Polish presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this ministerial debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation would like to welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland among us
today and to congratulate him on his excellent conduct
of our work. My country also thanks the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for the quality of
his report (S/2018/462) and takes note of his relevant
recommendations to improve the protection of civilians
in conflict situations. My delegation would like to
express its appreciation to Mr. Yves Daccord and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their constant commitment to
making the protection of civilians a primary concern of
the international community.

Almost two decades after the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999), which enshrines the inclusion
of the protection of civilians at the heart of the Security
Council's agenda, there is no doubt that considerable
progress has been made in strengthening the
international normative and institutional architecture
aimed at protecting civilians, including humanitarian
personnel, from atrocities committed during conflicts.
My country regrets, however, that in different
parts of the world, multidimensional situations of
crisis and conflict are causing great loss of human life
and massive violations of human rights, in particular
of such vulnerable persons as women and children.
Sexual violence and the systematic use of explosives
in urban areas have become real weapons of war in the
hands of State and non-State actors alike, in contempt
of international humanitarian law and of human
rights. In addition, the persistence of political crises
and the proliferation of weapons, as well as changes
in the typology of conflicts due to the emergence of
asymmetric actors such as terrorist groups and cross-
border criminal networks, render more complex the
challenges to be overcome in order to strengthen
protection for civilians in conflict.

The deterioration of the protection of civilians,
correctly described in the report of the Secretary-
General, challenges us. It stresses the need for urgent
measures at the national, regional and international
levels to ensure strict compliance with international
standards and practices for the protection of civilians.

Cote d'Ivoire endorses the Secretary-General's
recommendations to Member States concerning the
adoption and implementation of national strategies to
strengthen protection for civilians. Having experienced
the difficulties of a post-electoral armed conflict and
its harmful effects on civilian populations, the Ivorian
authorities are fully aware that the protection of
civilians must necessarily begin with the training and
heightened awareness of all concerned.

On the strength of that conviction, Cote d'Ivoire
has adopted a preventive approach since the end of
the post-election crisis. It prioritizes capacity-building
and awareness-raising among national security
institutions with respect to international standards for
the protection of civilians and assistance to internally
displaced persons. With the implementation of the
national strategy for security sector reform and the
adoption of the military programming law, the Ivoirian
Government is concretizing its desire to make the
national armed forces a republican institution at the
service of peace, respectful of human rights and
committed to a new social pact based on mutual trust
with the civilian population.

As a signatory to the Oslo Convention, the Arms
Trade Treaty and the Economic Community of West
African States Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related
Materials, Cote d'Ivoire has supported its security
sector reform with concrete measures in the area of
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants. As part of that same preventive
approach, my country has proceeded to destroy and
secure stockpiles of weapons, with the support of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and
international partners.

With the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), of
11 November 2009, the Security Council recognized
that peacekeeping operations are an important tool at its
disposal for ensuring the protection of civilians. Also,
the Council reiterated its commitment to addressing
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
of human rights.

Because they have the legitimacy to act on our
behalf and also have the resources and a range of tools
to do so, peacekeeping operations are undoubtedly the
best instrument to ensure effectively the protection of
civilians and humanitarian personnel in countries in
conflict. It is that profound conviction that motivates
the unreserved support of Cote d'Ivoire for the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, whereby the Secretary-
General intends to carry out the necessary reforms to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The protection of civilians and humanitarian
personnel, as prescribed by international standards, is
possible, effective and sustainable only in a supportive
environment, based on a political process for crisis
resolution and peacebuilding to which the parties to
the dispute subscribe freely. Cote d'Ivoire is convinced
that United Nations peacekeeping missions can
effectively contribute to the prevention of atrocities
against civilians, including by acting as ceasefire
monitors and as facilitators of political dialogue
and national reconciliation, as well as by supporting
transitional justice.

Peacekeeping missions are effective tools for
promoting the rule of law through monitoring, reporting
on human rights violations and supporting the effective
implementation of accountability mechanisms. They
also create favourable conditions for the provision
of humanitarian assistance and the safe, dignified
repatriation of refugees. Peacekeeping operations also
have human and logistical resources that facilitate
preventive tactical deployments in areas with high
potential for violence against civilians. Cote d'Ivoire
is therefore pleased that eight of the 15 peacekeeping
operations deployed around the world have mandates
and components dedicated to the protection of civilians.
On the eve of the twentieth anniversary of its
inclusion on the Security Council's agenda, the
protection of civilians remains a matter of concern
for the international community. Despite the many
persisting challenges, Cote d'Ivoire shares the hope
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report and
remains attentive to his appeal to States Members of
the United Nations and all actors to step up efforts for
improved protection of civilians in conflict. That is a
noble cause, and it is a part of our responsibility: the
maintenance of international peace and security.

