Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, since this is the first time I am making a
statement here in an open meeting of the Security
Council in the month of December, I wish to extend my
congratulations for your assumption of the presidency
and I wish you every success in this task. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland as well
for briefing us on the updated aide-memoire and the
road map regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) ofthe United Nations.

The various and serious violations that take place
in armed conflicts affect the security of millions of
civilians in different regions of the world. In particular,
they affect the most vulnerable, such as women,
children and the elderly. I cannot fail to mention here
the terrible deaths of nine children in a bombing in
Afghanistan in recent days. This is deplorable act,
which must be duly investigated.

Apart from combatants, civilians are the main
victims in armed conflicts, not only due to accidents,
but even worse, as a result of a policy of war. This
means that at the heart of the Security Council's work
should be the implementation of its mandate to ensure
international peace and security by dealing with this
problem. Similarly, protecting non-combatant civilians,
whether humanitarian or international personnel, is
unfortunately a growing concern in the international
arena. The periodic updating and review of this matter
and the presentation of the updated aide-memoire and
road map have enabled us to see the growing
importance ofthis question.

The culture of protection is as it was stated by the
Secretary-General when he introduced his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts in 2001, in
which he asked States to make the culture of protection
a reality. The development of a plan of action in this
sphere, we feel, is the cornerstone for implementing an
international policy of this culture of protection.
Applying a programme of dissemination is a concrete
step forward towards awareness-raising regarding this
issue for the various actors involved, whether civilians
or government authorities.

The updated aide-memoire and the road map,
which have been presented to us today, must be part of
this common basis for establishing the level of
responsibility towards civilian populations, both for the
Security Council and for the Member States of the
United Nations. In this regard, both documents should
serve as a guide for the adoption of future draft
resolutions related to this matter.

The situation of displaced civilians deserves
special attention. Unfortunately, and far too frequently,
there is forced conscription of children to be used as
soldiers, in particular in some regions of Africa, but
also in some regions of the continent where I come
from. In far too many cases, the international
community has witnessed atrocities carried out against
the civilian population, as Mr. Egeland has
emphasized, using rape and mutilation as weapons of
war.

Close cooperation with the various available
international and national actors, including the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, is necessary so that
an early warning network can be established, which
will allow for prevention of conflicts. Preventive
measures, along with political will, will help us to
avoid a repetition of the unfortunate events that we
witnessed, for example, in Rwanda and Burundi just a
few years ago.

The United Nations lost its innocence this year.
Until recently, we had been used to the various warring
factions throughout the world respecting international
humanitarian staff from the various United Nations
agencies. It was clear that United Nations staff were
not a military target. In the past, even when accidents
did happen and United Nations staff lost their lives, the
Organization as a whole was never considered a
military target by one ofthe parties to a conflict, as it is
now in Iraq. Therefore, we need to take concrete
actions. For example, my country feels that sanctions
should be reserved for very specific areas, focused
directly on those responsible and avoid negatively
affecting the civilian population. Similarly, we believe
that the social dimension of crises should be taken into
consideration because the Security Council has a role
to play with regard to the social threats affecting peace
and security.

In conclusion, we urge Member States to apply in
their legislation those two important documents: the
updated aide-memoire and the road map. We would
also suggest that the Security Council, as it did with the
earlier aide-memoire, endorse the document in a
presidential statement. We would thereby most likely
take a step towards protecting civilians in armed
conflict.
