Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Botswana is delighted that
the Security Council has reached consensus on the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) until 31 May 1997. The
contribution that UN SMIH is making to the betterment of
the lives of the ordinary people of Haiti is beyond doubt:
Violence has abated somewhat in recent weeks, and the
security situation has improved, along with the capacity of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) to deal with the
challenges facing it. These are no mean achievements in a
country in which the culture of violence has been a
dominant factor for generations. The people of Haiti
undoubtedly welcome and appreciate the role of the
international community in assisting them to rebuild a more
stable and peaceful society.

While it is important to acknowledge the achievements
made thus far, it is essential to recognize that the process
of rebuilding a democratic and politically stable Haiti

 

remains fragile and reversible. There is clear evidence
that some former members of the Armed Forces of Haiti,
which have been responsible for politically motivated
violence in the past, still have access to funding and
weapons. They are ready to destabilize the Government
at any time, and they therefore pose a serious threat to
Haiti's transition to democracy. Suggestions that some of
these groups may be using neighbouring countries as a
base need to be taken seriously. The international
community, and the neighbouring countries in particular,
must do all they can to ensure that political instability,
economic stagnation and undemocratic rule do not return
to Haiti, with all the attendant regional implications.

It is encouraging to note that the Haitian National
Police has shown marked improvement in the execution
of its duties and increased accountability, which in turn
inspire public confidence in police protection. However,
the easy availability of weapons, the high incidence of
armed criminal activity and the fact that the first police
officers graduated only 18 months ago are clear
indications that the HNP faces formidable challenges in
its efforts to maintain a secure and stable environment.

Botswana supports the Secretary-General's
observation in paragraph 6 of the Addendum to his report
that for now the military and civilian police components
of UNSMIH should be maintained at current strengths
subject, of course, to constant reviews, depending on the
improvements in the political situation on the ground.
UN SMIH is still very necessary to help the HNP
consolidate its hold on the security situation in Haiti. My
delegation therefore welcomes with appreciation the
flexibility that was demonstrated by members of the
Council in reaching agreement on operative paragraph 2
of the draft resolution that we are about to adopt. I extend
the gratitude of my delegation to the "Friends of the
Secretary-General for Haiti" for the tireless efforts they
have made to accommodate the concerns of all members
of the Council.

The economic rehabilitation and reconstruction of
the Haitian national economy is an indispensable part of
the consolidation of peace and democracy in that country.
It will be difficult to rebuild stable national institutions
when the mass of the people do not have a stake in the
economy of the country. In this respect, we commend the
countries that have contributed generously to the Trust
Fund or made concessional resources available to the
Government of Haiti. These contributions, as well as the
dedication and commitment to duty of the men and

 

women of UNSMIH, are monumental in the stabilization of
Haiti. We encourage them to continue the good work.

Botswana has always maintained that the international
community must always aim at ensuring that the financial,
material and human resources invested in the cause of
peace do not go to waste due to premature withdrawal of a
peacekeeping mission. What is of paramount importance is
that, when a peacekeeping mission is withdrawn from
theatre, there should be no need for redeployment within a
relatively short period of time. In other words, UNSMIH
should, at the end of the day, leave behind a stable and
prosperous country and a people that can look to the future
with pride and dignity. My delegation in therefore pleased
that operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution requests
the Secretary-General to submit a report by 31 March 1997
that includes recommendations on the nature of a future
international presence in Haiti.

