Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I should like
to join others in welcoming the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, and the representative of the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina - the
Minister of Security, Mr. Barisa Colak - to the
Council. I thank them both for their interesting and
enlightening briefings today. I thank also the Secretary-
General and Lord Ashdown for the written report to the
Council, which is an impressive and detailed account
of the notable advances that are being made on the
ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not least with
regard to structural reforms. Although key legislation
to a large extent still remains to be implemented, the
achievements made so far do, indeed, give good reason
for the optimism expressed here today.
The Ambassador of Luxembourg will shortly
make a statement on behalf of the European Union.
Denmark fully associates itself with that statement.

As we share most of the views and observations
already expressed by others today, I can limit myself to
three main points.

First, looking at the developments that have taken
place since November, when the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina was last debated in the Security
Council, it is appropriate to commend the European
Force (EUFOR) for the smooth transition from the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and, not least, for the
proactive and hands-on efforts to reinforce security and
stability made by EUFOR from the very beginning of
its mandate. The division of labour and cooperation
with the remaining NATO headquarters in Sarajevo
have proved faultless, and, thus, as we see it, there is
no need for change here.

Secondly, we commend the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, for the way he has managed to achieve
visible progress while maintaining the difficult balance
between, on the one hand, using his Bonn powers
proactively and, on the other, ensuring a gradual
transfer of responsibility and political ownership to the
polity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support the
gradual downsizing of the Office of the High
Representative. But the job is not finished yet; and as
we may be contemplating adjustments to the Bonn
powers, we should do so in a measured way and with
due attention to the likelihood of new crises in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Finally, and most importantly, with regard to
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, Denmark is strongly
committed to the European destiny of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Membership in NATO's Partnership for
Peace programme is within reach, and, hopefully,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will soon take up the
demanding but also fulfilling task of negotiating a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union. The road ahead is clear, but so are the
conditions that the Government in Sarajevo will have
to fulfil.

That is particularly true with regard to full and
unconditional cooperation with ICTY by both the
national Government and the entities. We welcome the
progress that we have seen lately, which was confirmed
this morning by Lord Ashdown, but more is required
for full cooperation. The fact that Radovan Karadzic,
Ratko Mladic and other persons indicted for war
crimes are still at large continues to cast a dark shadow
on all of the other progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on the efforts that the international
community has been making for more than a decade
now in that country.

I should like to end on a positive note. After
listening to the briefings today, we are convinced that
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina are on track,
but not to the extent that foreign assistance should
cease right away. Denmark is presently preparing a
substantial assistance programme focussing on local
economic development, and our support for civil-
society-building will continue. But I think that we all
sense the strong commitment of the Government and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take charge in
the forming of a better, more prosperous and
democratic future together, and we welcome that.

