The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on standby arrangements for
peace-keeping, document 8/1995/943.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has noted with interest
and appreciation the report of the Secretary-General of
10 November 1995 on standby arrangements for
peace-keeping operations (S/1995/943). It recalls
earlier statements by the President of the Security
Council on this subject and strongly supports the
efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance the
capacity of the United Nations for the planning, rapid
deployment and reinforcement and logistical support
of peace-keeping operations.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States not yet doing so to participate in the standby
arrangements. It invites them, and those States
already participating in the arrangements, to provide
information in as detailed a manner as possible on
those elements which they are ready to make
available to the United Nations. It also invites them
to identify components, such as logistic support
elements and sea/airlift resources, presently under-
represented in the arrangement. In this context the
Security Council welcomes the initiative undertaken
by the Secretariat for the creation of a standby
Headquarters component within the Mission
Planning Service of the Department of Peace-
keeping Operations. The Security Council also joins
with the Secretary-General in the establishment of
partnerships between those troop contributing
countries that need equipment for units that may be
provided to the United Nations and those
Governments ready to provide such equipment and
other support.

"The Security Council looks forward to further
reports from the Secretary-General on the progress
of the standby arrangements initiative and undertakes
to keep the matter under review."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/61.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.
