Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also wish to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Sergey Lavrov, on his outstanding
performance.

As Council members are aware, constructive
discussions were held one week ago between United
Nations officials and an Israeli delegation regarding the
parameters for the Secretary-General's initiative to
establish a fact-finding team with regard to recent
events in the Jenin refugee camp. Since the
presentation of the Secretary-General's initiative and
the adoption of resolution 1405 (2002), considerable
disinformation and confusion have been generated
regarding the mandate of the fact-finding team. Israel's
position is that any fact-finding team must have its
objectives and parameters clearly established prior to
its departure to the region.

In Israel's view, the principles governing the
operation of the team should have been based on both
the language of operative paragraph 2 of resolution
1405 (2002) and on established United Nations
guidelines for fact-finding. Resolution 1405 (2002)
determined that the team must "develop accurate
information", not reach any legal conclusions or make
recommendations. In calling for an examination of
events, Israel did not think it too much to expect that
the team address the activities of both sides, including
the use of a United Nations-administered camp as a
centre for terrorist activity, in violation of international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions.
United Nations fact-finding principles, as set out
in General Assembly resolution 46/59 of 1991,
stipulate that the fact-finding report be limited "to a
presentation of findings of a factual nature". The
resolution includes provisions regarding
confidentiality, the right of States "at all stages of the
fact-finding process" to express their views, the
obligation for the fact-finding team to respect local
laws and regulations and to engage in its mission in
cooperation with the parties concerned. Israel had a
right to expect that the United Nations would accept
the very guidelines and practices it itself has
established regarding the conduct of fact-finding
missions.

It is these considerations that lie behind Israel's
reservations regarding the mandate of the fact-finding
team. The six points of concern which the Israeli
Cabinet raised, and sought to resolve, stem directly
from those established guidelines and from operative
paragraph 2 of resolution 1405 (2002), which set out
the parametres for the Secretary General's initiative.

I should like to point out that while we
understand the international community's wish to
develop an accurate, thorough and balanced report on
the recent events in Jenin, we should not ignore the
reports of the international press and of representatives
of independent organizations present in Jenin that have
surfaced in recent days. Those reports have confirmed
Israel's position that what occurred in Jenin was an
intense battle between the Israeli military and
Palestinian terrorists, that weapons were widespread in
the camps, and that many buildings had been booby-
trapped with explosive devices.

From the very beginning, Palestinian statements
were overly alarmist, which is actually quite
symptomatic of their hyperbolic discourse regarding
Israel's actions in general. With respect to the alleged
massacre in Jenin, Palestinian spokesmen had initially
claimed that thousands of bodies were buried under the
rubble; then the figure was reduced to hundreds; and
now they must face the unfortunate outcome of the
fierce battle that took place: 47 Palestinian gunmen
killed, 23 Israeli soldiers killed, as well as seven
Palestinian civilians, whose deaths we profoundly
regret.

Indeed, today it is reported that Palestinian
officials themselves are now putting the number of
people killed in the Jenin camp at 56, and presenting
the events in Jenin not as a massacre but as a fierce
battle. That finding was disclosed to reporters by the
Director of Chairman Arafat's Fatah movement for the
Northern West Bank, Kadoura Mousa Kadoura, after a
team of four Palestinian-appointed investigators had
visited the camp.

Although we will surely be accused of quoting
out of context, it is still necessary to relay the words of
a Palestinian gunman who fought in the battle in Jenin,
which have confirmed this. A member of Islamic Jihad
who was responsible for building and hiding explosive
devices in Jenin was interviewed by Al-Ahram Weekly
and related how Palestinians in J enin prepared
themselves to trap and ambush Israeli soldiers. He said:

"We had more than 50 houses booby-
trapped around the camp. We cut off lengths of
main water pipes and packed them with
explosives and nails. Then we placed them about
four metres apart throughout the houses - in
cupboards, under sinks, in sofas".

Another, senior member of Islamic Jihad, Tabaat
Mardawi, told CNN that 1,000 to 2,000 bombs and
booby traps were spread throughout the camp.

Although there were unintended civilian
casualties in the gun battle in Jenin, as there are in any
conflict, those deaths, regrettable and saddening as
they may be, do not constitute a massacre. Those
casualties stem from the fact that armed Palestinians
fired from populated areas and built a terrorist network
in the very midst of the civilian population, with
blatant disregard for the safety and well-being of
Palestinian civilians. The accusations that hundreds or
thousands of civilians were killed in J enin - made just
a short while ago in this very Council - have been
shown to be deliberate acts of misinformation. We have
even received reports that Palestinians have dug up
bodies buried elsewhere and reburied them in mass
graves in Jenin to bolster their claims of Israeli
atrocities.

I believe that these facts might serve to caution
the Council against accepting every allegation as fact
and heeding every call for an investigation. Had the
international community known two weeks ago what is
known today about the nature of the events in Jenin, it
is doubtful that a fact-finding effort would have been
considered appropriate.

I believe the Council might also wish to consider
why massacres such as those that have claimed the
lives of hundreds of Israeli civilians - including that
on Passover eve - in pizza parlours and in
discotheques do not also merit the most serious
international attention. Would it not be fair, beyond the
condemnation of Palestinian suicide bombings as
"morally repugnant", to investigate such deliberate
massacres of Israeli civilians or to examine Chairman
Arafat's direct involvement in such attacks? Is the
Palestinian terrorist campaign immune from
humanitarian law or from serious international
scrutiny? I hope that Council members can appreciate
the sense of dismay that has been generated among
many Israelis by the Security Council's failure to adopt
resolutions that respond adequately and decisively to
the countless deliberate terrorist atrocities against
Israelis.

With regard to the situation at the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, the Palestinian side has sought
to portray as an Israeli siege what is in reality a hostage
crisis. Armed Palestinian terrorists, in violation of
basic humanitarian norms, have taken over a religious
shrine, fired from it, prevented the individuals inside
from leaving and desecrated the sanctity of that holy
place, as confirmed by three Armenian monks who
managed to escape from the scene.

Fortunately, negotiations between Palestinian and
Israeli representatives have been constructive. A
number of Palestinians have been released from the
Church in recent days, and we are hopeful that a full
and non-violent resolution of the stand-off will be
reached very shortly.

We have reached a satisfactory, non-violent
resolution of the situation at the Ramallah compound.
The Government of Israel agreed to a proposal made
by President Bush that the incarceration of those
responsible for Cabinet Minister Ze'evi's murder and
other terrorist operatives given refuge in the compound
take place in Palestinian territory, under United States
and British supervision, so as to avoid impunity and
prevent the application of what is by now the well-
recorded revolving-door policy adopted by the
Palestinian Authority.

Chairman Arafat is now able to move around at
will and to exercise his full authority as the leader of
the Palestinian people. The choice of whether to
prevent or to promote terrorism is entirely in Chairman
Arafat's own hands. For the sake of peace in the
region, it is imperative that he not incite his people to
hatred and to violence, but rather that he act as a force
for peace.

I would also like to point out that Israel has taken
substantial steps towards the implementation of
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) and has
proceeded with its withdrawal from Palestinian cities.
The implementation of Palestinian responsibilities
under resolution 1402 (2002), however, has yet even to
begin. Failure by the Palestinian side to fulfil the
requirements set out by the Security Council will
impede our progress towards a resumption of political
dialogue. The Council should focus not only on Israel's
actions, but also on the Palestinian side's blatant and
continuing refusal to agree on a meaningful ceasefire,
to end terrorism and incitement and to cooperate with
General Zinni, as called for in resolution 1402 (2002).
Only action by both sides can move us towards an end
of violence and terrorism and towards a political
resolution.

Finally, certain members of the international
community are now working to determine how best to
restart a political dialogue. Prime Minister Sharon will
be arriving next week in Washington, where he will
discuss his ideas and his proposals on how to breathe
new life into the peace process. Israel fully understands
that the Palestinians are, and will always be, our
partners and our neighbours and that only through
dialogue and negotiations, conducted in a spirit of
nonviolence and mutual recognition, can we
reinvigorate the spirit of peace and reconciliation that
will yield a just and lasting solution to the conflict in
our region.

