Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want
to begin by conveying our thoughts and prayers to
the people of China, as well as to those affected by
the school tragedy that we have just heard about this
morning. I know that the facts are still incomplete, but
from what we have heard so far, it is heartbreaking. The
United States stands with the students and the families
in prayer.

I want to thank our briefers, as well as Senegal,
Ethiopia and Egypt, for their contributions to this
meeting. We truly value their leadership in the
promotion of cooperation between the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations.

The African Union is an indispensable partner to
both America and the United Nations in promoting
peace and security in Africa. It has a unique capacity
to anticipate crises, mediate conflicts and deploy troops
and police on short notice. It does so, moreover, in some
of the most challenging environments in the world.

We applaud the increasing leadership the AU has
displayed in contributing to peace operations and
battling terrorist and insurgent groups. In Somalia,
the AU quickly deployed to provide security for a
fledgling Government in 2007. A decade later, thanks
to the bravery and courage of the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries, Somalia is on
a gradual path toward stability and peace. In Darfur,
the AU partnered with the United Nations to stabilize a
complex conflict.

Across the continent, the AU is partnering with
subregional organizations and countries to respond to
emerging and complex threats - from tense electoral
transitions in West Africa to Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin. We value our cooperation with our African
partners. It is in the interest of all ofus to work for peace
and prosperity in Africa. The question is not whether
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council will continue to improve our cooperation, but
rather how we can best work together to promote peace
and security.

Progress has been achieved thanks to the work
of both organizations, but there is much more work
to be done. In order to ensure that the Security
Council's response to the AU initiative is effective,
we need better cooperation in planning operations.
The Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council must share assessments of the political,
security, humanitarian and human rights dimensions of
missions from the very outset. Working together early
helps us ensure that the strategic concept - including
operations, force generation, and mission cost - has
the buy-in of all parties.

We support the AU's efforts to increase financial
self-reliance and to build the African Union Peace
Fund. We look forward to working with AU member
States to identify non-trade mechanisms for greater
self-financing. But any resolution with that goal in
mind must hold member States accountable to their
international obligations and commitments.

We welcome the AU's efforts to put in place
effective mechanisms to respect human rights in all
of its missions. Ensuring respect for human rights
and accountability for those who violate those rights
is essential, not just for African Union-United Nations
cooperation, but to preserve the trust between troops
and the communities they are supposed to protect. That
will require the creation of rigorous procedures for the
screening and selection of troops and police, followed
by the training and monitoring of personnel. Violations
and abuses must be reported and independently
investigated. Perpetrators must be held accountable. On
that, there will be no compromise.

We are encouraged by the prospect of more
effective, self-sufficient, and African-led peace
operations. We understand, however, that additional
progress will take time. Therefore, before considering
moving forward on any framework resolution with
regard to financial support through the United Nations,
we will look for implementation and concrete results
from the AU's own benchmarks and timelines. It may
therefore be premature for the Council to take action on
any substantive resolution on this issue in 2017.

The men and women who plan and conduct peace
operations are given a great responsibility. People in
the most vulnerable of situations rely on them for their
safety - often for their lives. It is essential that we get
this right. It is worth taking the time to make sure that
we get it right.

Again, we thank the Secretary-General and
the AU Commission Chairperson, as well as their
organizations, for their commitment to advancing the
AU-United Nations partnership and, through that, the
peace and security of Africa and the world.

