Mr. Alahmad (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Raisedon Zenenga,
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for his
important briefing on the efforts of the United Nations
represented by UNSOM. to achieve stability in Somalia
and to support the Federal Government of Somalia in
attaining peace and development for the Somali people.

I also thank Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose' Madeira,
Special Representative ofthe Chairperson ofthe African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for his valuable
briefing and the Mission's endeavours to maintain
security and to rehabilitate the Somali national security
forces. That demonstrates the importance which the
Commission attaches to ensuring that Somalia is
successful. We look forward to the Mission's renewal
next week following the current negotiations on a draft
resolution to extend its mandate.

I also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for her briefing, which reflected the scale
of human suffering faced by the Somali people for
decades as a result of poverty, marginalization, armed
violence, political instability, natural threats and
underdevelopment. All of that has led to an increase in
the humanitarian needs in Somalia, where one third of
the population needs assistance and protection in 2019.
In addition, food insecurity affects 4.9 million people
and the number of internal displaced persons reached
2.6 million.

In late March, the Security Council issued a clear
message that reflected once again its unity in terms
of supporting and assisting Somalia by extending
UNSOM's mandate unanimously under resolution 2461
(2019) (see S/PV.8494). That resolution is seen as an
international instrument that demonstrates the support
of the Council and the United Nations for Somalia in
building a federal State capable of overcoming the
difficulties about which we have just heard from the
briefers. The resolution took into consideration the
special circumstances and the unique situation of the
Somali crisis. Allow me to highlight the following
main issues.

The first issue is the political developments. We
welcome the significant progress made by the Somali
Federal Government in ensuring stability, reconciliation
and State-building despite many challenges that
undermine achieving the required priorities. That is
reflected in the fact that the Somali Government is keen
to accelerate the implementation of the transition plan
to which it is committed. We note the Government's
road map in implementing its comprehensive political
reform agenda, whose priorities are the review of the
Provisional Constitution by the end of this year, the
commitment to establish an electoral legal framework
during the current session of Parliament and the adoption
by the Council of Ministers of a temporary electoral
law and the political parties act, as well as the National
Independent Electoral Commission achieving progress
in registering voters by using a biometric system.

The second issue is the security situation. The
Al-Shabaab movement remains the main threat, as
we have just heard from the briefers. We note the
recent increase in the attacks and we reiterate our
condemnation of such attacks, in particular those that
targeted the United Nations compound near the airport
in Mogadishu at the beginning of this year. In addition,
other attacks targeted a number of hotels and centres,
particularly those against the ministries of public works
and labour, in which the Deputy Minister was killed.
Such incidents show that it is important to step up efforts
to ensure the implementation of the general security
framework in order to promote the effectiveness of
AMISOM. operations and combat Violent extremism.
We welcome the joint United Nations and African
Union review, which resulted in a new AMISOM
concept of operations, in line with the transition plan
and national security architecture, accompanied by the
gradual decrease in Mission personnel.

The third issue is the economic developments. We
welcome the progress achieved by Somalia in terms
of economic development. We hope that this positive
momentum will lead Somalia to meeting the required
conditions as a heavily indebted poor country. It is clear
that the Federal Government has started to produce
results through capacity-building in order to increase
its local resources and revenue, as recognized by the
International Monetary Fund. We look forward to
further progress through the adoption of accountability
and anti-corruption legislation, as well as the adoption
of the necessary structural adjustments of the Central
Bank after the recent appointment of its Governor. That
is an additional step towards achieving the goals of
economic reform.

In conclusion, we all know that this is in particular
an extremely important year in terms of implementing
pending political agreements and strengthening federal
institutions. That means that we, as Council members,
have a particular responsibility to implement our
common vision in order to help the Somalis build an
inclusive federal Somali State that upholds the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all its citizens.

