Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank the briefers for
their information.

The serious problems raised during today's
meeting are very worrying. We share the concerns
about information indicating the growth of trafficking
in persons in the region. The Security Council already
discussed the problem in last week's debate (see S/PV.8111) on the subject of trafficking in people in
conflict situations, at which we also adopted resolution
2388 (2017). The issue is regularly brought up in
discussions about the situation in Libya, as it has been
this month.

As we have noted before, the transnational
character of crimes related to trafficking in human
beings in situations of armed conflict demands major
international cooperation in combating it. In order to be
as effective as possible in dealing both with this problem
and with other migrant-related issues it is essential to
take an integrated approach that includes tackling its
underlying causes, prosecuting the perpetrators and
assisting their victims. The primary focus should be on
what has created the problem of migrants.

With regard to the root causes of the situation in
Libya, the scale of the activities there of the criminal
groups associated with trafficking in persons is one of
the many consequences of the severe and protracted
crisis created by the violent military intervention
in Libya's internal affairs in 2011. The inhuman
treatment of migrants has been made possible against
a background of continued political and institutional
disunity in Libya. And Libya does not exist in a vacuum.
The criminal business related to illegal migration
clearly has a reach throughout the region that extends
to Europe as well.

We have noted Libya's intention to prosecute these
criminal activities, and we should support its efforts to
fight them and assist the victims. However, a long-term
solution to the problem lies solely in the reunification of
Libya through a political settlement in the framework of
a broad-based dialogue under United Nations auspices.
Only the achievement of lasting peace and a consistent
struggle against the terrorist threats in Libya will help
lead to sustainably alleviating the problems of refugees
and illegal migrants.

Under the pretext of the difficult situation of
migrant rights in Libya, we are hearing suggestions
about the need for urgent intervention. We know that
there are some who prefer to address similar problems
independently by bypassing international law and
in violation of the sovereignty of States. That will
only exacerbate the difficult situation that emerged
following the destruction of Libya. At the same
time, key international organizations and structures
would be well advised to pay close attention migrant-
related issues in that country. In that regard, it would
be highly useful to strengthen cooperation with the
African Union.

