Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. President, we are very pleased to see you
presiding over the Council this month, and we thank
you for having convened this timely public meeting on
the grave situation in the Palestinian territories. My
gratitude goes also to Ambassador Kolby of Norway
for the praiseworthy manner in which he conducted the
work of the Council last month.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories has continued to deteriorate since the
Council last met on this issue. The bloody campaign
against defenceless civilians in the occupied territories
goes on unabated. Palestinians are trapped and
besieged by Israeli tanks and other state-of-the-art
weapons generously made available to the Israeli
regime. All-out repression, excessive use of force,
collective punishment against an entire people - a
people that has been enclosed and humiliated - have
thus far fuelled the endless cycle of violence and could
engulf the entire Middle East region. Media reports
indicating that food supplies and medicine are rapidly
running out in the besieged towns are further cause for
concern.

At a time when the plight of the Palestinians is
the focus of the entire international community and
when public opinion throughout the world finds the
atrocities committed by the Israeli troops to be
increasingly appalling, the Israeli regime, in order to
conceal its crimes in the Palestinian territories, is
increasingly taking on journalists who are struggling to
cover the aggression and its serious impact on
civilians. In so doing, Israeli troops curb and even
deliberately fire upon reporters with a View to
intimidating and dissuading them from carrying on
their work. Moreover, hundreds of peace activists,
mainly Europeans, as well as medical teams, are
abused and fired upon.

Decades of struggle by the Palestinian people for
their right to self-determination have clearly
demonstrated that the repressive policy atrociously
employed by the Zionists has thus far only hardened
the resolve of the Palestinians. The intensity of
resistance that the people under Israeli occupation are
currently exhibiting is truly unprecedented in the past
half-century. Evidently, it puts the occupiers on notice
that, unless the aspirations of the Palestinians are
realized and their rights restored, they should expect
graver consequences by the day.

In the midst of the tragic events taking place in
the course of the ongoing conflict, the international
community must contemplate the reasons that prompt
Palestinian teenagers and youngsters, who normally
should be seeing a bright future ahead, to sacrifice their
lives. It should be borne in mind that the exceptionality
of the response demonstrates the exceptionally ruthless
crimes committed against the Palestinian people over a
very long period of time - crimes that, by any
measure, are unprecedented, even in comparison to
similar instances in the colonial era.

Undoubtedly, approaching the issue
simplistically, playing the blame game and restoring
repetitious and superficial rhetoric by evoking
terrorism will, in this case, lead nowhere. Each time the
Israelis bulldoze more Arab homes and each time they
kill Palestinians and their hopes, they create more
militants. This may go on and on forever. What is now
unfolding in the Palestinian territories is a struggle for
national liberation and the right of self-determination
stolen from the Palestinian people for so long.

By refusing to withdraw from Palestinian towns,
as stipulated in Security Council resolution 1402
(2002), and, contrarily, by strengthening its occupation,
the Israeli regime is bluntly defying the will of the
international community, represented by this Council.
It is very unfortunate that those who stretch and
baselessly interpret Council resolutions just to advance
their narrow interests are now grasping at straws in
flouting the letter and spirit of a clear-cut resolution.

There is no doubt that selective enforcement of
the Council's resolutions has an adverse impact on the
authority of the Council, thereby undermining the
entire international security system. We urge the
Council to heed the call of the international
community, to live up to its Charter responsibility and
to take further effective action to halt the ongoing
bloody action against the Palestinian people. The
Israeli act of taking advantage of the defencelessness of
the Palestinians is repugnant and, if the Council does
not act to put an end to it, more bloodshed may lie
ahead.

