Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, for her insightful briefing, which provided a
comprehensive update on developments in Iraq, as
well as on the work of all the teams of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), which I
particularly commend.

I would first like to stress the importance of
working to consolidate the current positive momentum
in Iraq. That is one of the main conclusions of the
Council's visit to Baghdad at the end of June. The
continued efforts of the Iraqi authorities to open
a new chapter in their country's history should be
welcomed and encouraged. That is why, following the
elections, which strengthened the democratic process
in Iraq, appointments to three of four vacant federal
Government ministerial posts is another positive step.
We also welcome the latest appointments to head the
Kurdistan Regional Government.

The Prime Minister's issuance of Executive
Order 237, which aims to strengthen State control
over the popular mobilization forces, also supports
the stabilization process. The order's provisions must
now be implemented to be effective. The positive
political momentum must continue in order to meet the
expectations of the Iraqi population, particularly with
regard to public services, and to improve the investment
climate, within the framework of a united, federal and
democratic Iraq that respects all its constituents. In that
regard, we encourage Baghdad and Erbil to continue
their discussions with a view to sustainably resolving
the remaining points of disagreement.

Consolidating those gains is essential now that
Iraq is at a crossroads, which means that Iraq must
be vigilant and take action with regard to at least four
points, which are challenges that Iraq must overcome
but for which it can also count on our assistance.

My first point concerns the challenge that the
current regional tensions represent for stability in Iraq.
Priority must therefore be accorded to de-escalation
through dialogue. We must spare no effort to ensure
that Iraq does not revert to becoming another theatre of
a broader regional confrontation and risk jeopardizing
all the progress made in recent months. In that regard,
France fully supports the efforts of the Iraqi authorities
to facilitate regional dialogue and strengthen balanced
diplomacy. France recalls its commitment to respecting
the sovereignty and integrity of Iraq.

My second point concerns the threat that Da'esh
continues to pose to the stability of Iraq at a time
when it is reorganizing through clandestine cells. In
particular, there is an urgent need to reach security and
governance agreements in disputed territories where
the terrorist group is taking advantage of the political
and security vacuum to re-establish itself.

Thirdly, the stabilization and reconstruction of the
country, as well as genuine national reconciliation,
remain crucial to the long-term stabilization of the
country. In that regard, France welcomes the signing
of an agreement between the Government of Iraq and
the United Nations on the establishment of a fund to
disburse contributions towards the reconstruction of
Iraq announced at the Kuwait International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, and
we call on the Iraqi authorities and all our partners to
honour the commitments they made at the Conference.
The reconstruction process stalled in 2019; we must
work to revive that momentum.

Lastly, particular attention must be accorded to
the areas liberated from Da'esh, as well as to creating
the necessary conditions for the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of internally displaced persons to
their places of origin. The Iraqi-led stabilization and
reconstruction process for the benefit of the Iraqi
people is necessary to ensure a lasting victory against
terrorism and foster reconciliation among the various
sectors of the Iraqi population. Finally, I welcome the
attention that the Government of Iraq is willing to
devote to the fight against corruption and call on it to
redouble its efforts to that end.

In that context, international partners must stand
alongside the Iraqi authorities more than ever. The
Security Council's unanimous support for the Iraqi
authorities is key to supporting Iraq at this critical
juncture. The Council's first visit to Iraq in June was
an important milestone in that regard. The international
community must also continue its support, in particular
to meet the country's humanitarian, stabilization and
reconstruction needs.

I also wish to reiterate France's support for the
work of UNAMI and the Special Representative in
supporting the Iraqi authorities, in particular the
Mission's efforts to promote the active participation of
women in the public arena, human rights and dialogue
between Baghdad and Erbil. We fully endorse the
priorities set out by the Special Representative. The
announcement of the opening of the Mosul office next
month is also encouraging news.

In conclusion, for its part, France will continue
to fully support the Iraqi authorities, first, in the area
of security, given the threat posed by Da'esh, and,
secondly, in the area of humanitarian concerns and
stabilization. That is the purpose ofour nearly €1-billion
loan for reconstruction and our work to strengthen Iraqi
State institutions.

France will also continue to work towards
achieving lasting and inclusive reconciliation. The
fight against impunity is a crucial factor in that regard,
and that is the purpose of our support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, whose mandate will be renewed in
September. It is also important to shed light on the fate
of missing persons, including during the Gulf War, in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013).

Lastly, I recall that, in the autumn, France will hold
another follow-up conference on the Paris Action Plan,
which was adopted at the 2015 International Conference
on the Victims of Ethnic and Religious Violence in the
Middle East.

