Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and to associate myself with the
words of welcome and thanks addressed to Mr. Lubbers
for the briefing he has just given us on the
humanitarian situation in West Africa.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the tragic
situation that has been affecting millions of refugees
and displaced persons in that subregion for some time.
The deteriorating security situation along the border
and the resumption of fighting in certain areas also
prompt our concern and fear that these acts of violence
could spread even further, thus accelerating the
movement of local populations towards vulnerable but
safer areas, which would worsen the humanitarian
cr1s1s.

Mr. Lubbers' visit to the subregion, in our
opinion, was also very timely, and we thank him for
having begun a constructive dialogue with the States
concerned and for having deployed commendable
efforts to find a solution that would remedy the
situation and that would ensure, thanks to the
cooperation of all the parties involved, the resettlement
of displaced persons and the voluntary repatriation of
refugees in full security. My delegation would like to
assure Mr. Lubbers of our full support for his efforts,
and we anxiously await the results of his initiative.

My delegation is pleased with the commitment
made by the Presidents of Guinea, Sierra Leone and
Liberia to respect the freedom of access and passage of
these vulnerable persons towards safer areas, and asks
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to support
unreservedly this plan, without which it will be
difficult to follow through with this initiative in the
most secure conditions.

This is only the first step in a long process. The
implementation of this initiative requires, in our
opinion, a rapid response to a few practical questions,
and we think that it is essential to determine
beforehand, first, the authorities and mechanisms that
would be capable of ensuring the protection of
displaced persons and refugees, as well as local
populations; secondly, the non-State players involved
in the subregion so that we can be assured of their full
cooperation and support for the principles of the
freedom of access and passage for displaced persons
and refugees; and thirdly, the authority or authorities
who will be in charge of supervising the
implementation of this initiative, considering that
neither the Guinean army nor UNAMSIL seems to be
able to do it, for many reasons.

We can reach this objective only with the swift
and tangible support of the international community,
whose contribution is crucial in order to consolidate the
considerable efforts deployed by all the actors to
contain this crisis.
The inter-agency mission currently in West Africa
will allow us rapidly to define the key needs of the
countries of the subregion; to assess the impact of the
presence of refugees on the economic, social and
humanitarian situation in the States concerned,
particularly Guinea; and accurately to determine the
pressing needs for urgent logistical assistance that
would help to accelerate the resettlement process for
displaced persons and the repatriation of refugees.
Only in the light of the conclusions and
recommendations of the mission will we be able
effectively to determine the proper and coordinated
response that is necessary. Hence, my delegation
eagerly awaits the mission's report.

The refugee crises in West Africa will be resolved
once and for all only when we have put an end to the
conflicts and addressed their root causes. In this
respect, my delegation calls on all parties to join forces
in order to build the foundation of lasting peace and
stability, the sole guarantors of development and
economic prosperity in West Africa and elsewhere.

My delegation has always advocated
multidimensional action in peace-building and urges
the donor countries and international financial
institutions urgently to reaffirm their commitment to
and solidarity with these disadvantaged and deeply
suffering populations in order to help them escape this
distressing situation. Moreover, the repatriation and
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons will
stand a better chance of succeeding if they are part of
an effort to revive economic activity and the social
fabric.

I cannot conclude without reiterating once again
my delegation's devotion to respect for the physical
integrity of the United Nations humanitarian and
associated personnel and the inviolability of its
facilities.

