Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Peru for including this issue on the agenda
and for the opportunity to participate in today's open
debate and to reaffirm the importance that we attach
to this matter. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing this morning.

Before proceeding, I wish to express the
condolences of the Chilean Government to both the
Japanese Government and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for the death of IAEA Director
General Yukiya Amano. I had the opportunity to
work alongside him for five years, when we were both
Ambassadors in Austria for international organizations,
and for two years on the IAEA Board of Governors;
I in fact succeeded him as Chair of the Board. I saw
first-hand Director Amano's fervour and passion for the
issues of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
His absence will be noticed and missed and we
appreciate the contribution that he made with regard to
those issues.

Returning to the issue of the Palestinian question,
Chile wishes to reiterate its conviction that the solution
to the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian question, lies in two free, autonomous,
sovereign and independent States that are able to live in
peace within safe and recognized borders, in accordance
with United Nations decisions and resolutions and
international law, which must serve as the basis for a
direct agreement between the parties.
The President of Chile, Sebastian Pifiera Echefiique,
recently conducted his second official visit to both Israel
and Palestine just one month ago, on 24-28 June. The
first such visit was in 2011, following Chile's recognition
of Palestine as a State. He was as always accompanied
by a representative delegation from both the Palestinian
and Israeli communities, including parliamentary,
business and civil society representatives. During his
trip, President Pifiera Echefiique reaffirmed that Chile
sees its contribution to reaching a peaceful solution as a
foreign-policy priority, while continuing to express his
support for ajust and lasting solution in the Middle East.

Our commitment to peace goes back many years
to the early twentieth century, when what is now the
largest Palestinian community outside the Middle East
began arriving in Chile and integrating themselves
into all levels of society. Not only has the Palestinian
community found its home in Chile and become a part of
our society, but an extensive Jewish community has also
been well established for many years. We share strong
historical and brotherly ties with Israel and Palestine.
For that reason, the President signed agreements during
his most recent visit that are important for both States
because they reflect the synergy that exists between
Israel and Chile and between Palestine and Chile.

As a country thatbelieves in respect for international
law and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, we wish to reiterate what was pointed out a
few weeks ago by President Pifiera Echefiique in that
holy land:

"We are confident that Israel and Palestine
share exactly the same aspirations as all other
nations of the world - the best for their societies
and for the people living on their territories;
prosperity and security; and the desire to achieve
a sustainable peace to end the decades of pain that
have scarred entire generations."

Violence only generates Violence, but sustainable
peace fosters development, well-being and the promotion
of resilient and cohesive societies that are capable of
addressing and overcoming their own challenges.
We trust that both nations believe in the two-State
solution. We believe that it is the responsibility of the
international community to support them in achieving
that aspiration which has already been delayed for far
too long.

