Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, have provided us with
profound insights into the situation in Afghanistan,
and we are greatly in their debt. Ambassador Tanin
has distinguished himself in the service of his country.
We pray that his superlative performance will also be
manifest in his new responsibility.

Afghanistan continues to make steady and striking
progress under the reform agenda of President Ghani.
The appointment of Cabinet members and other
officials, including four women, to ministerial positions
vividly demonstrates a determination and commitment
to implementing crucial reforms, including the
empowerment of women and the advancement of their
rights. We welcome the Government's commitment to
transparency and accountability. We believe that is vital
to promoting good governance in Afghanistan. The
re-establishment of the Electoral Reform Commission
in July, designed to address fundamental issues of
governance, as stated in the political agreement of
21 September 2014, is a notable development. We
commend the Commission for its engagement with a
broad range of stakeholders, including civil society.
Progress in electoral reform is crucial to the solid
establishment of democracy in Afghanistan. Electoral
reforms that enhance transparency and inclusive
governance are vital to engendering a united and secure
Afghanistan.

On reconciliation, we applaud the initiatives
launched by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to promote dialogue at the
provincial level in Afghanistan. Local reconciliation
efforts constitute a vital building block for reconciliation
at the national level. Therefore we urge the people of
Afghanistan to embrace those initiatives.

Concerning security, we commend the Afghan
National Security Forces for their success against
insurgents operating in various parts of the country.
The fact that they have prevented insurgents from
holding any provincial capital attests to their capability
to defend the territorial integrity of the country. We
note that challenges remain in securing rural areas.
That includes resupplying or reinforcing armed
forces units in those areas. It is important that those
challenges be urgently addressed in order to close the
gaps that insurgents could use to establish a foothold,
and thereby destabilize the country.

On counter-narcotics, we welcome the launch
of the Afghanistan Drug Reporting System, aimed
at providing access to data on key counter-narcotics
indicators in Afghanistan. It is our expectation that that
will significantly aid the war on drugs in that country.

We commend the efforts of the Afghan authorities
in the eradication of opium poppy in the country. The
40 per cent increase in eradication between 2014 and
2015 underscores the progress that has been made in
that important counter-narcotic effort. We express
our condolences to the families of security officers
killed in the course of counter-narcotic operations.
Concerted national, regional and international action
will be essential in order to sustain the war on drugs in
Afghanistan.

While significant progress has been made in
Afghanistan 4 across a broad spectrum of sectors 4 we
admit that considerable challenges still exist. It is our
expectation that the work of the Tripartite Commission
will enhance the ability of the United Nations to help
Afghanistan to meet those challenges. We pay special
tribute to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haysom, the UNAMA staff and Afghanistan's
development partners for their dedication and
commitment to placing the country on a sure path to
peace, reconciliation and development.

