Mr. Izetbegovic (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to say how pleased I am to see the
delegation of Slovenia, and in particular you,
Mr. President, presiding over the Security Council. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
members of the Security Council for giving us the
opportunity to speak about Bosnia and Herzegovina here
today.

I also take this opportunity to express my sympathy
to the families and friends of all those who recently died
in the cause of peace in the plane crash in Kosovo.

 

Unlike in the recent past, today I appear before the
Security Council as just one of the members of a new
rotating Presidency adopted as part of the Dayton/Paris
Peace Accords. There may thus be an impression that I
would not be so pleased with the new circumstances. That
is not the case.

Thanks to the Dayton/Paris Accords, we do have
peace and we do have a joint Presidency, in which at least
the opportunity exists for all to work together and chart one
course for the good of one country and its people.
Compared to war and fighting alone - the forces of ethnic
racism and cleansing - my current role and, most
critically, the situation of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are preferable.
In the past four years, thanks to the efforts of our
people and the assistance of the international community,
we have repaired almost every school, hospital and bridge.
We have restored the postal service and electricity supply
systems which were severely damaged. Today we have
more students than we had before the war, and our post
offices and our hospitals are better equipped. Our monetary
currency is stable. We have facilitated the return of almost
half of the refugees and displaced persons to their homes.

While giving priority to infrastructure, we have not
achieved satisfactory results in the reconstruction of the
economy, which still has to undergo a serious
transformation. Here I am primarily referring to the
privatization of small, medium and large companies, as well
as the adoption of laws to create conditions conducive for
foreign investors. This task is before us, and it is of crucial
importance for the strengthening of peace and stability in
our country.

So, to some, the glass may appear to be half empty.
To me, and I believe to most Bosnians, the glass is half
full. We now must find the means to make the glass more
full, even if drop by drop. We and the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina really have no alternative, even if the rate
of progress is slow.

Allow me now to briefly address the list of issues and
areas where the Security Council and the international
community as a whole can assist.

First, the rate of refugee return is still too slow and
obstructed in many aspects. We must accelerate the process.
Unless people return to their homes soon, the peace will
appear hollow and the return to normalcy will be
indefinitely stalled. Bosnia and Herzegovina has always
been a multi-ethnic country, where people of different
ethnic backgrounds have been intermingled in all its
regions. However, some still insist upon the idea that the
two entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina are ethnically
homogeneous. That must be changed. Bosnia and
Herzegovina and both of its entities must embrace the
three constituent peoples and others in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This was already demanded by the Peace
Accords. We have agreed to provide the Security Council
in three months with a progress report regarding refugee
return during this period, and expect that the Council will
see real results, or address the obstruction.

Secondly, those responsible for war crimes must be
arrested and prosecuted. The situation has improved, with
the stabilization force (SFOR) taking a more active role.
However, as the most recent report of the President of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia indicates,
much needs to be done, especially in terms of certain
areas of the region. I trust that the Security Council will
heed the concerns and the request for action outlined by
the Tribunal in this report. Without such action, the
atmosphere in the region will remain dominated by the
stale smell of "ethnic cleansing".

Thirdly, the pace of rebuilding our country and
economic reform must be quickened. Here we must
recognize our responsibility and endeavour to move more
rapidly. Still, we need real assistance to rebuild from the
base of a war-damaged landscape and an outdated
economic system. We also need the input of the Office of
the High Representative to harmonize the economic
system throughout the country.

Fourthly, this brings me to the widely discussed
issue of corruption. We must heighten our vigilance, and
we also must make sure that we have the tools for the
job. The most powerful means, of course, is the effective
control of Bosnia and Herzegovina's borders. Corruption
within our country is not linked to misuse of aid money.
Such moneys are almost exclusively managed through
non-governmental organizations and directly by the donor
countries. Rather, the trouble is the lack of effective
control of Bosnia and Herzegovina's borders. It produces
smuggling and lost customs and tax revenues. It also is a
major risk in terms of international crime and terrorism.
The Council has certainly heard what kind of difficulties
we faced in regard to the adoption of the Law on State
Border Service. As long as some resist effective control
of our borders by a diverse Bosnian border service,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to be at risk. Not
to support the Law on State Border Service really means

 

to support corruption. Here I have to pause and inform the
Council that only yesterday evening we adopted the New
York Declaration, which contains the framework for the
border service law. I must state that I fully support the
Declaration.

Fifthly, I come to the most complex and serious issue.
The Dayton Agreement endowed Bosnia and Herzegovina
with an opportunity to end a war, but not with all the
necessary means to effectively manage its affairs.
Particularly at the central government level, we lack
common mechanisms to have a functioning and unified
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Even with existing institutions, the
constant demand for consensus decision-making on all
issues too frequently stalls the whole political system.
Consensus decision-making is too frequently misused to
obstruct. Always seeking the lowest common denominator
in decisions can be translated into anarchy or dependency,
or both.

I should also like to emphasize the continuing mine
problem. However, the process of demining has at least
some momentum, and, with the assistance of Slovenian
colleagues and others, we have confidence in the gradual
elimination of the plague.

Finally, I turn to the issue of security in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region as a whole. We have decided
to unilaterally reduce our military expenditure by 15 per
cent in 1999. We are ready for a further reduction, on
condition that it be done throughout the region, in
accordance with the Vienna Protocol. We believe that a
most appropriate contribution to global peace would be to
offer our soldiers and police to the United Nations
peacekeeping efforts. Bosnia and Herzegovina has a moral
responsibility to help others in need. Our recent experience
can be used as a valuable lesson for others in need of
peacekeeping. As important, this could serve to give
formerly opposing militaries in our country a unified
perspective of the future.

As for the region, we cannot feel secure in our future
until the region as a whole moves forward economically
and towards the necessary respect for democratic, human
and minority rights.

Ownership is a term that has recently become more
popular in reference to Bosnia and Herzegovina. It may be
a new, stylish terminology, but it is an established concept.
Indeed, it may be most appropriate now that we remind
ourselves and the Council that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
ours, that it is for the Bosnians,

I must enthusiastically endorse the ownership
concept now being espoused. Bosnia and Herzegovina
always has been and will be for its peoples. We take
responsibility for the Dayton Accords. The Accords were
negotiated with the direct input of the Contact Group
countries - the United States of America, France, the
United Kingdom, the Russian Federation, Germany and
Italy - and was endorsed by this entire Council. I have
in the past stated that the Dayton Accords were a
compromise not only between different parties, but also
between justice and injustice, between democratic and
undemocratic ideas.

Nonetheless, I fully stand behind my signature to the
Peace Agreement and the commitments under it. This is
the best that could be achieved under the circumstances.
I also trust that the Council will stand by this Agreement,
not just as a historical document, but as a breathing,
evolving charter for peace. We expect that the Council
and the other endorsers and signatories will promote the
evolution of a Dayton Agreement consistent with the
highest standards of democracy, economic development
and respect for human rights.

In this Council, and under similar circumstances, the
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina, its institutions and
people are collectively assessed blame for the too frequent
failures of the process. The placement of collective
accountability on all shields the individuals responsible.
Accountability for progress, or lack of progress, in the
political process and decisions must be borne by
individuals.

We did not request the world's assistance because we
did not know how to manage our country; rather, we
were faced with the brutal reality of making a flawed
peace agreement or, alternatively, having the war
continue. We believed the flawed peace to be preferable.
Now we in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the Council and
the peoples of our country, must work together to
marginalize the flaws and rebuild the country on an ever
sounder foundation. Clearly, when one starts with a crack
at the base, it is not always easy either to proceed or to
have confidence in the long-term stability of the process.
However, I believe we all understand our responsibilities,
and we have no other alternative but to go ahead.

