Mr. Osman (Somalia): Please allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to acknowledge the successful tenure
of your predecessor and the positive role he played in
leading the Council last month.

The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to making continuous progress on security and
financial reform. There has been much progress since
the Somalia Security Conference, including a plan for
the plan within the deadline, which was developed
in close cooperation with the federal member states.
The relationship between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states is strong,
as demonstrated by President Mohamed Abdullahi
Farmajo's current peace tour in the north-eastern and
central regions of Somalia and his visit to Galkayo
with President Xaaf of Galmudug and President Gaas
of Puntland. During this week's peace tour, President
Farmajo visited several towns in Puntland and
Galmudug states and held crucial meetings with state
leaders, elders, civil society groups and politicians
on the reconciliation process. The meeting that led
to the agreement between Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a
and Galmudug was another milestone. There has also
been close collaboration with the federal member
states on economic recovery, including dealing with
anti-corruption issues and reform. A path to inclusive
politics has been charted, and discussions will now also
include security sector reform.

However, the existing arms embargo framework on
Somalia is major obstacle to the effective implementation
of our ambitious security sector reform plans. The
current arms embargo supports a disjointed supply of
weapons and ammunition to various different security
sector entities or federal member states, without the
knowledge or the approval of the Government. That
contributes to fragmenting our country andjeopardizes
our peacebuilding, our political progress and, above all,
the unity of Somalia.

There may be a rationale for limited specific
exemptions, but the arms embargo framework must be
closely aligned with the Somali security architecture.
The Monitoring Group, in its Implementation
Assistance Notice No. 2 of 2016, recognizes those
concerns and provides recommendations to the Security
Council, which have to date not been implemented. We
are a fragile, recovering State, and it is critical that
all members of the Security Council play their part
in influencing a reduction in the micromanaging and
current destabilizing levels of foreign interference in our
internal affairs, especially with regard to the ongoing
Gulf crisis. Needless to say, we see those concerns
as an affront to our sovereignty and independence.
In the past, there was less clarity on security than on
economic and political reform; but our national security
architecture now provides a comprehensive approach.

The devastating truck bomb explosion of 14 October
at a major junction in Mogadishu, which destroyed
property and killed over 500 innocent civilians, with
more than 200 injured or missing, was regarded as
the biggest and deadliest vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device terrorist attack in the world's history.
That event again served to underscore the Al-Shabaab
terrorist group's ability to stage large-scale attacks,
despite months-long offensives against it by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army (SNA). Somalia will forever remember
that dark day in our history. The Somali people and
our Government are more united than ever in the fight
against Al-Shabaab.

After the attack, on 11 November, the Prime
Minister chaired the first meeting of the executive
group on a comprehensive approach to security. Each
of the group's strands is led by a relevant member from
a federal ministry, with the support of international
partners, including AMISOM, the European Union,
the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the
United States. A critical priority is to enable AMISOM
operations by enhancing its operational effectiveness
and providing predictable and sustainable funding. In
that regard, it is crucial to listen to, and to take into
due consideration, the joint message of the African
Union and United Nations envoys on the AMISOM
funding consultations.

Moreover, the recently conducted operational
readiness assessment revealed that the Somali National
Army lacked the properly trained manpower, barracks,
weapons and ammunition, as well as logistical support.
The Somali National Army needs to be capacitated
in all fields - training, equipment, mobility and
weapons - to be able to inherit, hold and preserve the
gains achieved. Without support against the constraints
I mentioned, the transition from AMISOM. to the Somali
national security forces will be a mirage. The transition
from AMISOM. to the SNA should be conditions-based.

We take this opportunity to pay special tribute
to the African Union. Ten years ago, Somalia was in
a very different position, and Somalis everywhere are
grateful to AMISOM. for the sacrifices made to help
our people. Somalia needs AMISOM. for the transition
and the continued support of our partners in building
the Somali national security forces, based on our
national security architecture and the outcome of the
operational readiness assessment.

The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to carrying out democratic, transparent and credible
elections by 2020-2021 under the leadership ofPresident
Farmajo. The holding of the elections in 2020-2021 is
clearly articulated in the provisional constitution of
the Federal Republic of Somalia. The political road
map emphasizes that democratization is an essential
component in building a Viable State. The road map
sets out the critical steps necessary to achieve the
envisaged credible direct elections in 2020-2021, with
a division of roles, responsibilities and timelines of the
different constitutionally mandated institutions of the
Government. Accompanying the road map is a logical
framework matrix to monitor and evaluate progress, on
a weekly basis, on the political benchmarks of all the
relevant institutions by the Cabinet subcommittee for
inclusive politics, chaired by the Prime Minister.
I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the looming humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
According to United Nations specialized agencies,
6.2 million people are still in need of humanitarian
assistance due to the drought and the conflict in Somalia.
The agencies are particularly concerned that the below-
average rainfalls for a fourth consecutive season and
the forecast indications of a fifth consecutive below-
average season indicate that the risk of famine remains
in many parts of Somalia in 2018. We also remain
concerned about the more than 1 million people who
have been newly displaced, in addition to the 1.2 million
already in a state of protracted displacement. We thank
our partners for their continued support and strongly
appeal to their generosity in taking the necessary
actions, including the provision of resources, to ensure
the continued delivery of urgent humanitarian relief.

To conclude, my delegation wishes once again
to express to the Council the gratitude of the Somali
people and their Government for the efforts of the
United Nations to ensure peace and stability in their
country. I would also like to reiterate my Government's
commitment to implementing its economic, political
and security reforms. The road to final peace may be
long and difficult but, with the support of our partners,
we are optimistic that we will continue on the path to
peace, progress and prosperity.

