Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would first like to take this
opportunity to convey my deepest condolences to the
people and Governments of all the countries touched
by this terrible event, and in particular the families of
the innocent victims. Ireland itself remembers the loss
of an Irish-born citizen who was aboard Flight MH-17,
and I wish once again to convey our sympathies to her
family for their devastating loss.

A little more than a year ago, the Council gathered
here in the days following the downing of Flight MH-
17. In a clear indication of the manner in which the
event affected and shocked each and every nation,
an unequivocal message was delivered through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2166 (2014). It was a
sincere expression of compassion towards the victims,
and it also acted on the desire to ensure humane and
dignified treatment oftheir remains, a full, thorough and
independent international investigation determining
the exact course of events, and the holding to account
of those responsible.

A year later, we welcome the progress made in
identifying and swiftly repatriating the victims and
their possessions and in establishing an effective,
professional and independent investigation led by
international experts. The sole task remaining is
setting up an independent and impartial accountability
mechanism to bring those responsible to justice in a
credible and legitimate manner.

As we recently marked the first anniversary of this
terrible tragedy, the shocking and harrowing images of
the crash site and the overwhelming loss of innocent
life have once again been appearing on our television
screens and in our newspapers. Resolution 2166 (2014)
sought to ensure that those scenes, and the actions
behind them, would not go unchecked and that the
callous disregard for human life demonstrated by those
responsible would not be without consequence. Today's
draft resolution (S/2015/562) merely sought to deliver
on the objectives of resolution 2166 (2014).

I would like to warmly commend Australia,
Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine for
their leadership in bringing the draft resolution to the
Council. A tribunal of the type it proposed would be
a definitive endorsement of the global community's
commitment to creating a transparent, effective and
authoritative accountability mechanism for delivering
justice in an independent and impartial manner. The
establishment of such a tribunal now, in advance of
the publication of the investigative reports, would have
ensured that any actions taken on the basis of those
reports would not become politicized.

Security Council tribunals have a proven track
record. The establishment of such a tribunal in advance
of the completion of the investigation would not
represent an anomaly or a precedent; in fact, it would be
a continuation of established practice. All other similar
ad hoc tribunals, such as were established in the wake
of conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and
Lebanon, were set up prior to the completion of their
investigations.

As an island nation, Ireland understands as well as
any other the importance of civil aviation. The second
busiest international air route in the world passes
through Dublin. Civil aviation has strengthened our
links with the fraternity of nations and is our gateway
to the world. It is an indispensable tool for global
communication, security and prosperity. Is it possible to
maintain a global civil aviation industry if the absolute
safety of our skies is in any way compromised by a lack
of accountability for incidents such as that involving
Flight MH-17? Surely, putting the safety of our skies
at risk for civilian travel is by any measure a threat to
international peace and security.

It is incumbent upon the global community to join
together in order to create a single, mutually acceptable
and coordinated accountability mechanism to deliver
justice in an independent and impartial manner. It
behoves us to continue to act with the same degree of
decisiveness, cooperation and solidarity as we did in
the weeks immediately following this disaster.

