Mr. Kubis: We are meeting amid intense focus
on ensuring that Afghanistan's three complex and
intertwined transition processes - political, security
and economic - are on track. Those efforts are due to
culminate in 2014, but the fundamentals are to be put
in place this year.

The very core of transition is the strengthening
of Afghan national ownership and leadership. The
onus for driving progress is thus on the Government
of Afghanistan and the country's leading political
forces. There is, however, a clear need for sustained
and predictable international support, through 2014
and beyond, in ways that reinforce Afghanistan's
leadership.

As announced this week, Afghan security forces
have entered the last phase in assuming the lead
responsibility for security throughout the country.
Anti-Government elements are, however, seeking
to counter this by targeting security personnel and
terrorizing civilians. They aim to shake the population's
confidence in the Government and its armed forces.

We are seeing increasingly brutal, complex assaults
on high-profile targets, high in civilian casualties but
low on reaching military objectives, but nevertheless
garnering media attention. Targeted killings of
those deemed supportive of the Government include
civil servants and judicial workers, in violation of
international law and the norms of war. In population
centres, attacks in public spaces demonstrate a complete
disregard for civilian lives.

Afghan security forces fight bravely and bear the
brunt of losses, showing increased courage, confidence
and competence in countering the intentions of the
anti-Government forces. At the same time, the Afghan
forces, notably the National Army, urgently require
critical enablers such as air capacity to ensure their
effectiveness and sustainability. The international
community must assist them.

A smooth and legitimate transfer of power is
widely acknowledged as the most critical part of the
transition, underpinning all other efforts. President
Karzai continues to reiterate his commitment to
standing aside, in accordance with the Constitution.
Planning and positioning ahead of the polls, scheduled
for 5 April 2014, dominates the political landscape.

Although I see progress in many technical areas, I
am concerned by the continued delays in the passage of
the two major pieces of electoral legislation. For orderly
and timely preparations for the polls, promulgation is
necessary before the summer recess of the National
Assembly. That will require compromise and goodwill
on all sides, notably the proactive engagement of the
Government. The continuous lack of progress in this
critical area has already raised questions in some
minds about intentions to hold elections in a timely and
acceptable manner.

An increased focus on a broad national accord with
regard to electoral platforms and possible presidential
candidates is legitimate and even advisable. However,
that must not be at the expense of electoral preparations,
and it cannot and should not be a substitute for credible
elections. There is no alternative to inclusive and
transparent elections as a means of delivering a political
transition with the necessary degree of legitimacy and
acceptability. The elections are central to international
and domestic legitimacy and sustained extraordinary
support on the part of the international community for
the new Government.

Peace is the Afghan people's greatest desire.
Political efforts centred on establishing a Taliban office
in Doha for the purpose of talks between the Afghan
High Peace Council and authorized representatives of
the Taliban to promote peace and reconciliation led
to contradictory developments and announcements
this week. We hope that the current controversies and
legitimate concerns related to the Taliban office in
Doha will soon be resolved, thus opening the way for
direct peace and reconciliation discussions between the
High Peace Council and the Taliban. We also hope that
this will be accompanied by a reduction of violence and
of civilian casualties.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan stands ready to support all peace and
reconciliation efforts, based on and in full conformity
with its mandate. Among other things, it stands ready
to facilitate an inter-Afghan track-two dialogue as
well as to engage with the Taliban on issues related
to the promotion of human rights, the application
of humanitarian law and the reduction of civilian
casualties.

The promotion of peace and reconciliation
requires an enabling regional environment. Recent
developments between Afghanistan and Pakistan, as
noted in the Secretary-General's report (8/2013/350),
are of concern. Such tensions are unfortunate and
dangerous, especially at this stage of Afghanistan's
development. They bring in additional elements of risk
to an already complex and complicated political and
security situation in Afghanistan and in the region. It
is for the two countries to address those concerns and
problems and their underlying reasons, to build trust
and to refrain from any steps that could contribute to an
escalation of tensions and inflamed public sentiments.
The two neighbouring countries share common
concerns and interests in fighting terrorism. They can
succeed or fail together.

I am encouraged by the positive exchanges following
the recent Pakistani elections between President Karzai
and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, as well as by the
resumption of high-level military contacts between the
two countries, with the participation of the International
Security Assistance Force.
A major conference in Kabul next month will
assess the progress made on the mutual commitments to
Government reform and international civilian assistance
made one year ago in Tokyo. Frank discussions between
the Government of Afghanistan and its international
partners must result in a reinvigorated agenda for
action in the coming year. Among the hard deliverables
are not only issues of economic development and good
governance, but also, at this juncture of the transition,
issues related to elections and human rights. They
address fundamental building blocks of the Afghan
State.

This week's appointment of new human rights
commissioners to the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission raised concerns at whether the
appointment process complied with international
principles and standards and met Afghan legal
requirements of transparency, broad consultations
and selection of independent, qualified individuals.
These concerns are currently under review by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Geneva and will be further reviewed by the respective
international accreditation body for such national
human rights institutions. In the meantime, the work of
the Commission will be under increased scrutiny.

The implementation of the Law on the Elimination
of Violence Against Women, and protecting and
promoting the rights of Afghan women and girls and the
gains they have made over the past decade, are another
central obligation. Women's equal and meaningful
participation in economic, political and public life is
constitutionally guaranteed in Afghanistan and globally
recognized as central to improving social development,
including the health and well-being of children, who
represent the future of any nation. Key international
donors are clear that any erosion of such commitments,
including of the Law on the Elimination of Violence
Against Women and its implementation, would have
a direct negative impact on future international
assistance.

Afghanistan's already acutely low humanitarian
indicators are put further at risk by shrinking
humanitarian space. But humanitarian response alone
will not suffice, and greater attention and priority
must be afforded to durable solutions and Government
capacity. This includes a greater development focus
on disaster management systems, internally displaced
persons and refugees, their strictly voluntary return
and sustainable livelihoods, and sustaining access to
and the quality of the health system.

This is a critical juncture. The trajectory is
irreversible, but the Afghan authorities, the Afghan
people and international partners need to work
together in ensuring that it is sustainable. There are
results to report, but setbacks appear and are and
will be inevitable. The need is for predictability and
confidence. Determined internal and external efforts
are required to prove that the worse-case scenarios are
wrong. This is challenging but possible.

