The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2003/665, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling all its
previous resolutions and statements of its
President regarding the situation between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, as well as the conclusions of
the Security Council mission to Eritrea and
Ethiopia in 2002, welcomes the Secretary-
General's progress report of 23 June 2003
(S/2003/665).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ethiopia and Eritrea, and its support for the 13
April 2002 delimitation decision of the Eritrea-
Ethiopia Boundary Commission.

"The Security Council welcomes the public
commitment of both parties to a full and
expeditious implementation of the Algiers
Agreement of 12 December 2000, and reaffirms
the Council's commitment to contribute to the
completion of the peace process. The Council
welcomes the parties' acceptance of the 13 April
2002 delimitation decision as final and binding.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact
that the situation in the Temporary Security Zone
has remained calm and that the parties have
cooperated well with the Special Representative

of the Secretary-General and with the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE). The Council reiterates its serious
concern about outstanding issues referred to in
the Secretary-General's report, in particular some
restrictions on the freedom of movement of
UNMEE that remain and the continuing absence
of a direct high altitude flight route for UNMEE
aircraft between Asmara and Addis Ababa,
resulting in additional costs to the Mission.

"The Security Council supports the
Secretary-General's observation in his progress
report (S/2003/665) that expeditious demarcation
of the border is crucial, and expresses concern at
the delays so far, particularly given UNMEE's
operational cost at a time of growing demands on
United Nations peacekeeping. Delays would be
contrary to the wish of both parties to achieve
lasting peace and stability as manifested in the
Algiers Agreement.

"The Security Council urges the parties to
provide their full and prompt cooperation to the
Boundary Commission for the beginning of
demarcation in Sector East and for the initiation
of survey work in Sectors Centre and West. The
Council calls upon the parties to pursue any
matters that may arise in connection with the
implementation of the Boundary Commission's
delimitation decision within the provisions of the
Algiers Agreement.

"The Security Council encourages the
parties to continue their cooperation with the
Military Coordination Commission in order to
resolve military and security coordination issues
arising from the Boundary Commission's
activities. The Security Council welcomes
assurances given by both parties regarding the
provision of security for the Boundary
Commission's staff and contractors operating in
the Temporary Security Zone and adjacent areas
during demarcation.

"The Security Council regrets the absence
of political contacts between the parties. It
believes that political dialogue between the two
countries is crucial for the success of the peace
process and the consolidation of progress made
thus far. The Council calls on both parties to
normalize their relationship through political
dialogue, including confidence-building measures
such as holding alternating meetings of the
Military Coordination Commission in each
other's capital.
the

"The Council underlines the United Nations
readiness to facilitate political dialogue if
requested and to offer strong support in
addressing the humanitarian and development
challenges that would result from the demarcation
of the border.

"The Security Council encourages UNMEE
to continue its local outreach activities in order to
provide valuable information about the peace
process and mine awareness programmes to the
local population. The Council welcomes
UNMEE's intention to continue quick-impact
projects, which provide direct assistance to
communities in the border regions, and welcomes
the Secretary-General's recommendation
contained in paragraph 22 of his report. The
Council, expressing appreciation to those
Member States that have already provided
contributions to the Trust Fund for the
Delimitation and Demarcation of the Border and
to the Trust Fund to Support the Peace Process in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, calls on Member States in a
position to do so to urgently provide further
support to these Trust Funds.

"The Security Council is concerned about
the serious shortfall of resources received in
response to the consolidated appeals to address
the humanitarian consequences of the drought in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, and calls on Member States
and the international community to contribute
generously to these appeals."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2003/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
