Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We will only touch upon certain aspects ofthe
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
which has been discussed at length. The topic has
been on the Council's agenda for almost 15 years. The
Council regularly includes the protection of civilians
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. Moreover,
the relevant provisions are contained in existing
international legal documents.

However, despite the assurance of parties to an
armed conflict that they are taking all precautionary
measures, reports of cases of the disproportionate or
indiscriminate use of force causing civilian deaths
continue to reach us from war zones with alarming
regularity. Such incidents include medical personnel,
teachers, journalists and humanitarian staff, that is,
those whom international humanitarian law categorizes
as civilians and who should enjoy the unconditional
protection of all parties to armed conflict. In that
connection, we reiterate that guaranteeing the effective
protection of civilians is possibly only by the parties
to a conflict fully complying with their international
commitments under international humanitarian law.

Far from being theoretical, such problems are
of a practical nature, in particular given the fact that
resolving such situations directly involves the Security
Council. Civilian deaths as a result of the actions of
those who should protect them clearly reflect a flaw
in the system. Either precautionary measures are
insufficient or they occur through the authorities
mandated by the Security Council not fulfilling their
obligation to protect civilians.

In that regard, unfortunately, we must once again
note that, despite the calls of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the circumstances of the civilian
deaths in Libya as a result of NATO air strikes, as
reported by journalists and investigated by the Human
Rights Council, have still to be duly established. It is
a matter of such fundamental issues as the need for
scrupulous compliance with Security Council mandates
for the protection of civilians and basic ethical norms,
such as due apologies and material compensation. The
issue of the protection of civilians is all the more in
the spotlight in view of the practice of the targeted use
of unmanned aircraft or drones, including in a cross-
border context.

In that connection, we are concerned both about
civilian deaths and the psychological stress inflicted on
civilians living under the constant threat ofa devastating
missile strike. That issue is already a foremost priority
of human rights bodies, including the Human Rights
Council Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights while countering terrorism.
We call on the Security Council to remain focused on
the issue. We believe that it is worth mentioning the
positive experience of certain United Nations missions.
For example, it seems important to examine in depth the
experience of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, which, we understand, has developed a
special mechanism for tracking civilian deaths.

In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the
international community should take proactive steps to
protect civilians, in particular if it involves the use of
force, only if endorsed by the Security Council and with
fullest compliance with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
