Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I should like to start
by joining others in commending Poland for
having convened this open debate, and we are glad,
Mr. Minister, to see you preside over this meeting. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
on the theme based on his comprehensive report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462).
I should also like to thank the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Yves
Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for having shared their
perspectives with the Council.

Across the many conflict and crisis situations
that we deal with here in the Council, the protection
of civilians is a common challenge. Innocent civilians
suffer vicious attacks; many others become displaced;
some are kidnapped or are held under siege; and others
are starved or denied the basic necessities. Even the
lives of humanitarian workers and other actors, who
are the front lines of saving lives, continue to be at risk.
We have witnessed all this in a number of conflict and
crisis situations.

Therefore, the protection challenges identified in
the report of the Secretary-General, particularly those
related to attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
as well as instances of disregard for international
humanitarian law by parties to an armed conflict, are
indeed a matter of serious concern. We note the three
additional actions recommended by the Secretary-
General and the national protection policy framework
annexed to his report. We hope that these three
additional actions, as well as the policy framework, will
be further discussed within the appropriate framework.

As identified in the 2016 report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/447), enhancing respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law and
promoting good practice by parties to armed conflict
should continue to be the priority for action in the
protection of civilians. Strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law by both States and
non-State armed groups is important in this regard.
Peacekeeping operations continue to be an important tool
for the protection of civilians, in spite of the challenges
they face, especially in asymmetric environments.
As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations and one of the signatories
to the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
Ethiopia attaches great importance to the protection
of civilians. In this context, we believe that proper
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries in the formulation of the mandate of a mission
is vital in order to achieve greater effectiveness in the
execution of the mandate and ensure the protection
of civilians.

Moreover, peace operations should be adequately
resourced and equipped with the necessary capabilities
if they are fully to implement their protection-of-
civilians mandates. Without bridging this gap, it would
be too difficult to expect peace operations to deliver
on their mandates, and we have a long way to go in
addressing this critical challenge.

Of course, it goes without saying that peacekeepers
should be guided by the broader principles of
international humanitarian law in carrying out
their mandated responsibilities and that they should
be adequately trained in the area of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

As one of the largest refugee-hosting countries,
we continue to grapple with increasingly complex
challenges related to the suffering of people on the
move as a result of armed conflicts. In this regard,
it is important to reinforce our international values,
solidarity and responsibility-sharing as the basis upon
which we, as the international community, must move
forward in responding predictably, comprehensively,
efficiently and meaningfully to these challenges.

I would like to conclude my remarks by reaffirming
the commitment of Ethiopia to the protection
of civilians, including by providing life-saving
humanitarian assistance and international protection
to the thousands of refugees we continue to host as
well as in our continued participation in various peace
operations in our region.

