Mr. Maas (Germany): I thank the Polish presidency
for convening this meeting today. I remember that,
only two weeks ago, Mr. President, we commemorated
together the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Warsaw
uprising. In the final months of the Second World War,
200,000 innocent men and women - most of them
civilians - were murdered by German soldiers, and
the city of Warsaw was left in ruins. It was crimes like
those that led the international community to proclaim
"never again". The Geneva Conventions were adopted
and to this day they remain one of humankind's
proudest achievements. The alternative - war without
limits - is simply not acceptable.

The Geneva Conventions are the cornerstone of
international humanitarian law. Their spirit is upheld by
the brave men and women in humanitarian operations
worldwide who dedicate their lives to saving the lives
of others. And while they are doing their job, we have
to ask ourselves, "Are we really doing our job?" Of
course, humanitarian issues have become regular items
on the agenda of the Security Council. The Council
is increasingly frequently being briefed by experts
whose credibility is unassailable, and that is the case
for our briefers today. They make sure that attacks on
humanitarian actors and violations of humanitarian law
are clearly addressed. But can we talk about progress
when humanitarian crises are multiplying, especially in
the context of armed conflict? What does it say about
the Security Council when we meet time and time again
and people are still dying?
Respect for humanitarian law is declining, and
the complexity of modern warfare, with extremist
groups and conflicts without borders, adds new deadly
challenges. Day after day, civilians, humanitarian
workers and medical personnel are attacked. Hospitals
and schools are targeted. Just recently, a hospital
supported by the German Government and its
humanitarian partners in the Syrian town Kafr Nabl
was attacked twice - just one example of many. We
are failing the most vulnerable. We are not living up to
our legal and ethical obligations.

Mr. Peter Maurer once said that peace remains the
ultimate goal of neutral and impartial humanitarian
work, and that goal is highly political. I agree. It is a
threat to peace and security when thousands of people
die, when tens of thousands fear for their lives. And
when the most basic principles of humanity are at risk,
the Security Council must take action. It is our duty to
do so. We might not agree on specific political solutions
for many ofthe world's conflicts. That is the sad reality,
but we must bridge our differences when our only task
is to protect human lives. Let us live up to the principles
we all agreed upon 70 years ago. Let us bring those
who attack humanitarian workers and violate the
Geneva Conventions to justice. This is why Germany
supports organizations that document war crimes in
Syria. The perpetrators must know that they will not
go unpunished. And let us use our influence to ensure
that all parties to conflict fully respect humanitarian
law and principles.

The goal of humanitarian diplomacy must be to
spread knowledge on international humanitarian law
just as the German Armed Forces already do whenever
they carry out training missions abroad, such as in
Mali. Let us back those who negotiate every day for
humanitarian access. Their success saves human
lives. Institutions such as the Geneva-based Centre of
Competence on Humanitarian Negotiation deserve our
full support.

Those are concrete steps we can take today, not
tomorrow. They are part of the humanitarian call for
action that Germany and France initiated during our
joint presidency of the Security Council in March and
April. Our meeting today is an important step forward.
We invite all Member States, starting with members of
the Security Council, to join us.

We must not forget the lessons that humankind
learned 70 years ago. For those who saw the horrors
of the Second World War, the Geneva Conventions
became a sign ofhope, and they would remain so today
if we finally implemented them. Any progress we make
will save the lives of many, and it is our duty to try.

