Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish at the outset to thank the Chairmen of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) -
Ambassadors Vilovic', Mayr-Harting and Urbina,
respectively - for their informative briefings and for
their work to strengthen international cooperation in
combating terrorism.

The Russian Federation favours increased
cooperation and coordination among the three Security
Council Committees. The main direction for this
coordination effort was set out in their joint statement.
We consider future cooperation among the Committees
and their expert groups to be a key prerequisite for
enhancing the Security Council's effectiveness in
combating the global threat of terrorism.

I turn now to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. With the assistance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Committee has made significant progress in its
dialogue with States on the basis of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments relating to resolution
1373 (2001). We note the growing role of the CTC
subcommittees under the chairmanships of the Russian
Federation, France and Viet Nam.

Country visits continue to be an important tool
for the CTC, and the experience of the past six months
has confirmed the effectiveness of such visits,
including regional, repeat, focused and comprehensive
visits. I note the cooperation between CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of Eight
during such visits. These endeavours have enabled the
Committee to clarify the provisions of the Global
Implementation Survey relating to resolution 1373
(2001).

We also note progress in the dialogue between the
CTC and Member States concerning resolution 1624
(2005), which relates to the ideological fight against
terrorism and, in particular, to putting an end to
incitement. A hundred Member States have already
submitted reports to the Committee on this.

We wish also to commend CTED, under the
leadership of Mike Smith, for its assistance to the
Committee. In June, in accordance with resolution
1805 (2008), an interim review of the work of CTED
took place. It assessed the efforts of the CTED, and the
Executive Directorate received high marks in all areas
pertaining to its mandate. We endorse that positive
assessment. We further support CTED's participation
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and we commend CTED for its assistance
to the Task Force's working groups on integrated
assistance for countering terrorism, tackling the
financing of terrorism and protecting human rights
while countering terrorism.

We continue to consider the 1267 Committee to
be among the Security Council's most effective and
capable counter-terrorism mechanisms. We express
grave concern at the increase in terrorist activity and
the expanded role of the Taliban and its extremist
ideas, both within the territory of Afghanistan and
beyond it. In our view it is unrealistic to claim that the
link between the Taliban and Al-Qaida is growing
weaker and that by using flexible sanctions, we could
drive a wedge between them or somehow isolate so-
called intransigent Taliban. We think that it is
inappropriate and dangerous to attempt to establish
political contacts with leaders of extremist groups,
especially in contravention of the Security Council's
sanctions regime. We call upon all States to strictly
implement measures against individuals on the
sanctions list established in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the guiding
principles of the work of the 1267 Committee.

We welcome the efforts of the Committee and the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team in
keeping the consolidated list up to date and ensuring
that it reflects the true face of today's terror threat. At
the same time, we consider any attempts to accelerate
or facilitate de-listing in breach of existing procedures
to be unconstructive. We support the sensible idea of
increasing the transparency of the Committee's
procedures, in order to avoid doubts about the
legitimacy of the imposition of sanctions, including
those raised by regional or national courts.

It is important not to allow the role of the
Committee in monitoring the implementation of
sanctions to be weakened, in particular with respect to
exemptions from financial embargo. We call upon
States to submit, in accordance with resolution 1735
(2006), requests for listing individuals and
organizations linked to the Taliban and Al-Qaida,
including those that finance their terrorist activities
with the proceeds from sale of illicit drugs.

Full and conscientious fulfilment by all States of
their obligations is necessary for a successful outcome
in our efforts to combat the real and ever-changing
threat to international peace and security posed by the
Taliban and Al-Qaida. The Russian Federation has
consistently favoured full implementation by all States
of resolution 1540 (2004) and of the subsequent
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), which were
intended to ensure that weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery and related materials do
not fall into the hands of non-State entities, especially
terrorists.

The aims of resolution 1540 (2004) have lost
none of their relevance. The gravity of the threat of the
possession by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction
was mentioned by many participants in recent open
meetings of the 1540 Committee, which were held as
part of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution. The 1540 Committee
has a central role to play in consolidating and
enhancing the effectiveness of international efforts in
this sphere.

The Committee has done very good work during
the reporting period. Eight meetings were held, and
considerable work went into preparing and organizing
them. Six of these were open meetings with the
participation of a number of Member States and
international and regional organizations. Without
doubt, this practice enhances the transparency of the
work of the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies.

It is our expectation that the review process soon
to be completed will give fresh impetus to further
stepping up international efforts to combat the
proliferation of threats and risks, with the 1540
Committee playing a coordinating role. It is important
that the Committee continue to increase its assistance
to States in complying with the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) and, to that end, that it coordinate the
broadest possible international cooperation, in
particular as part of the extensive informational and
awareness-raising programmes in which it participates.

We are prepared to continue to support such
measures, including in the context of our constant
cooperation, on issues related to the mandate of the
1540 Committee, with members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States. Russia will continue to take
purposeful measures to attain the goals set out in
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).

