Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): My delegation
would like to extend its congratulations to you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and we also wish to
convey our appreciation for convening this important
debate on peacekeeping operations.

Recent dilemmas with conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa and elsewhere have confronted all
of us with new challenges and threats that have not
existed before. This has required us to think creatively
about problems that still claim hundreds of lives. If
thinking creatively implies that we redefine the
paradigms of conflict prevention and resolution, we
should be courageous enough to do so.
South Africa believes that conflict cannot be
resolved only by addressing the symptoms. As a short-
term response, immediate relief of the symptoms might
be helpful, but we need to delve into and understand
the causes of conflicts so as to prevent escalation or
recurrence of the violence. South Africa believes that
an early integrated application of political, economic
and military measures to restore or enhance the ability
of conflict-ridden societies to look after themselves,
politically and economically, is what the international
community should be striving for.

We believe that the prevention of conflict should
be the main goal of the United Nations. That could
only be possible by strengthening the early warning
mechanisms through voluntary sharing of information
among States. Prompt action based on proper analysis
of early warning signals could serve us better than
containing an already existing conflict and also save us
from spending much- needed resources on
peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping is an expensive exercise and should
be undertaken as part of a comprehensive solution to
conflicts. It should be a vehicle towards the creation of
better conditions for socio-economic development and
good governance. These are essential ingredients in the
prevention of incipient and ensuing disputes from
escalating into deadly conflicts. South Africa believes
that no Government can be stable and legitimate
without hope flowing in from prospects of a growing
economy, rising employment, reduction of illiteracy
levels and a better life for all. The resolution of
conflicts will create the right environment for creating
strong States and will also prepare countries for
sustainable development.

One of the most important innovations in the
management of international security in the post cold-
war era is the concept of shared responsibility between
the United Nations and regional organizations for the
effective management of conflicts within the regions of
the world. Lessons learned from that cooperation show
that United Nations capacity is enhanced by it.

The African Union and other regional
organizations have shown their commitment towards
resolving long-standing conflicts on our continent. The
actions of Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire and of
the African Union in Burundi and recently in Sudan are
clear examples of how regional organizations can
intervene and help prevent conflicts from escalating.
However, that active role by the regional structures
should not be perceived as absolving the United
Nations of its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation looks forward to the early approval of a
peacekeeping mission in Burundi.

However, it is a well-known fact that the scope
for regional peace operations is limited by the lack of
funds and logistics capabilities. Therefore, we should
be creative enough to work out a strategy to enhance
that cooperation with the provision of logistics and
equipment. A credible mission would be one
authorized by the United Nations in support of regional
initiatives aimed at bringing peace and stability. More
importantly, there must be participation from the
developed world, including logistical and material
support. That would serve as a useful resource on
which the United Nations could rely when
circumstances demanded.

The Brahimi report (S/2000/809) provided us
with a clear set of specific, concrete and practical
recommendations to improve the functioning of the
United Nations. In the course of implementing the
Brahimi recommendations, we have learned that
success depends on political will and on the
availability of a number of other resources, including
logistical and financial resources.

Knowledge of an impending conflict does not
always translate into the political will to act. The
decision to intervene is more often based on a political
calculation by States of where their interests lie. In that
regard, my delegation would prefer that the Security
Council acted in the interest of the international
community and intervened in a timely manner. These
interventions should also be commensurate with the
problem on the ground. The goal should be to resolve
conflict by providing appropriate mandates and
adequate resources to ensure that conflicts do not
escalate or recur.

