Ms. Fang Liu (spoke in Chinese): I am pleased and
honoured to have been invited by the President of the
Security Council to attend today's meeting.

(Spoke in English)
I wish to express my sincere thanks to the President
of the Security Council, Mr. Gerard van Bohemen of
New Zealand, for inviting the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) to address the Council
on international civil aviation security issues, and to
New Zealand's Foreign Minister, The Honourable
Murray McCully, for presiding over this meeting.

ICAO has been contributing to the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy since 2006, as well as to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In particular, I would highlight
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).
ICAO is one of the 38 entities of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which is mandated
to strengthen the coordination and coherence of
counter-terrorism efforts in the United Nations system.
We enjoy productive collaboration with all Security
Council bodies, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).

ICAO was established in 1944 upon the signing
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation in
Chicago. We work with 191 Member States and industry
partners to adopt international civil aviation standards
and recommended practices and policies in support of
a safe, efficient, secure, economically sustainable and
environmentally responsible civil aviation sector. The
over 12,000 standards and recommended practices and
policies are contained in 19 annexes to the Convention
and used by ICAO member States as benchmarks to
ensure that local civil aviation operations and regulations
conform to global norms. In turn, these harmonized
national air transport regulations help States, airlines,
airports and others to cooperate in managing over
100,000 daily flights. This currently permits 3.5 billion
passengers per year - representing some 10 million
travellers each day, and one-third of the world's trade
by value by air - to reach their global destinations
safely, securely and efficiently. It is important to stress
that the worldwide air transport network will double its
volume of flights and passengers by 2030.

ICAO also protects civil aviation through the
adoption of treaties. Among 19 United Nations counter-
terrorism treaties, eight were adopted by ICAO,
including most recently the Beijing Convention of
2010 and Montreal Protocol of 2014. In addition to
its standards-setting role, ICAO audits States' civil
aviation oversight capabilities in the areas of safety
and security, and coordinates targeted assistance and
capacity-building, utilizing these monitoring results.
Technical assistance is a major component of
the ICAO No Country Left Behind initiative, which
focuses on assisting all States on prioritized needs
to improve implementation under all ICAO strategic
objectives. The primary objective of aviation security
assistance is to support Member States in resolving
significant security concerns identified through the
ICAO Aviation Security Audit Programme, and to
assist them in implementing security standards and the
ICAO Traveller Identification Programme Strategy.

ICAO established in 2015 a regional aviation
security and facilitation plan for Africa, but
importantly, a great deal more is needed in terms of
commitments and cooperation on the part of States
and other international organizations if these and other
technical assistance efforts are to fully meet their
objectives. ICAO is also keenly aware of the critical
links between sustainable socioeconomic development
for States and safe, secure air transport operations, as
international aviation contributes roughly 3.5 per cent
to the world gross domestic product. While we strive
with our member States towards the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, that role is becoming more
important than ever.

Aviation security - or, more precisely, the
prevention of acts of unlawful interference against
civil aviation - is one of ICAO's highest priorities.
I mentioned earlier that ICAO's standards are set out
in 19 annexes to the Chicago Convention. Annex 17
is specifically focused on aviation security. They
cover a comprehensive range of measures, from
national organizational arrangements and allocation of
responsibilities to threat and risk assessments, baggage
and cargo security, physical security at airports and
incident response to international cooperation, among
many other matters.

The high-profile landside airport attacks in
Brussels and Istanbul earlier this year were a tragic
reminder of the enormous challenges faced in securing
public areas, the inseparability of aviation security and
national security and of the significant socioeconomic
consequences of terrorism. But they also remind us of
the resilience and responsiveness of the global civil
aviation network. Subsequent to those attacks, ICAO
rapidly developed new amendments to annex 17 aimed
at enhancing landside security at airport facilities. It is
anticipated that the ICAO Council will adopt them in
November.

In terms of the outlook for international civil
aviation security, at present we consider it to be both
promising and challenging. I am pleased to inform
the Council that ICAO's Universal Security Audit
Programme continues to record that levels of effective
implementation of aviation security standards are
steadily improving, at both the global and regional
levels. Intensive collaboration by States, under ICAO's
leadership, is also permitting us to refine all the relevant
standards, recommended practices and best-practice
guidance based on risk management.

Another very positive development we have taken
note of is the unprecedented level of multilateral
cooperation to support aviation security enhancement
initiatives. In addition to the ICAO African regional
security plan, the States of the Middle East region
recently adopted the Riyadh Declaration, which outlines
the need to improve aviation security in that region. But
at the same time, the threat and risk situation remains
complex and rapidly evolving, and so too must the
security measures to address them.

Threats posed by small weapons carried by
passengers, improvised explosive devices concealed
in baggage and cargo, and man-portable air defence
systems continue to require attention. As well, areas
of new or renewed concern, such as landside security,
cybersecurity, remotely piloted aircraft systems and
insider threats require urgent attention. And while
the overall effective implementation of ICAO's global
standards is improving, there remains much room for
progress. That is especially the case in States that lack
national capacity or may otherwise be characterized
by under-developed civil aviation security systems and
programmes.

A cornerstone of ICAO's aviation security
standards is the obligation of each State to designate
and specify to ICAO an appropriate authority within its
Administration. Those authorities are responsible for
the development, implementation and maintenance of
the national civil aviation security programme. Those
national civil aviation security focal points coordinate
the direct involvement of national police, intelligence,
customs, immigration, justice, foreign affairs, finance,
military and other agencies to ensure a cohesive,
whole-of-government national civil aviation security
programme. They must also coordinate the involvement
of airline and airport operators and air-traffic service
providers within that broad national framework. In
other words, aviation security at the national level
must engage a large number of entities, and each must
contribute in a manner consistent with their respective
mandates and responsibilities. The same holds true at
the international level. But the required coordination
can be complex and challenging at times, mainly due
to variation among State coordination mechanisms and
their resulting impacts on the global framework.

States are therefore called upon to help ensure that
all of their relevant domestic entities work closely and
effectively. To help drive the needed national focus
on global harmonization, ICAO therefore coordinates
closely with its member States, the CTED, the
World Customs Organization, INTERPOL and other
members of the CTITF, regional aviation and security
organizations and many others to enhance civil aviation
security. Throughout those efforts, a recurring theme is
securing and mobilizing States' political will, as well
as enhancing national capacities.

The Security Council's focus will serve to heighten
the efforts by the global community on aviation security,
encourage intensified political engagement by the States
to effectively implement ICAO's security standards and
to support ICAO's technical assistance activities to the
States in need. For the coming 2017-2019 triennium
of the ICAO work programme, the centrepiece in the
field of aviation security will be the development of
a new global aviation security plan. Among the goals
envisaged for the plan are greater technical assistance to
States to build their capacity and achieve higher levels
of effective implementation of annex 17 standards on
aviation security, accelerate the development of human
resources in aviation security, process and technology
innovation to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency
of security measures and greater use of many aviation
disciplines to improve security.

The global plan will establish and align targets
and objectives tailored to States' needs, together
with an effective mechanism for monitoring global
progress. Under that new ICAO global aviation
security plan, States, regions, industry operators and
other stakeholders will be unified through a strategic
framework that offers clarity on all priorities for
aviation security enhancement. It will establish
individual, bilateral and multilateral means to address
those priorities, time frames for achieving results and
the consequences to be expected when commitments are
not delivered. That will provide ICAO with invaluable
support in achieving its aviation security objectives and
in effectively contributing to the Security Council's
resoluitons and the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

