Mr. Oye Mba (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
First, I would like to say how delighted I am that this
special meeting of the Security Council on Africa is taking
place under your presidency, Madam. Your country,
Sweden, has always shown great interest and particular
sensitivity to the problems of third world countries in
general, and particularly those of Africa.

Secondly, I would like to say that I fully associate
myself with the statement just made on behalf of Africa by
the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina Faso.

A year ago, on 25 September 1997, the Security
Council, on the initiative of the delegation of the United
States of America, which at the time occupied the
presidency of the Council, met in this Chamber at the level
of Foreign Ministers to consider the appropriateness of
concerted international action to promote peace and security
in Africa.

That welcome new initiative arose from the Security
Council's interest in Africa, which, given its situation,
requires more than ever before the support of the entire
international community to meet the challenges it is facing.

The Secretary-General's thorough and very accurate
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
provides an objective analysis of the situation. It also has
the merit of formulating some action-oriented
recommendations.

Here I wish to pay tribute to our Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Arman, who has shown himself worthy of the
confidence placed in him by the international community,
and in particular by his continent.

My country, as the Council knows, chairs the ad hoc
working group established by the Security Council. Thus,
I welcome the positive reactions to the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report. I venture to
hope that the results of these deliberations, some of which
have already been adopted by the Security Council in the
form of resolutions and presidential statements, will mark
an important advance towards concrete action.

Such action, to my mind, should, inter alia, be
aimed at strengthening arms embargoes; stemming illicit
flows of small arms; resolving the question of
transnational populations; supporting countries that
receive massive flows of refugees; strengthening African
capacity for peacekeeping; and coordination between the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity and
African regional organizations in the area of conflict
prevention and the maintenance of peace.

On the subject of prevention, I welcome the
reflection of that concern in resolution 1197 (1998),
adopted by the Security Council on 18 September 1998.
Concerning Central Africa, the Ministers of Defence
and the Interior, meeting in Libreville from 28 to 30 April
1998, reconsidered the idea of an early warning
mechanism as an instrument for crisis and conflict
prevention. At that time, we reiterated the imperative need
for the speedy establishment of this structure, pursuant to
the decision taken by the heads of State and Government
of Central Africa.

As current Chairman of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, I welcome the fact that this idea is now enjoying
the support and favourable attention of the international
community. On behalf of our 11 member countries, I
wish to express solemn thanks to the countries and other
donors that have contributed to the special fund set up in
that respect, especially Japan, the United States of
America, Germany, the United Nations and the OAU.

Gabon, for its part, is currently making every effort
to establish the logistical conditions that will make it
possible for this future early warning mechanism to have
its headquarters in Libreville. But to bring this project to

 

fulfilment we still need the full assistance of the
international community.

In order to create unity and make their armies
operational for future peacekeeping missions, the member
States of the Committee have decided to organize joint
military exercises to simulate peacekeeping activities.

Accordingly, a delegation of representatives of the
member States of the Committee, led by Gabon's Minister
of Defence, was received in June, here in New York, by
Secretary-General Kofi Arman. He assured them that the
United Nations would provide assistance for implementation
of this plan. A number of partners of countries from our
subregion also expressed their interest in this idea.

Finally, for the first time in the annals of the
Committee, from 18 to 21 May 1998 we held, in Bata,
Equatorial Guinea, a conference on the problem of the
relationship between democratic institutions and peace in
Central Africa. That meeting brought together within a
single forum members of Governments, representatives of
opposition parties, senior police officers, representatives of
civil society and experts on questions of political freedom,
freedom of the press and human rights. At the end of that
conference, the participants recommended, inter alia, the
establishment of a subregional parliament in Central Africa.
That body would be responsible for dealing with questions
of common interest with the aim of reinforcing confidence-
building measures and subregional peace. It would also act
as a mechanism for dialogue and for the promotion of
values relevant to the democratic experiences of Central
Africa.

While this special meeting of the Security Council is
taking place, a special summit of heads of State of Central
Africa is meeting with President Bongo in Libreville to
seek a peaceful solution to recent crises and conflicts
besetting our subregion, in particular the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Need I stress that the holding of that summit in
Libreville, in the wake of so many other round tables, talks,
mediation efforts and peace negotiations, is the result of the
relations of trust and friendship that President Bongo and
Gabon have always tried to maintain with all of our
neighbours.

Far from constituting any kind of competition, these
initiatives seek rather to complement the many efforts being
made jointly in the area of conflict prevention, management
and settlement by the United Nations and the OAU, as
well as by the subregional organizations.

All of these political actions cannot alone guarantee
durable peace and security in Africa if they are not
accompanied by steps in favour of economic and social
development, because poverty, misery and despair are
often the real cause behind the turmoil that we see
breaking out in various places.

That is why my delegation believes in the need for
coordination between the various bodies of the United
Nations and the international financial institutions in order
to give a comprehensive response to the Secretary-
General's important report.

In conclusion, I would like to express the hope that,
beyond mere declarations of intent, the ideas that emerge
from our debates in the ad hoc working group and the
Security Council will lead to concrete and timely
decisions and actions.

