Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing on the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which he
chairs, for this reporting period. As this is Mr. Quinlan's
last briefing as Chair of the Committee, we would like
to thank him and the Australian delegation for chairing
that subsidiary body of the Security Council for the past
two years. We note the efforts of the Panel of Experts,
which provided useful assistance. We continue to
carefully study the midterm report of the Panel, which
was recently discussed at the Committee's meeting.

On 24 November, in Vienna, another round of
negotiations was concluded on one of the most difficult
issues in current international relations, that is, settling
the matter of the Iranian nuclear programme. In spite
of the fact that those negotiations have been ongoing
for some time now, just in the last year, new impetus
was provided to them, after a Joint Plan of Action was
agreed in Geneva. In that regard, we would like to note
that the manifest progress achieved in this area was to
a great extent the result of thinking outside of the box
and creative technical and political ideas presented by
the Russian delegation.

Over the past year, the Plan was strictly complied
with, thus allowing for significant progress in moving
towards a decisive agreement. The talks will go on, as
demonstrated by the recently concluded Geneva round
of consultations of political directors. At the three-to-
four-month mark, a document must be produced that
sets out all the basic principles. The parameters for their
implementation will then be discussed in technical and
drafting consultations.

For the moment, we consider it important to
underscore that, at this critical stage of the negotiations
progress regarding Iran's nuclear programme, any
activities of the Committee that could be interpreted as
extending beyond its direct purview would be harmful.
This applies equally to the essentially pointless repetition
of the idea that all legitimate sanctions against Iran will
remain in full effect. Any conscientious member of the
international community understands that fact without
prompting from the outside.

Demonstrating excessive zeal is sometimes
dangerous, as stated by the great Talleyrand. What is
important today is that all participants in the negotiations
aim to work energetically in an uninterrupted manner.
For our part, we will continue to do everything
within our area of responsibility for a definitive and
comprehensive solution to all issues having to do with
the Iranian nuclear programme and the lifting of the
sanctions against Iran pursuant to Security Council
resolutions.

