Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, President Kafando, for his briefing.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
concerned about the political and security situation in
Burundi, which is causing unnecessary suffering to the
population. I would like to bring the following three
points to the attention of the members of the Security
Council: the political space for the 2020 elections,
the ongoing human rights violations, and the need for
continued inter-Burundian dialogue.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has taken note
of President Nkurunziza's statement on 7 June of
the end of his term in 2020. That is an encouraging
announcement and a step towards respecting the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. We hope that this
decision will contribute to opening the political and
democratic space to all political actors to prepare free,
transparent and inclusive elections. We therefore call
on the Burundian Government to exploit that dynamic
to create, in consultation with all political movements,
conditions conducive to credible elections in 2020, with
the full and equal participation of women. We believe
that only an inclusive dialogue involving all political
actors, women and men can lead to that result.

That brings me to my second point. As long as
the inter-Burundian dialogue remains at an impasse,
human rights violations will continue. Credible sources
have reported several cases of assassination, murder,
arbitrary arrest and politically motivated kidnapping
during the previous month in various parts of the
country. Furthermore, we are seeing a degradation in
the situation of Burundian refugees in the region, with
repeated infiltrations by Government agents of refugee
camps in Tanzania.

The involvement of the Imbonerakure militia
and the National Intelligence Service in those actions
is particularly concerning. The Government of the
Netherlands condemns these violations and urges the
Burundian Government to put an end to impunity and to
fully respect and guarantee the rights of all Burundians.

Given the human rights situation, investigations
and independent reports are more important than ever.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Government of
Burundi to resume its cooperation with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and to fully cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry
and the three independent experts mandated by the
Human Rights Council. The international community
remains willing to engage in a constructive discussion
of these issues with the Burundian authorities.
My third point relates to the inter-Burundian
dialogue. That dialogue, held under the auspices of
the East African Community, remains the designated
framework for addressing the ongoing political crisis
in Burundi. Discussions on modalities for the return of
exiled opposition members must also be finalized as
soon as possible to elaborate a road map for the 2020
electoral process. That is why we call on the East
African Community to hold the next dialogue session
as a matter of urgency. We also call on all parties to
participate therein without any preconditions.

Once again, we underscore that the inter-Burundian
dialogue must be inclusive and abide by the principles
and the spirit of the Arusha Accords. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands also hails the stated commitment of the
African Union to contribute, along with the East African
Community, to an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
maintains its commitment to development and stability
for all Burundians. Nonetheless, the stakeholders in
Burundi are the only ones who can re-establish a lasting
peace, with the support of the region.

In his capacity as facilitator, Mr. Mkapa stated,
on the margins of the African Leadership Forum, that
security and peace in Burundi should be discussed by
the East African Community leaders. We support them
and call on them to continue their efforts, with the
active support of the African Union and the continued
attention of the Council, to break the political impasse.

