Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
begin by expressing our appreciation to Secretary of
State Rice and Foreign Minister Lavrov for this
welcome American-Russian initiative that will enable
us to end this meeting by adopting a resolution on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Speaking up once again after a long silence and,
we hope, in one voice, the Security Council is
reminding the peoples concerned that the international
community as a whole remains concerned about their
fate. In recalling in its draft resolution the guidelines
for the bilateral negotiations under way, the Council is
reconfirming its responsibility to support the process
until the goal shared by all - the end of the conflict
and the establishment of an independent, democratic
and viable Palestinian State in East Jerusalem, the West
Bank and Gaza, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security within secure and recognized borders - is
reached.

Today, 13 months after the Annapolis conference,
for the first time in eight years there is sufficient
momentum to reach the peace agreement awaited for
more than 60 years. Maintaining that momentum and
the future of the two-State solution continues to require
our attention and commitment on several levels.

First, the intensified bilateral negotiations
pursued by the Israelis and Palestinians bear witness to
considerable political investment on the part of the
parties, particularly in their resistance of the repeated
attempts of extremists on both sides to derail the
negotiations. We can only welcome the confirmation
by the parties themselves that that this political
dynamic is now irreversible. More than ever before, the
negotiations need full domestic and international
support, regardless of the outcome of the period of
political transition now under way.

At the domestic level, support for the negotiation
process will require above all concrete and visible
improvements in the situation on the ground. In the
West Bank, recent progress in the economic and, above
all, security fields demonstrates the benefits of the
political programme of Prime Minister Salam Fayyad,
as well as the mutual benefits of increased cooperation
on the part of the Israeli authorities. Alongside the
release of Palestinian prisoners, these results
strengthen mutual confidence and point to the road to
be followed; they should encourage Palestinians and
Israelis alike to step up their efforts to meet their
obligations.

Recent events have made such progress all the
more urgent. In the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
ongoing Israeli settlement activity is alarming.
Belgium notes that the continued settlement activity
has been unanimously condemned because it is clearly
and completely contraindicated by the stated desire to
establish the mutual confidence necessary to the peace
process. Above all, however, it is illegal and
jeopardizes the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State. The violence deliberately committed by
extremist settlers against Israeli law enforcement
agencies and, above all, against Palestinian civilians
strengthens our concerns even furthers. We therefore
call on the Israeli authorities to freeze settlement
activity forthwith and to ensure that the violence does
not go unpunished.
After five months of calm and hope in the Gaza
Strip, the humanitarian situation of its population
continues to deteriorate and is now catastrophic.
Rockets are again being fired into southern Israel, and
there is a real danger that the violent downward spiral
may resume, with civilians, as always, the primary
victims. Belgium therefore calls on all actors, and
Hamas in particular, to work urgently to prolong the
truce in order to ensure the critical normalization of the
security, humanitarian, economic and political
situations to which the populations involved
legitimately aspire. In that context, we join the Quartet
in supporting the efforts of Egypt to achieve inter-
Palestinian reconciliation and the release of Corporal
Shalit.

At the international level, the past year has seen a
remarkable intensification of the international and
regional support that was already manifest in the
largely positive response to the Annapolis meeting.
Belgium and its European partners contributed their
political and economic support for the Palestinian
Authority at the meetings in Paris, London, Berlin and
Bethlehem. Through the European Union, we also
participated in the Quartet, whose five summit
meetings in one year reflect greater political
commitment. Belgium supports a broader role for the
Quartet in following up the parties' implementation of
their commitments. We also welcome the regular
involvement in its meetings of members of the Follow-
up Committee on the Arab Peace Initiative.

Desirous of greater international involvement in
that promising yet fragile process, Belgium will vote in
favour of the draft resolution prepared by the United
States and Russia.

