Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Allow me at the outset to
extend the warmest welcome to Mr. Irakli Menagarishvili,
the Foreign Minister of Georgia, to today's meeting of the
Security Council.

The last few months have brought additional problems
to the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia. On several occasions
since the beginning of this year, the Security Council has
expressed serious concern over the deteriorating security
situation and resumed fighting, which have made the future
of the peace process increasingly uncertain.

The strenuous efforts of Mr. Liviu Bota, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and of other
international players involved in the search for a viable
solution of the conflict cannot be infinite and cannot bear
fruit without the full engagement and cooperation of the
parties. The responsibility to move the peace process
forward by renouncing violence and seriously considering
peaceful options for the resolution of the conflict clearly
lies with the parties themselves.

We welcome the recent second high-level meeting of
the parties held in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations. This gives us hope that the dialogue may be
preserved. The parties should act in good faith and should
put greater effort into continuing the talks to achieve
substantive results on the key issues of the settlement of the
conflict and concrete progress under the commitments they
have freely entered into within the institutional framework
agreed upon during the first Geneva high-level meeting,
held in November 1997.

The humanitarian problem and human rights
violations continue to be among the factors that keep the
peace process from becoming operational. The situation
of the persons displaced by the latest round of fighting in
the Gali sector, reports of extensive destruction of houses,
burning of villages and practices of the Abkhaz
authorities preventing the return of the refugees are
unacceptable. Until the safe return of the people to their
homes is ensured and further abuse of the population is
prevented, there cannot be a viable solution of the
conflict. Safe return of the refugees and displaced persons
is urgently needed in order to give additional credibility
to the peace process.

Apart from the political process, the exercise of the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) under volatile and dangerous
conditions remains a matter of serious concern to us. The
situation on the ground is still unsettled and tense. Several
incidents involving UNOMIG personnel have happened in
the last six months, some regrettably ending in casualties.
The reported mass media campaign launched against
UNOMIG and the initiation of acts of harassment against
the Mission, among other things, show a clear need for
constant review of the matter. In order to be able to
implement its mandated tasks effectively and in full,
UNOMIG has to be provided with adequate security. The
current situation requires further thinking about additional
practical security measures, including the idea of a self-
protection unit. However, the primary responsibility for
the protection of unarmed United Nations military
observers rests with the parties themselves.

In our view, the presence of UNOMIG continues to
be an important stabilizing factor in the area. We
therefore support the extension of UNOMIG's mandate
for a further six months. Slovenia will vote ln favour of
the draft resolution.

