Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): Allow me first to
pay tribute to you and Ireland, Mr. President, for your
presidency of the Security Council this month. I join
others in thanking and commending Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his views on the developments and
challenges that lie ahead in East Timor. I also welcome
Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief Minister of the Second
Transitional Government of East Timor, whose
presence speaks volumes for the development and
progress achieved in that land. I also wish to express
our appreciation for the useful briefings given by the
representatives of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

There is no doubt that the United Nations,
through its United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET), under the outstanding
leadership of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, has
effectively performed its tasks as mandated by Security
Council resolution 1272 (1999). This has been well
reflected in the peaceful elections for the Constituent
Assembly on 30 August this year, which marked a
milestone in East Timor's transition to independence.

The people of East Timor and UNTAET deserve
enormous credit for their remarkable achievements,
especially in the light of the harrowing destruction two
years ago. We also welcome the formation of an all-
East Timorese Council of Ministers to oversee the
public administration of East Timor. It is with them
that the will of the East Timorese resides in shaping a
self-governing and independent East Timor.

We are heartened by the positive political,
economic and social developments in East Timor
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. We fully
support his recommendations on the successor mission
to UNTAET, in which he envisages that a post-
independence United Nations presence will be required
in East Timor for a period of at least two years.
Thailand voices its support for this proposal, not
because it is one of the major troop contributors to the
Mission, but because of our cognizance of the need for
the continued engagement of the international
community in securing a solid foundation for the future
of East Timor.

Despite the enormous strides, the emerging of
East Timor as a nation-State still needs the unwavering
support and cooperation of the international
community. Let us not be hasty in withdrawing our
attention and responsibility from East Timor upon its
attainment of independence. UNTAET's tasks, which
are to establish a national civil administration, assist in
the development of civil and social services and
support capacity-building for self-government, among
others, as laid out in resolution 1272 (1999) are far
from being completed. They will not have been
completed at the time of independence, as has been
recognized by the Secretary-General.

The Thai delegation has emphasised on many
occasions, and reiterates today, that the support of the
United Nations and the international community in
capacity-building is of the utmost priority for the East
Timorese to attain self-sustenance in the political,
economic, social and cultural development of the
country. It is therefore imperative that we assist in
every way possible in equipping the East Timorese
with necessary skills and capabilities for democratic
self-government and nation-building. In this respect,
we support the Secretary-General's proposal that the
core tasks of UNTAET's successor mission should be
funded by assessed contributions and supplemented by
bilateral or multilateral arrangements.

We cannot stress enough that a premature
withdrawal of UNTAET, especially the peacekeeping
force, would undermine the remarkable contributions
and substantial investments of the international
community in East Timor. Thailand thus believes that
only a clear exit strategy with a solid development
framework conducive to East Timor's self-sustenance
would prevent the disintegration of the progress
achieved to date.

From our regional perspective, we recognize that
only a strong and stable East Timor will contribute to
the political and economic viability of the region. We
in the region are doing all we can within our limited
resources and capabilities to support the efforts of the
United Nations and the international community in
East Timor. It will take considerable time for East
Timor to be a viable State with effective institutions of
administration. Thus it is pivotal that the international

community support a successor mission to UNTAET in

East Timor for as long as necessary, at least until it has

reached a certain level of sustainable development.

Thailand, for its part, has offered to assist in the areas

of agricultural, public health and technical expertise.

Thailand's support for the establishment of peace
and stability in East Timor, in our continuous
contribution of military and civilian police personnel
since UNTAET's inception two years ago, has been
acknowledged by the international community. Our
troops are not only engaged in safeguarding the
territory, but are also playing a significant role in the
rehabilitation of East Timorese through civil-military
activities. A number of subsistence projects and non-
military training, particularly in agriculture, have been
initiated with the aim of fostering capacity-building for
the population at the grass-roots level.

The Royal Thai Government, despite its limited
resources, intends to continue this dual role, and is
prepared to maintain one battalion of troops in
UNTAET's successor mission. We believe our
contribution will play a part and make it possible for
East Timor to become self-sufficient and thus ensure a
peaceful future for its people.

