Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. China appreciates the good offices of the Special Envoy and supports his ongoing efforts to enhance communication with all partiesin Syria and the Astana guarantors, to listen to the reasonable requests of the Syrian Government and to continue to advance the political process in accordance with the principle of Syrian leadership and ownership and resolution 2254 (2015). Due to the interconnectedness of the grave political, security and humanitarian issues in Syria, we must take certain measures to advance the political process in the country. First, we must stay the course towards a political settlement and make good use of the Constitutional Committee as a platform. A political solution is the only way to end the Syrian crisis and must be based on maintaining Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. The establishment of the Constitutional Committee was a good start for the Syrian political process. Its role should be fully leveraged on the basis of the existing outcomes. Differences among Syrian parties in the work of the Constitutional Committee, while unavoidable, should be resolved through dialogue. We should pay particular attention to maintaining the independence of the Committee's work and creating the conditions necessary to enable all parties in Syria to narrow their differences and build consensus. We hope that the members of the Committee will demonstrate their political will, uphold the spirit of compromise and play a constructive role in reaching consensus among all parties in Syria. Secondly, terrorism in Syria must be eradicated in order to create a favourable security environment for advancing the political process. Rampant terrorism has significantly undermined prospects for a serious political process and a better future for the country. As such, it must be taken seriously and be addressed by all parties. Idlib has become a breeding ground for terrorism, and the acute problem of foreign terrorist fighters has had substantial knock-on effects. Countries should eliminate the safe havens established by terrorist groups in Syria, in accordance with international law and all relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015). China supports all the parties in their continuing efforts to seek comprehensive, long- term solutions to the Idlib problem through dialogue and negotiations. Thirdly, efforts should be made to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria, which would help to advance the political settlement process. The international community must step up humanitarian aid to Syria and support the United Nations in providing help to the displaced persons. Humanitarian aid should be dispensed with no political strings attached. In the long run, we should support the Syrian Government in rebuilding where the security situation is relatively stable. The international community has a moral responsibility to help Syria restore economic development and calm. In order to effectively carry out humanitarian relief operations in Syria, we should enhance communication and coordination with the Government and respect Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
