Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, as the representative
of the brotherly nation of the State of Kuwait, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. We are pleased that Ambassador
Yamamoto is here with us today and would like to
thank him for his dedicated efforts in Afghanistan as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
am glad to see Ms. Sima Samar briefing us today. She is
doing important work as the Chairperson of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission.

Today's meeting on the situation in Afghanistan
comes at a crucial moment, as we are engaged in
the delicate task of carefully steering two important
national processes, namely, the election and the peace
talks. We wish to end the decades-long conflict by
means of a comprehensive settlement, accepted by all
Afghans, and a presidential election to consolidate and
ensure the continuity of democracy, governance and
the rule of law in our society. At this critical juncture,
we are confident that both of those objectives can be
attained with adequate international support and with
patience and commitment.

First, on peace efforts, the National Unity
Government has long believed that the prospect of
peace can be achieved only through a process that
enjoys the support and consensus of all Afghans. The
momentum for peace has grown stronger as a result of
increased engagement and activities in Afghanistan and
abroad. Last month, a consultative loya jirga on peace
brought together 3,200 elected members from across
the country, including members of political parties,
tribal and religious figures, women, youth and civil
society, to build consensus and create a mandate for
peace talks with the Taliban. Women and young people
played a prominent role in the jirga, as women led 13 of
the 50 working committees and comprises 30 per cent
of all participants.

The outcome was the adoption of a declaration that
created the parameters and a road map for talks with
the Taliban. The declaration called for an immediate
and permanent ceasefire; respect for the values and
essence of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan; the
preservation of democratic gains and the constitutional
rights of people, especially women; the start of direct
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban; the preservation and strengthening
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces;
the continuation of support from the international
community; and a realistic timetable for a responsible
withdrawal of international security forces.

Protecting the essence of our Constitution,
especially equal rights for men and women and human
rights, is the core element of today's Afghanistan and a
strong desire of the Afghan people. Therefore, we should
ensure that the outcome of any potential agreement will
only retain, expand and strengthen women's right for
the purpose of a sustainable and durable peace.

For our part, we continue to stand ready to engage
in comprehensive talks that reflect the views and
overall position of the people of Afghanistan. We thank
all our international partners, from within the region
and beyond, for supporting our efforts for a durable,
dignified and lasting peace. In that regard, we highlight
the efforts of the United States and other partners in
support of peace, including the recent decision of the
Government of Germany to take a more proactive role
in peace efforts and in helping to facilitate direct talks,
which we sincerely hope will take place very soon.

The best measure of progress in advancing
peace negotiations is not only the extent to which the
Taliban reduces its violence, but rather that they cease
it entirely through a permanent ceasefire, and their
decision to engage in direct talks with the Government.
The intra-Afghan dialogue is a good start towards
direct discussions.

We also must not forget the important role that the
region can play in facilitating direct peace negotiations
for a successful agreement. Building a regional
consensus for peace has been vital to Afghanistan,
and to achieve that the Government has taken various
steps in reaching out to the region to build greater
engagement and establish the needed consensus.

The commitment of the Afghan Government to
peace is clear and genuine. That is demonstrated by the
Government's decision to release nearly 900 Taliban
prisoners following the Bid religious holiday as part of
the demands from the participants in the peace jirga
and as a confidence-building measure.

Unfortunately, actions taken so far by the Taliban
fail to signify even the slightest degree of commitment
to peace. Not very long ago, the Taliban announced
their spring offensive campaign and started to attack
civilians while their representatives were engaged in
peace negotiations. That is further evidenced by new
attacks during the month of Ramadan against ordinary
Afghans, civilians and religious figures who were
denouncing violence and spreading the message of
peace in different parts of the country.

The Taliban has also attacked and killed many
humanitarian aid and medical workers. They have
restricted the movement and activities of many aid
organizations, including the World Health Organization
and the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
have vowed to continue their attacks on aid agencies.
During the three-day Eid holiday, at least 30 people
were killed in approximately 23 Taliban attacks in
Logar, Helmand, Baghlan and Kapisa provinces. These
attacks unfortunately reconfirm the group's desire to
manipulate a genuine offer for a peaceful settlement to
the conflict.

We believe that only a dual-track approach of
pressure and incentives can ensure a conducive
environment for a successful outcome. The attacks
represent a violation of international humanitarian law,
and any degree of passivity from any of us can lead
to the misunderstanding of weakness and space for the
group to dictate the terms of the negotiations.

Despite the continued attacks, our security forces
have repulsed the Taliban's spring offensive and
prevented the group from capturing territory. According
to the latest joint Government committee report, from
85 to 90 per cent of productive territory, including
natural resources, highways and other infrastructures,
are under Government control.

To further deter the extremist elements, our security
forces were able to clear the Taliban presence in Deh-
Yak and Khwaja Omani districts of Ghazni province
over the past several weeks. That was achieved not
only due to the professionalism and bravery of our
forces but also in part due to the ongoing efforts to
reform the security sector to make it more streamlined
and effective.

Meanwhile, facing defeat in the battlefield, the
Taliban have sought to compensate setbacks with a
renewed focus on attacking soft targets, using civilian
compounds as shelters, leading to an increase in civilian
casualties and the waging of a psychological warfare
through terror and destruction. We are documenting
changing battle tactics by the Taliban in incorporating
a more heinous strategy by planting improvised
explosive devices and other explosives in civilian
spaces, including targeting schools. A recent example
is the ongoing fighting in the Baharak district in Takhar
province, where the Taliban have used civilian houses
as shields and have prevented people from even leaving
their houses.

Civilian protection remains a high priority at the
highest levels of our Government. We have taken
institutional measures to avoid collateral damage,
which include close coordination with the international
forces during security operations and accountability
for incidents resulting from actions that deviate from
standard rules of engagement. We continue to take
concrete steps to ensure the physical protection and
well-being of children, including preventing any
recruitment of child soldiers in our security forces,
through our revised penal code, which criminalizes
such activities.

The emergence of a democratic political order
through a democratic process chosen by the people
of Afghanistan is among our most significant
achievements over the past 18 years. When using the
term "we," I am not referring solely to the people of
Afghanistan, but rather I am speaking in the context
of the collective efforts and sacrifices that all of us
in the Council have made. Less than two months ago,
President Ghani inaugurated our new Parliament in
the presence of its members and representatives of the
international community. Looking ahead, our people's
approach to the future includes the expectation that
nothing outside of the democratic order can determine
our political destiny.

Therefore, despite all the challenges, we will make
sure to hold presidential elections in September of this
year. We are fully aware that the task will not be an
easy one. At the same time, we are confident in being
able to fulfil it successfully, with support from the
international community and our friends and allies. We
have begun security and technical arrangements for the
elections and are in discussions with our international
partners on various aspects of the process. We welcome
the appointment of the United Nations advisers who will
serve as international commissioners in the Independent
Election Commission to provide technical support. We
will spare no effort whatsoever to ensure a credible,
transparent and inclusive electoral process to meet the
demands of our people and our political stability.

The gains of the past 18 years also include the
emergence of a dynamic and committed young
generation. This generation is increasingly taking
charge of the country's future. The resilient role of
Afghan women as agents of change, progress and
transformation has been a fundamental part of that
new dynamic. Women's contributions and leadership
have reached new heights, as public servants across the
Government and in the private sector. For the first time,
the heads of the Independent Election Commission and
the Electoral Complaints Commission are both women.

To consolidate those gains, promote and protect the
rights of women and incorporate women's voices in the
peace and security agenda, we look forward to working
with a broad set of partners through the group of friends
of Women of Afghanistan here in New York, which we
will soon launch in partnership with the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom. I would like to
sincerely thank Ambassador Pierce for her commitment
to this cause. We look forward to benefiting from the
Council's support for the group's activities.

The new Afghanistan is also starting to emerge as
catalyst for economic and regional cooperation. That
is best demonstrated by the implementation of several
mega-regional projects, under our Afghan-led Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan
platform, which will yield economic dividends
beyond our immediate region, and the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process. Through increased trade, investment,
infrastructure and development, we are moving in the
direction of sustainable growth.

To conclude, I would like to quote one of the
participants at the consultative peace jirga, who said
that "no one wins in war as no one loses in peace."
Therefore, securing tangible and durable peace
that is acceptable to the people of Afghanistan is an
imperative to make sure that our country will move
forward, not backwards. Together with our friends
and allies, we stand at an important crossroads where
a collective and unified approach will enable us to
achieve our strategic objectives of a peaceful, stable
and prosperous Afghanistan.

