Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We deeply appreciate
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui's remarkable work, undertaken in pursuance
of her mandate, to implement the international legal
framework for the protection of children affected by
armed conflict. With a firm yet pragmatic approach,
she has been able to obtain the cooperation of States
and regional organizations. We welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Jean Asselborn to the Council. Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas and her team have done a splendid job in
putting together a very comprehensive draft presidential
statement. Luxembourg has conducted inclusive and

skilful negotiations to bring all Council members on
board.

Children are the most valuable resource we have.
A society's soul is reflected in the way it treats its
children. The United Nations Charter's adage "to save
succeeding generations" urges us to invest in children's
future, which is in fact our future. We know that
millions of children are trapped in wars and conflicts.
They are killed, maimed, raped and subjected to sexual
violence. They are recruited, abducted and detained,
and are coerced into becoming part of armed conflicts.
Some progress has been made to slow down this
scourge, especially in developing norms and standards.
Thousands of children have been demobilized,
rehabilitated and reintegrated. Much more needs to be
done to ensure compliance, fight impunity and protect
children's rights in the face of new risks that come
about as a result of the evolving nature of conflict.

As Ms. Zerrougui pointed out this morning, the
absence of clear front lines and identifiable opponents
and the tactics used by terrorist groups make children
vulnerable in conflict situations. Children have been
used as suicide bombers and human shields. Schools
continue to be attacked, which particularly affects
girls' education.

Persistent perpetrators of violence against children
must be brought to justice through national judicial
systems and, where applicable, the use of international
justice arrangements.

The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today sends a strong signal: the Council condemns all
violations of applicable international law impinging on
children's rights. It demands that all parties to conflict
immediately put an end to such practices and take
special measures to protect children.

In his report (S/2013/245), the Secretary-General
referres to an increasing number of child casualties
incurred through the use of armed drones. He has also
called for adherence to the principles of precaution,
distinction and proportionality and for transparent and
effective investigations when child casualties occur. For
its part, Pakistan believes that the use of armed drones
violates sovereignty, causes civilian casualties and puts
communities at risk of reprisal attacks. Drone strikes
radicalize disaffected communities and increase the
number of terrorists. Urgent and intense negotiations
are needed to address the issue of armed drones.

Pakistan fully supports the mandate of the children-
and-armed-conflict mechanism, including its reporting
and monitoring procedures. We want to strengthen
the political consensus around that mandate to ensure
better protection of the rights of children in situations of
armed conflict. For that purpose, the legal parameters
of the mandate must be respected. Focus should
continue to remain on situations of armed conflict and
those threatening international peace and security. We
are encouraged by Ms. Zerrougui's outreach to Member
States to understand and address their concerns in that
regard.

The draft presidential statement to be adopted today
clearly recognizes the primary role of Government,
which is to be supported and supplemented by the
United Nations, in providing protection and relief to
children affected by armed conflict.

Before concluding, I would like to make the
following suggestions.

Every effort should be made to ensure that the
information collected through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism is accurate and verifiable. The
Council should finalize objective and balanced listing
and delisting criterial, in full consultation with Member
States. The terms "armed attacks" and "armed groups"
should be replaced by "terrorist attacks" and "terrorist
groups" in cases where a clear determination has been
made that the attacks were launched by terrorist outfits.
There is no need for legal euphemisms in that context.

Finally, I thank Under-Secretary-General Herve
Ladsous, UNICEF Deputy Director Yoka Brandt and
Save the Children Associate Vice-President Gregory
Ramm for their statements. Their contributions have
enriched our discussion in the Council.

