Mr. Bing Dai (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would like to preface my statement with a condemnation of the attack that took place yesterday in the Niger and to express our condolences to the families of the victims. I would like to thank the three briefers - Special Representative of the Secretary-General Sori-Coulibaly, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Waly and Ambassador De Almeida Filho, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission - for their briefings. China has been closely following the developments in Guinea-Bissau. Presidential elections were held at the end of 2019, which went smoothly despite some dispute of the election results. The parties have, by and large, been able to resolve their differences through dialogue. China is pleased to note that the National Assembly approved the new Government programme on 29 June this year and that the political process is gradually getting back on the right track. We find these developments commendable. In the light of the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/755), I would like to make the following points. First, the formation of the new Government created a pivotal opportunity. The parties in Guinea-Bissau should seize that opportunity to put the long-term interests of their country and their nation first, take practical steps to continue implementing the Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) six-point road map, expedite the constitutional review and other political reforms, consolidate the hard-won political stability, promote economic development and improve the people's living standards. The challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) makes it all the more important for the parties to keep the interests of the people foremost in their minds and to work as one in the fight against COVID-19. The parties should also work harder to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime in the defence of the rule of law and justice. Secondly, given Guinea-Bissau's economic fragility, in addition to its own efforts, greater international support is in order through increased investment in the country's poverty reduction efforts, education, health care and infrastructure, among other areas, so that the country can develop sustainably on both the economic and social fronts. China stands ready, along with the rest of the international community, to provide assistance where we can to support Guinea-Bissau's national development and COVID-19 response. Thirdly, ECOWAS played an important role in resolving the election-related dispute through active mediation. China continues to support African countries in seeking African solutions to African issues. China supports regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and ECOWAS, in continuing to provide tailored support for Guinea-Bissau's peace and development, while respecting its sovereignty and without interfering in its internal affairs. The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau (UNIOGBIS), for its part, can continue to play a coordinating role to create synergies among various actors. Fourthly, China has taken note of the phased implementation of the transition plan by UNIOGBIS and encourages the Office to strengthen its communication and coordination with the United Nations country team and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and to take fully on board the views of the Government of Guinea-Bissau in order to ensure a seamless transition between mandates. China stands ready to continue supporting the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and UNIOGBIS.
