Ms. Sison (United States of America): We
appreciate the successful work of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in
stabilizing Abyei. The mission's efforts in working
with local communities to strengthen ties, resolve
disputes and increase stability have greatly contributed
to the general calm in that contested area between the
Sudan and South Sudan. We commend Ethiopia for its
contributions to UNISFA and for successfully achieving
the mission's core mandate - the stabilization of the
Abyei Area.

Since 2011, however, the Sudan and South Sudan
have made little concrete progress on implementing
their agreements related to Abyei and the border. As
a result, UNISFA has been regularly prevented from
fully implementing its mandate, particularly with
respect to supporting the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), which has not
functioned as intended for almost six years.

When the Security Council unanimously renewed
the UNISFA mandate in May 2017 under resolution 2352
(2017), the Council gave the parties a final six months
to show their commitment to fully operationalizing the
Border Monitoring Mechanism. While we continue to
support the JBVMM. concept, the Security Council
cannot continue to support and resource a mechanism
that the parties themselves do not expeditiously take
tangible steps to implement.

The parties agreed to take several important
steps in that regard at the extraordinary session of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held on
14 and 15 May. We acknowledge that there has been
limited progress in completing those steps, such as
by authorizing UNISFA to use the helipad at Gok
Machar and conducting aerial reconnaissance patrols
to establish JBVMM. team sites. We note that a meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism was
held on 31 October, at which it reaffirmed the parties'
commitments. It is unfortunate, however, that it
took more than five months for that meeting to take
place, especially considering the deadline the Council
had given.

In addition, we remain seriously concerned about
reports that armed forces continue to occupy areas
within the agreed Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and
that Sudanese armed police still surround the Diffra
oil complex. These actions are inconsistent with the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011, as well as
with several Security Council resolutions.

In consulation with regional and international
partners, and in view of the mixed results since the
Council last renewed UNISFA, we support resolution
2386 (2017), renewing the overall mission mandate for
another six months, while giving the parties a final
four months to complete the steps to which they have
previously agreed with respect to fully implementing
the J BVMM.

