Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and
for Lithuania's consistent effort to integrate the issue of
press freedom and the threats to it across the work we
do at the Council., I would also like to thank our guest
briefers, Mr. Deloire and Ms. Pearl, for their powerful
words today and for the tremendous work they are doing
to advance this most critical cause. Ms. Pearl has been
a tremendous force for good in the world. As a mother
and former journalist, I am in awe of her strength. I
offer a special thanks to her son Adam for being present
today; he is the best reminder of why we need to do
more to protect journalists.

Nearly two years ago in July 2013, when the
Council last met to discuss the issue of the protection
ofjournalists (see S/PV.7003), the United States raised
the case of Mazen Darwish, the Head of the Syrian
Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression. Darwish
had been held incommunicado since February 2012,
when he was detained by regime officials along with
several colleagues. Today, he remains behind bars
along with two fellow staff members, Hani Zaitani and
Hussein Ghreir. On 13 May, earlier this month, their
trial was suspended for the twenty-fourth time, which
is little surprise, given that their only crime was to

report the truth about the Al-Assad regime's atrocities.

Since the beginning of this month, the whereabouts of
the three men have been unknown. Mazen's brave wife
Yara Bader, who has led the Centre since his arrest and
campaigned around the globe for his release, is with us
in the Chamber today. I thank Yara for all she is doing.
Darwish's case exemplifies the first of three challenges
I want to highlight today with respect to the protection
ofjournalists.

How does the international community protect
journalists from parties that deliberately target them?
In the four plus years since the Syrian conflict began,
more than 80 journalists have been killed and at least
90 more abducted, according to the Committee to Protect
Journalists. Countless more have been threatened,
attacked, wounded, barrel-bombed or disappeared.
They have been targeted by both the Al-Assad regime
and violent extremist groups like Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), whose grotesque executions of
journalists alongside humanitarian aid workers, foreign
soldiers and people of different religions or political
beliefs seemed aimed both at using their victim's
suffering as a recruiting tool and at dissuading other
journalists from covering the conflict.

Unfortunately, their tactics seem to be working, as
the videos of their executions are widely disseminated
on social media, while both international and national
coverage of the Syrian conflict itself has declined
dramatically. What the Al-Assad regime, ISIL and
other State and non-State actors like them that target
journalists have in common is that they do not want
people to see them for what they really are - whether
that is a regime willing to torture, bomb, gas and
starve its people in order to hold onto power or a group
masquerading as religious that routinely desecrates the
basic dignity of human beings. That is why the Mazen
Darwishes, James Foleys and Daniel Pearls of the world
are so dangerous to those groups and Governments.
Their reporting strips away the facade and shows us
what lies beneath.

That brings me to the second challenge. How do we
protect journalists, and more broadly, press freedoms
in situations in which violence is escalating and there
is a risk of mass atrocities? That is important, as we
know that a robust press can play a key role in helping
to prevent crises from metastasizing into full-blown
conflicts and mitigating the conditions in which grave
human rights violations tend to occur.

We are seeing that right now in Burundi. After
the ruling party's announcement of the candidacy of
President Nkurunziza for what would be his third term,
despite the explicit two-term limit set by the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi,
there were large public protests. The Government
responded by shuttering the country's most important
media outlets. Not long after members of the military
attempted to oust the current Nkurunziza Government,
the offices of at least four independent radio stations,
which have generally been critical of the Nkurunziza
Government, were attacked and their equipment
destroyed. Since the unlawful attempt to seize power
was quashed, several independent journalists report
being told that they are on a list of people to be arrested,
and many more reportedly have been threatened with
death, torture and disappearance, forcing them to
go into hiding. One Burundian journalist said in an
interview: "No journalist feels safe enough to look for
information". That is right now, in Burundi.

Even in countries that are not experiencing conflicts
or at imminent risk of sliding into unrest, the erosion of
press freedoms is often a harbinger of the rolling back
of human rights that are critical to healthy democracies.
This is the third challenge that I would like to raise:
how do we - and by "we" I mean the United Nations,
bodies such as the Security Council and our individual
Member States - push back against the erosion ofpress
freedoms by Governments intent on silencing critical
voices and other key outlets of free expression. Look to
any region and you will see alarming warning signs of
how the crackdown on press freedom is coupled with a
broader crackdown on civil and political rights.

Take Ethiopia, where nine journalists, six of them
bloggers from the collective Zone 9, which covers
political and social news, have been imprisoned
since April 2014 under Ethiopia's anti-terrorism
proclamation. After 20 administrative hearings, their
trial finally began on 30 March. If convicted under the
proclamation, they could face up to more than a dozen
years in prison.

Take Azerbaijan, where Khadija Ismayilova, a
contributor to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty's
(RFE/RL) Azerbaijani service, remains incarcerated
on charges widely viewed as politically motivated.
Ismayilova is known for her reporting on corruption.
After arresting her in December 2014 on charges
of inciting a man to commit suicide, authorities
raided RFE/RL's Baku office, interrogated its staff,
confiscated reporting notes and sealed the newsroom.
New charges have been added to Ismayilova's case as
she awaits her trial, including embezzlement, illegal
business and abuse of power.
It is worth noting that all around the world, for
every individual or group targeted through prosecution,
attacks and threats, there are countless more impacted:
people who, seeing the risks, either begin to self-censor,
go into hiding or flee the countries that so desperately
need their independent voices.

Given the critical importance of press freedoms in
advancing so many of the goals of the Council, let me
make four recommendations in closing as to how we
can meet these challenges.

First, we must condemn the Governments and
non-State actors that attack journalists as well as the
overly restrictive laws and regulations that undermine
their freedom. It is much easier to prevent these spaces
from closing than it is to fight to reopen them.

Secondly, we must give journalists the tools
they need to protect themselves, particularly when
working in conflict zones and repressive societies.
The $100 million that the United States has invested in
training more than 10,000 at-riskjournalists and human
rights defenders in digital safety and in providing them
with anti-censorship tools is one example. Another is
the training provided by civil-society groups such as the
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, whose director
in Iraq, Ammar Al-Shahbander, was killed by a car
bomb on 2 May, a devastating loss for his family, the
community ofjournalists he mentored and his nation.

Thirdly, we can ensure that the people who
attack journalists are actually held accountable for
their crimes. The failure to effectively investigate
and prosecute such crimes sends a clear message to
perpetrators that they can continue to commit them
without any consequences.

Fourthly and finally, we can help create
programmes to protectjournalists operating in conflict
zones, particularly those targeted for their work.
Colombia shows how this can be done. The national
protection unit established by the Government in
2011 is empowered to protect 19 vulnerable groups,
including journalists and human rights defenders. As
of last year, more than 80 journalists - and this is
extraordinary - were receiving protection measures
ranging from cell phones and transport subsidies to
bodyguards and armoured cars. The programme has
an annual budget of $160 million, which speaks to
Colombia's commitment to protecting these individuals
and the country's recognition of the crucial role that
these groups play.

One of the journalists who has received protection
is Jineth Bedoya Lima. In 2000, when Bedoya was 26
years old, she was heading into one of the country's
most dangerous prisons to report on paramilitary
groups when she was abducted, drugged and driven
to a hideout, where she was raped and beaten by three
men. As they were abusing her, one of her captors
told her, "We are sending a message to the press in
Colombia". Later they left Bedoya bound, by a trash
dump. She fled the country soon after. Today Bedoya is
back in Colombia, reporting stories with the protection
of bodyguards from Colombia's unit. She still feels
fear but perseveres, driven by a commitment to telling
the stories that otherwise would go untold, and that
includes her own.

In speaking out about her own experience,
Bedoya has helped make the serious and seriously
underreported problem of sexual assault in Colombia's
long-running conflict more visible, and she has become
a leading advocate of accountability even as several of
her own attackers continue to roam free. Bedoya also
led a countrywide campaign to establish a national day
for the dignity of women victims of sexual violence,
which last year Colombia's President, Manuel Santos
Calderon, agreed to establish. Colombia just honoured
the day for the first time two days ago, on Monday,
25 May.

There are few greater living testaments to the value
of protecting journalists than Bedoya's story. We must
not allow voices like hers to be silenced.

