Mr. Khoshroo (Iran): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Netherlands presidency for
organizing today's debate. I also thank the Ambassador
of Afghanistan for his statement. I would like to
thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing on the Secretary-General's
most recent report (S/2018/165).

Unfortunately, security remains the major challenge
for Afghanistan. According to the Secretary-General's
report, 2017 ended with the highest level of security-
related incidents ever recorded. A wave of deadly,
complex attacks, in particular three major attacks in
Kabul with hundreds of fatalities, continued throughout
January 2018. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-
Khorasan Province remained operationally resilient,
thereby exacerbating the volatile security situation as
conflict between the Government and terrorists, as
well as extremist groups, continued throughout most of
the country.

Iran continues to support the promotion of security
and stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan. It supports any Afghan-
led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled call
for a reconciliation and peace process. It is in that
context that we agreed to participate in the Kabul
Process - and endorsed its final declaration in
February this year - and in similar processes to help
achieve peace and security in Afghanistan.

The Afghan National Unity Government is in
the forefront of fighting terrorism, in particular the
Taliban, Al-Qaida, Da'esh and its affiliates, as well as
other terrorists and extremist groups and criminals.
The sustained support of the international community
is needed to support the Afghan Government in that
fight and to address its complex security, economic and
political challenges.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major step towards
consolidating peace and improving its economic status
in the region. In that regard, I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to Kazakhstan for its initiative to
organize a ministerial debate on regional partnership
in Afghanistan and Central Asia, as a model to link
security and development during its presidency of the
Security Council in January. The world should regard
the situation in Afghanistan not as an opportunity for
competition but as one to establish peace, security and
stability through development - a win-win approach
for Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries,
including those in Central Asia and the international
community in general.

For more than three decades, Iran has hosted
millions of Afghan refugees and has shared much
needed subsidized goods and services with them,
including basic commodities, public health and public
education. This year alone, our schools are providing
education to nearly 400,000 undocumented Afghan
students. With that in mind, we welcome and urge
further efforts to strengthen the process of regional
economic cooperation, including measures to facilitate
regional connectivity, trade and transit. Over a
decade and in total, Iran has funded more than 300
development projects, including reconstruction and
building infrastructure totalling $500 million. Such
projects have the capacity to change regional economic
perspectives and can help prosperity and stability
in Afghanistan.

During the reporting period, trade through Iran's
Bandar Abbas and Chabahar ports increased as of early
2017, marking a significant shift in Afghanistan's access
to markets and international trade. The findings of the
Afghanistan Opium Survey 2017 of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, indicating an 87 per cent
growth in opium production, are alarming given the
fact that narcotics provide a major source of income
for terrorist groups. The international community
must support the relevant international and regional
projects and activities, including those carried out by
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan,
within the framework of the triangular initiative to
counter narcotics.

We reiterate our support for UNAMA and United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a comprehensive plan. Sustained ownership and
partnership with the Afghan Government are needed in
order to utilize the best potential of UNAMA and the
United Nations system to deliver the necessary services
in priority areas, as advised by the national Government.

The General Assembly, through its resolution
64/253, recognized 21 March of each year as the
International Day of Nowruz. Nowruz - "New
Day" - is celebrated in many countries, including
Afghanistan. Nowruz has served as the common
inspiration for peace and reconciliation for more than
300 million people around the globe. On the eve of
Nowruz, I would like to express my best wishes to
the fraternal people of Afghanistan, wishing them a
happy Nowruz, and reassure them of Iran's full support
in their endeavour to reach peace and prosperity in
their country.

