Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would, first of all, like to thank Ambassador Takasu,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for his
briefing on the Committee's work over the past three
months. We would also like to express our gratitude to
him for the work he has done since taking office as
Chairman of the Committee.

The Iranian nuclear issue has to do with the
effectiveness of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime, has a direct bearing on the
situation in the Middle East and affects international
energy security. It has therefore attracted widespread
attention in the international community.

China has always supported maintaining the
international non-proliferation regime. We oppose the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and do not want to see
a new wave of turbulence in the Middle East. We have
always called for resolving the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomatic means and in a peaceful way. China
has always believed that resolving that issue through
diplomatic means is in the interest of peace and
security in the Middle East region. It is also in the
common interest of the international community. China
is therefore ready to continue to play a constructive
role in that regard.

The United Kingdom, France, Germany, China,
the United States and the Russian Federation are
maintaining close contact and cooperation with regard
to restarting negotiations on this issue. The
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has also
5
continued its cooperation with Iran on various issues
pertaining to Iran's nuclear programme. Rare
opportunities exist in connection with restarting
negotiations on the matter.

China has taken note of the fact that IAEA
Director General ElBaradei has submitted his latest
report on the Iranian issue. We appreciate the efforts
made by the IAEA and its Director General. We hope
that Iran will continue its cooperation with the IAEA
and resolve outstanding issues at an early date, so as to
allay the misgivings of the international community
about its nuclear programme.
At the same time, we also hope that the
international community will seize this opportunity to
intensify its diplomatic efforts on this matter and
maintain and promote dialogue with Iran, so as to
achieve an early start to negotiations in the search for a
long-term comprehensive and appropriate resolution to
the Iranian nuclear issue.

