Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Like all the other
members of the Council, the Republic of Korea has
consistently supported the Middle East peace process,
which began with the 1991 Peace Conference on the
Middle East in Madrid, on the basis of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We have always held the view
that the progress achieved jointly by the Israelis and the
Palestinians for the peace and common prosperity of the
region is undeniable proof that any regional dispute, no
matter how deep-seated and complex, can eventually be
solved through dialogue between the parties directly
concerned. For a country like the Republic of Korea, which
has itself suffered from the painful division of its land for
almost half a century, the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue has
also served as a positive example of confidence-building
measures and of the peaceful settlement of disputes.

Although the Middle East peace process suffered a
devastating blow last year with the tragic loss of Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the year 1996 has begun on a note
of optimism, most notably in the successful conclusion of
the conference on assistance to the Palestinians, held on 9
January in Paris, where the Republic of Korea announced
its decision to provide additional grant aid of $3 million
beyond the $12 million already offered for rehabilitation
projects of the Palestinian people. Within the region itself,
the Palestinians achieved another milestone in the quest for
the expansion of self-rule and peaceful coexistence with
the Israelis by holding elections of the Palestinian Council
and President of the Palestinian Authority on 20 January
in a peaceful and democratic manner. It is due to these
very encouraging signs that the international community
has been filled with hope that a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region is within reach.

Regrettably, a series of terrorist attacks in Israel on
25 and 26 February and on 3 and 4 March sent a dark
cloud over the region. Fully recognizing that these acts of
cowardice were intended to derail the peace process, all
the members in this Chamber echoed their support for
peace and called on the parties to consolidate their efforts
and increase their cooperation in curbing violence and
combating terrorism. Outside the Council, the
international community advocated a similar position by
holding the Summit of Peacemakers on 13 March in
Sharm El Sheikh on the Sinai peninsula. Participants in
the Summit expressed their firm support for the peace
process and issued a strong condemnation of terrorism.

Despite the international community's hope that the
Middle East peace process would continue intact, we note
that the Israeli policy adopted in response to the terrorist
attacks has adversely impacted the lives of Palestinians.
In particular, Israeli measures such as the closure of its
borders with the West Bank and Gaza have caused
enormous hardship for the Palestinian people and have
stirred international concern. The socio-economic
problems resulting from Israeli countermeasures should be
resolved as soon as possible, not only from a
humanitarian perspective, but also for the sake of the
peace process itself. After all, it is the obvious goal of the
extremists to fan the flames of hatred among Palestinians
against Israel and the peace process.

Therefore, the current situation of the region
demands a most cautious and balanced approach. While
terrorism should be prevented, the economic well-being
of the Palestinians should be duly considered as well.
Although the international community should encourage
the pursuit of such a solution, primarily to preserve the
peace process, the task itself is in the hands of the parties
directly concerned. Fortunately, there is an array of legal
frameworks to support this end, particularly the
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements of 1993 and all subsequent agreements,
including the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and
Gaza Strip signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) in 1995. But ultimately, it is the
wisdom, courage and patience of the Israelis and

 

Palestinians alike which will enable them to surmount the
daunting challenges before them. As the problems facing
the two peoples are man-made, so too can the solution be
forged among these two parties. Given that both Israel and
the PLO have a crucial stake in the continuation of the
peace process, the spirit of compromise and cooperation
must be revived by accommodating in a most balanced
manner the economic well-being of the Palestine people and
the security interests of Israel.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to appeal once
again to both Israelis and Palestinians to move beyond the
bloodshed and suffering of the past by implementing
faithfully and promptly the international commitments they
freely entered into.

