Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking you, Sir, for organizing this
timely debate. My delegation aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, but also wishes to make a few points of its
own.

We welcome the annual report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2012/261),
and we warmly welcome the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. We reaffirm in the strongest terms
our continued support for the mandate of the Special
Representative. Despite today's vote, it remains clear
that that mandate also includes situations of concern
other than those on the agenda of the Council. We
thank the former Special Representative, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her Office for their highly
dedicated work, and we welcome the latest expansion of
the trigger of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals. We call on
the Council to expand the trigger to the two remaining
grave Violations: denial of humanitarian access and
abductions. We further call on the Council to ensure
that Special Representative Zerrougui regularly briefs
the Council and its Working Group, including on
situations such as those in Libya and Syria.

The report of the Secretary-General once again
makes for disturbing reading. We are particularly
concerned about the increasing number of persistent
perpetrators listed in its annex. It is imperative for the
Council to use all the tools at its disposal to strengthen
accountability and to stop those tragic developments.
The Council should expand, where relevant, the
mandates of existing sanctions committees, and also
consider allowing the Working Group to directly apply
target measures against individuals. Furthermore,
the Council should enhance its cooperation with
international courts and make more frequent use of its
power to refer situations to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The recent ICC sentence against rebel
leader Thomas Lubanga for recruiting and using child
soldiers in hostilities shows the relevance of the Court
in that regard. We also believe that the ICC's deterrent
effect should be applied to other situations, such as that
in Syria.

Without effective investigations and prosecutions,
national criminal laws will exert little deterrent effect.
We must therefore increase our efforts to strengthen the
capacity of national courts to investigate and prosecute
violations against the rights of children. That is in line
with the principle of complementarity, according to
which international courts should get involved only as a
last resort. Ultimately, the responsibility to protect and
respect the rights of children in armed conflict rests
with the parties themselves. We call on all persistent
violators to develop and implement action plans that
may eventually lead to their delisting. To that end, the
States concerned must allow direct contacts between the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the relevant non-State actors.

A further way to strengthen the United Nations child
protection system is to apply the Security Council's
normative framework on child protection in a more
consistent manner. Research reveals that the Council
often fails to reflect its thematic agenda in its country-
specific work. In close partnership with Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict and with the support ofthe
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, we have developed a mobile application that
seeks to increase the impact of the Council's agenda
on the mission mandates of peacekeeping operations
and on the criteria for sanctions committees. The
application will provide policy-makers - those in this
Chamber - with readily available key documents and
appropriate language for negotiations. The application
was launched today by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General at an event organized by the
Mission of Liechtenstein, in cooperation with Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank everyone who attended the
event and made it a success.

