Mr. Alasania (Georgia): Let me express my
gratitude to the members of the Security Council for
08-45458
this opportunity to address them. Today's special
Council meeting is being held to consider the grave
escalation of the situation in the Tskhinvali region of
Georgia. First, I will reflect on the recent events that
have led to that tragic deterioration.

On 1 August, at about 8 a.m. Tbilisi time, a
pickup vehicle containing six Georgian police officers
was hit by two remote-control explosive devices. As a
result of that attack, five Georgian policemen were
severely wounded. The central authorities decided not
to retaliate, so as not to escalate the situation.

On 2 August, six civilians and one Georgian
policeman were injured during the overnight shelling
of seven Georgian villages in the South Ossetian
conflict zone. The seven Georgian-controlled villages
came under intense fire from South Ossetian separatists
using large-calibre mortars. Georgian law-enforcement
personnel fired back defensively for some time but
then received a ceasefire order aimed at not escalating
the situation.

On 3 August, the South Ossetian separatist
government announced the evacuation of more than
500 people, including 400 children. However, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Russia's Republic of North
Ossetia told the Interfax news agency that it was not an
evacuation; the children were being sent to North
Ossetia as part of a prearranged summer camp
programme, as he explained it. Russian media outlets
started a massive propaganda campaign against
Georgia.

Late on 6 August, separatists opened fire with
mortars on Georgian-populated villages: Eredvi and
four others. Georgian Government forces fired back to
defend the civilian population. As a result of intense
crossfire during the night, two servicemen belonging to
the Georgian battalion of the Joint Peacekeeping
Forces were injured. The separatist regime also
claimed several injuries on its side. Despite the
targeted attacks on the peaceful population and
villages, as well as on the Georgian police and
peacekeeping forces, the central authorities decided not
to respond with a heavy exchange of fire, in order not
to injure the local population.

Temur Yakobashvili, Georgian chief negotiator
and State Minister for Reintegration, said in late-night
televised remarks on 6 August that it was the position
of the Georgian Government that only direct dialogue
with the Tskhinvali authorities would resolve the
3
deteriorating security situation. Mr. Yakobashvili also
stressed that Ambassador-at-Large Yuri Popov would
attend the talks as a facilitator. South Ossetian chief
negotiator Boris Chochiev refused to take part in the
negotiations.

Overnight and in the early-morning hours of
7August, intensive fire came from four positions in
various Ossetian villages. The separatist authorities
continued firing on Georgian law-enforcement
personnel and peacekeeping units with mortars and
artillery. The central authorities responded with limited
fire in order to defend those positions.

In a morning interview with Russian news
agencies, South Ossetian de facto President Eduard
Kokoity declared that, if the Georgian Government did
not withdraw its military forces from the region, he
would start to clean them out. President Saakashvili,
speaking with journalists at the military hospital in
Gori, where he was visiting injured Georgian
servicemen, said that, despite the attacks on the
Georgian villages, Tbilisi was showing maximum
restraint. The President also called on Russia to recall
from South Ossetia its officials, who consider
themselves the so-called South Ossetian government.

On the morning of 7 August, Temur Yakobashvili
visited the conflict zone to meet with representatives of
the separatist government. The Minister of State met
with Marat Kulakhmetov, Commander of the Joint
Peacekeeping Forces, in Tskhinvali. Once again,
however, the separatists refused to negotiate with him.
Anatoly Barankevich, head of the separatist republic's
Security Council, threatened that armed groups of
Cossacks from North Ossetia were headed towards
South Ossetia to fight Georgian forces.

By 4 p.m. the same day, the separatists had
resumed their shelling of Georgian villages. Three
Georgian servicemen were injured when the South
Ossetian separatist forces blew up an infantry combat
vehicle belonging to the Georgian peacekeeping
battalion. Georgian police responded by firing towards
groups of armed separatists in those villages, killing
two separatist militiamen and wounding two others.
Later, the Georgian peacekeepers' checkpoint at Avnevi
was bombed, and several Georgian servicemen and
civilians were killed.

In a live televised address at 7.10 p.m., President
Saakashvili said that he had ordered the Georgian
forces to cease fire in South Ossetia. He stated that
there had been casualties, including both deaths and
injuries. Mr. Saakashvili said that he had ordered the
ceasefire specifically to give the South Ossetian
secessionist regime another opportunity to resume the
talks. Despite Georgia's decision not to return fire, the
Georgian village of Avnevi once again came under fire
from South Ossetian militiamen at approximately
8.30 p.m. The village can be described as having been
totally destroyed as a result of that attack.

South Ossetian separatist armed groups fired at
the Georgian-controlled village of Prisi at about 10.30
last night. The attack left several people wounded on
the Georgian side. At approximately 11.30 p.m., the
same separatist authorities opened fire on all Georgian
positions around the South Ossetian capital of
Tskhinvali, including those in the villages of
Tamarasheni and Kurta. The police station in Kurta
was totally destroyed as a result of that heavy fire.

I want to state very clearly that the illegal
separatist authorities and armed formations are under
the control and direction of the security and defence
agencies of the Russian Federation. Numerous high-
ranking Russian officers from among the ranks of the
peacekeepers, as well as other officials from the
Russian military, intelligence, and law-enforcement
services, are serving in senior roles in Tskhinvali.

That is a clear violation of Russia's obligation to
remain neutral: instead, it has thus become a party to
the conflict. These Russian officers and individuals
include: Mr. Yuri Morozov, the Prime Minister, born in
the Russian Federation, who, before his appointment in
the government of South Ossetia in 2005, occupied
various positions in Bashkiria; Mikhail Minzayev,
Minister for Internal Affairs since 2005, a colonel in
the Russian police, who, in 2004, during the counter-
terrorist operation in Beslan, led FSB Special Unit
Alpha; Anatoly Barankevich, Secretary of the National
Security Council of South Ossetia since 2006 and a
colonel in the Russian military forces, who participated
in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and in both
Chechen wars; Boris Attoyev, Chairman since 2006 of
the Committee for State Security, analogue of the
KGB, who previously held various positions in the
Soviet KGB and who after the completing his mission
in Afghanistan was appointed to the central apparatus
of the FSB in Moscow; Vasily Lunev, Minister for
Defence of South Ossetia since March 2008, a general
in the Russian army; Vladimir Kotoyev, head of the
Government Protection Service since 2007, a colonel
08-45458
in the Russian army, who participated in the Chechen
and Bosnian wars; and Oleg Chebotariev, head of the
State Border Protection Services since 2005, a colonel
in the Russian FSB. Those individuals were granted
impunity by the Russian Federation from being held
responsible for atrocities that they have been
committing.

The Government's military action was taken in
self-defence after repeated armed provocations and
with the sole goal of protecting the civilian population
and preventing further loss of life among residents of
various ethnic backgrounds. We believe that every
democratic State would have reacted in a similar
fashion to protect its own citizens. The Government
acted because the separatists not only defied the
ceasefire but sharply escalated the violence, killing
several peacekeepers and civilians within hours of the
ceasefire.

Additional illegal forces and military equipment
were and are entering Georgian territory from Russia
through the Roki tunnel, threatening even worse
violence. The separatists have also been continuing to
threaten to attack other parts of the country outside the
South Ossetian region, allegedly with the foreign
assistance that is flowing into that region. Russian
peacekeepers told Georgian officials that they were
unable to control the separatists. The security situation
was deteriorating and violence wais increasing rapidly.
The separatists were not heeding any appeal for direct
talks.

Georgia seeks a negotiated solution to the
conflict, with international engagement. Our offer of
autonomy in line with European standards stands, with
international guarantees including an elected regional
parliament, an elected regional president, shared
sovereignty and the protection of South Ossetian
identity, culture and language, still on the table. Until
such a solution is agreed, the region, we think, should
be governed by the elected head of the South Ossetian
administration, Dmitry Sanakoev, an ethnic Ossetian
and former separatist leader.

We invite Russia to be constructively engaged in
the economic rehabilitation of the region as well as to
contribute to the agreed security arrangements there.
The Government's immediate goal at this point is to
restore peace, to facilitate the return to normal life for
all residents of the region and to allow the return of the
refugees and internally displaced persons. We stand
08-45458

ready to ensure adequate supplies of water, electricity,
food, emergency services, medical care and shelter.
Separatist rebels will be eligible for amnesty.
Humanitarian organizations will have access to the
region, and the Georgian Government has already
allocated funding totalling €2 million for the
immediate humanitarian and emergency needs of the
region.

According to verified reports, as we speak, a
huge contingent of military personnel and equipment is
illegally entering Georgia's sovereign territory through
the Roki tunnel. The Russian Federation's Republic of
North Ossetia has declared the mobilization of armed
mercenaries to be sent to Georgia. There are disturbing
signs that we are facing a calculated provocation for
the purposes of escalating the situation in order to
justify a pre-planned military intervention from the
Russian side.

We therefore demand that the Russian Federation
prevent the transit of armed mercenaries to Georgia,
exercise its influence over the separatist regime to stop
attacks on the civilian population and start
negotiations.

As in my last address to this forum, I want to
reiterate Georgia's call to the international community
to explicitly condemn the continuing infringements of
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity by the
Russian Federation. Despite this most recent
escalation, I want to emphasize that the Georgian
Government once again calls for, and is showing its
readiness to immediately begin, peace talks aimed at
resolving the conflict in South Ossetia and calls on the
separatist rebels to cease their military actions and
come to the negotiating table.

