Mr. Passy: I will try to respond. Thank you, Sir,
for this really unique opportunity to respond to the
Security Council members.

First, in response to Ambassador Cunningham's
question on our conception of anti-trafficking and
border controls, we can learn a lot from what is being
done in the Balkans. We have great experience in this
area and we can apply it in the future. The most
important thing for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is to learn from our
past experience; we really have great experience that
we can apply in new areas. Of course, everything
depends, as all know, on funding, but the proper
allocation of financial resources might help in that
direction.

Our main focus in past years - financially
speaking, looking through the budget of OSCE - was
the Balkans and not so much the Caucasus or Central
Asia. I believe that the time has come when we can
think of reallocating attention. Now that the situation
in the Balkans has relatively calmed down, we can
reallocate attention to Central Asia and the Caucasus.

This is more or less the answer to Ambassador
Pleuger's question on conflict prevention and what
OSCE can do in that direction. With respect to early
warning, what is very important in the area of Central
Asia and the Caucasus is, first, to stimulate the
countries into talking to each other. I have to confess
that the dialogue between the countries in those two
regions is broken. We need to encourage them to sit
together and talk together. That is the first thing that
we shall have to do.

The countries there have to address three specific
groups of problems. The first represents the problems
related to democratization. The second represents
problems related to fighting terrorism. The third
represents the problems related to internal tensions that
they have to resolve or suppress. The leaderships of
those countries do not always have the capacity to
address those three groups of problems simultaneously.
That is why we have to encourage them to share their
experience and best practices with each other so that
they can learn from each other. I think that will be one
of the big challenges facing OSCE and the
international community in the future. OSCE cannot do
this alone, but it can stimulate.

As to OSCE and the United Nations in
Afghanistan and Iraq, this is, I would say, one the best
opportunities for visionary thinking and cooperation
between OSCE and the United Nations. OSCE can help
a lot and bring its expertise to bear in both of those
countries. We have expertise in monitoring elections;
we have expertise in police training; we have expertise
in building democratic institutions. All of these
elements are desperately needed both in Afghanistan
and Iraq and we are ready to respond to a request by
the United Nations to serve, if it so wishes.

That is why I would suggest that, in a future
resolution on Iraq, the Security Council consider the
possibility of specially mentioning a future role for
OSCE, along with other international organizations.
That is, of course, up to the Council to decide.
Moreover, speaking of future resolutions on Iraq, I
would draw the Council's attention to the possibility of
inviting other regional organizations to support the
building of democracy there. In particular, I mean such
organizations as the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the League of Arab States or the Gulf
States. We should not limit the activities of the
international community only to the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), OSCE, the European
Union and so on. We need the organizations that
involve Arab and Islamic countries also to be taken on
board and involved in this very important process.

In response to Ambassador Konuzin of the
Russian Federation, as he certainly knows, what
happens in Kosovo is of immediate concern not only to
me, as Chairman-in-Office, but also to me in my
national capacity. The distance between the border of
Bulgaria and the border of Kosovo is only 60
kilometers, so any turbulence in Kosovo immediately
reflects at home. We hear it. That is why we reacted
immediately and, after the violence in Kosovo, the
Secretary General of NATO, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer,
and I agreed on a joint visit. We visited the region and
we very strongly condemned all acts of violence.

OSCE is working in Kosovo under the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
and Harri Holkeri is the person who is giving the
ultimate guidance. That is why I would not restrict our
attention only to media, as you have asked. That is
very important, but we should not restrict ourselves
only to media. We should address all forms of violence
and the inspirations for violence.

We talked to the Kosovo leaders, who have - or
are supposed to have - some influence on their
respective media. The Secretary General of NATO and
I told them clearly that no one should benefit and no
one will be allowed to benefit from the violence in the
region.

In response to Ambassador Motoc, my dear
friend, colleague and neighbour from Romania - we
still remember Romania's great chairmanship of the
OSCE in 2001 - as far as Moldova is concerned, we
are sparing no effort in encouraging the sides to work
together. We are inviting the three-sided and five-sided
formats, but we cannot do more than what the two
sides that are directly involved are ready to do. We
shall spare no effort in encouraging them. I would like
to address to the members of the Security Council to
focus as countries, to encourage the sides in the
conflict to act appropriately.

Also, I have very recent information concerning
Kosovo. There is a report on the role of the media by
my newly appointed representative, Mr. Haraszti. We
needed such a person to do the job, and obviously he is
starting to do his job.
Regarding the remarks of Ambassador Jean-Marc
de La Sabliere of France, I already spoke of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE.
I would just mention that we need more encouragement
from the Security Council. Just ask us to do the job and
we are ready to do the job.

The OSCE is, in one respect, a much more
difficult organization that the Security Council. I had
experience in the Security Council during the past two
years. Here there are only five countries that can veto a
resolution. In my case, it is much more difficult. There
are 55 countries that can exercise the veto. When I
visited President Karzai of Afghanistan, and I told him
those are the regulations - any single country can veto
my proposal - he told me, "Oh, that is like the Loya
Jirga." I responded, "Mr. President, OSCE is my Loya
Jirga."

If we have the encouragement, support and
leadership of the Security Council, we will have a
much more effective organization, because, if you can
agree between yourselves here, I can promise that your
agreement here will be passed in the OSCE.

Finally, our Chairman mentioned Nagorny
Karabakh. I visited Nagorny Karabakh and had the
chance to speak to all parties to the conflict on the
Azari side and the Armenian side. My general
conclusion is that we have to encourage them to talk to
each other more. We should tell both sides that time is
not everybody's ally. My impression is that there is a
misunderstanding that time is everybody's ally. On the
contrary, it is everybody's enemy. The more we
postpone the solution to the conflict, the more painful
the solution will be.

I would especially like to mention here, to the
Security Council, that after our visit to Azerbaijan and
our talk with President Aliyev, he was kind enough to
release 129 prisoners. He told me that he wanted to
prove that he wanted his country to democratize. On
the very next day he offered very real proof that he
meant what he said.

Those are my brief comments and responses to
your questions. If the Council would permit me now, I
would not like to miss this extraordinary opportunity to
touch upon one very painful question, which I would
like to address in my national capacity.

We have six Bulgarian doctors who were caught
up in Libya, in jail, almost six years ago. Only
yesterday five of them were sentenced to death.

Bulgaria was a co-sponsor of the Security
Council resolution lifting the sanctions on Libya, and
we believe that this was the right thing to do. Now I
believe we will all have to help Libya to resolve this
painful question, because, since those death penalties,
this issue has become even more difficult for Libya
than for Bulgaria. I just wanted to inform the Council
that all of us will have to help in order for that
humanitarian case to be resolved.

