Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation thanks
Chile for having organized this important debate and
for the concept note provided to guide our discussion
(S/2015/6, annex). We also thank the Secretary-
General; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota; and Nobel Laureate
Leymah Gbowee for their briefings.

It is a widely accepted fact that there can be no
development without security and no security without
development. Lessons learned from the Millennium
Development Goals clearly confirm the link between
security and development. The theme of this debate
also resonates within the context of the ongoing global
discourse on the post-2015 development agenda. Nigeria
therefore sees merit in the Council holding a debate on
inclusive development.

The United Nations Development Programme
Human Development Report for 2014 confirms that
conflict and a sense of personal insecurity have a
pervasive impact on human development and leave
billions in precarious conditions. The Council's efforts
should therefore focus on promoting development
that ensures that no one is left behind, through its
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding and preventive
diplomacy.

Development can be meaningful only if all
segments ofsociety contribute to creating opportunities,
participate in decision-making and share in the benefits
of development.

The presidential statement just adopted by the
Council (S/PRST/2015/3) underscores the importance
of allowing a space for all actors, regardless of their
racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural or
economic background. In order to ensure security and
development, the Council has, through its internvention
in conflict and post-conflict situations, recognized
the relevance of inclusiveness in the promotion of
good governance, national reconciliation, democracy,
gender equality and sustained economic growth. The
Council has promoted greater inclusiveness for women
in conflict resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding
through its women and peace and security agenda. In
countries emerging from conflict, the inclusion and
participation of women in governance and economic
activity, as well as the provision of skills and jobs for
young people, have provided the necessary impetus for
peace and security.

Lessons learned from United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities indicate that inclusive
development activities can help to prevent a relapse
into conflict. It is therefore necessary for the Council
to continue to advance the concept of inclusive
development when authorizing mandates. It is also
Vital to pay attention to the strengthening of the
national institutions, civil societies and private
sectors of countries transiting from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. That can be achieved through greater
collaboration, cooperation and coordination between
the Council and other United Nations bodies, funds and
programmes.

At the national level, we in Nigeria are taking
concrete steps to meet our security challenges and
foster peace through inclusive development. Our "soft"
approach to countering violent extremism adopts a
multidimensional strategy in addressing the root causes
of radicalization and violent extremism. Its overall aim
is to employ practical measures to halt Violent extremism
in the short-term and prevent future occurrences in the
long-term. Through the programme, the Government is
addressing the key economic, social, religious, political
and cultural issues fuelling the radicalization upon
which the insurgency feeds. Through the soft approach,
we are pursuing a wide range of reforms through our
educational system. We are also creating economic
opportunities and providing skills to those at risk of
radicalization.

At the subregional and regional levels, Nigeria
has played an active role in the restoration of peace
and democracy in countries emerging from conflict.
That underscores our conviction that solid democratic
institutions are vital platforms for the participation
of all groups, including women and youth, in the
development of any country. Nigeria was one of the
early responders that provided support to combat the
spread of Ebola in West Africa. Our action was based
on the need to sustain the development already attained
in the affected countries in order to reduce the risk of
relapse into conflict.

Finally, Nigeria believes that the United Nations
should continue to act as an agent for inclusive
development. We also believe that the Security Council
should support the ongoing global discourse that
promotes inclusive development as a critical factor in
fostering sustainable peace, security and development.

