Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Mr. Alvaro de Soto for
his detailed briefing. We know Mr. De Soto very well;
he is an old friend. He has many years of experience in
the service of the United Nations, and we have high
hopes for him. We hope that, with his outstanding
abilities and diplomatic wisdom, he will continue to
move the Middle East peace process forward to further
progress.

Compared to the situation of four months ago,
recent developments in the Israeli-Palestinian situation
are cause for concern. One year after the International
Court of Justice issued its opinion on the question of
the separation wall, the Israeli Government has
announced that it will accelerate its construction of that
wall in East Jerusalem. That contravenes the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the principle of land for
peace, and it is bound to exacerbate Israeli-Palestinian
discord. The matter of Jerusalem's final status should
be resolved through peace talks by the parties
concerned on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

China hopes that the Israeli and Palestinian sides
will jointly maintain the good atmosphere that has
emerged this year in the situation in the Middle East,
and continue their efforts towards reconciliation.

China expresses its concern about the recent
escalation of violent clashes between Israelis and
Palestinians. That situation underscores the importance
and urgency of ensuring security and ending violence.
We have noted that Mr. Abbas, the Palestinian leader,
has gone to the Gaza Strip to bring the situation under
control and that the Israeli side has postponed military
action against Gaza. We hope that both sides will
maintain the greatest restraint and restore the
tranquillity that has prevailed in recent months at an
early date.

Through Palestinian and Israeli efforts and the
mediation of the international community, there has
been an easing of tensions this year, which has been
rare in the past four years. It is generally felt that 2005
is a year of opportunity. But the onset of opportunities
and the fulfilment of hopes must be based on mutual
trust. Any slight slackening of caution on either side
will not only disrupt the good atmosphere, it will also
seriously impede the peace process.

I once again appeal to both sides to display
political courage and wisdom, to remain on the path of
peace talks, carry out their obligations under the road
map for peace in the Middle East and, eventually,
achieve the peaceful co-existence of two independent
States.

The attainment of Israeli-Palestinian peace is
inextricably linked to effective support from the
international community. Along with the international
community, China will follow the situation closely and
make tireless efforts to move the Middle East towards
the earliest possible establishment of peace and
stability. As an important body in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and stability, the
Security Council should also play an effective role in
that regard.

