Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening an open debate on this
important issue. I also wish to thank Mr. Egeland for
his informative and thoughtful presentation.

The report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) points out an
alarming trend. Despite the decrease in inter-State
warfare, internal armed conflicts are breaking out with
greater frequency, and more and more civilians are
suffering. A civil war caused by ethnic or religious
differences almost invariably intensifies hatred
between the parties. Civilians are often subjected to
relentless attack by combatants, and the number of
victims increases steadily. Based on the principal that
States have the obligation to ensure the well-being of
their populations, the report devotes one chapter to the
protection of civilians, pointing out that humanitarian
aid is a vital tool for helping Governments fulfil that
responsibility, its core purpose being to protect civilian
victims, minimize their suffering and keep them alive
during the conflict so that when war ends there will
still be a will on the part of the people to promptly
rebuild their shattered lives, and a basis on which to
rebuild them.

We hope that the Security Council will further
strengthen the legitimacy and effectiveness of its
actions, including its efforts to protect civilians in
armed conflict. In order to decide on appropriate
actions to be taken, it is extremely important that the
Security Council be informed, accurately and in a
timely manner, about a situation that is causing
concerns over the protection of civilians. In that
context, Japan would welcome opportunities to have
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Egeland, brief
the Security Council on an ad hoc basis, whenever the
situation requires. Of course, it is also indispensable
for the Security Council to listen to the Governments
concerned on the protection of civilians and to learn
their analysis and what steps they have taken.

The Security Council may also wish to consider
using Arria formula meetings where appropriate,
taking into account the report of the Panel of Eminent
Persons on United Nations-Civil Society Relations
(A/58/817), in order to have a broader understanding of
a situation. On the other hand, it is true that even in the
case of the genocide in Rwanda, in which the Security
Council failed to take effective action, information was
available that massive killing was under way. The
Security Council has a responsibility to respond to
situations which pose threats to international peace and
security by applying international norms. While
recognizing that it cannot resolve all humanitarian
crises, the Council should give such crises its full
attention and discuss how to respond. Each member of
the Security Council should contribute to the
international response in one way or another, while
bearing in mind the special responsibility it bears.

The lO-point platform of action that Mr. Egeland
introduced last year provides a highly suggestive basis
for our discussion of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Due to time constraints, I will limit
myself to three points to which Japan attaches
particular importance.

The first is on strengthening cooperation with
regional organizations. Regional organizations can play
an enormously important role in addressing the
protection and assistance needs of civilians, for
example by helping to improve security conditions and
ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel. In Darfur,
for example, we are encouraged to hear that the
African Union is engaging in efforts to ameliorate the
situation. We believe that the United Nations should
promote cooperation with regional organizations so
that they may fulfil their respective mandates, and we
strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation regarding the establishment of a
framework within which the United Nations can
engage with regional organizations more systematically
on humanitarian issues, including eventually legal
matters, as appropriate.

Japan fully supports the activities conducted by
regional organizations to provide assistance and
protection to civilians caught amidst conflict. With
regard to Darfur, in addition to the contribution of $22
million that we have already disbursed to international
organizations for humanitarian assistance, we are
further considering cooperating with the African
Union.

Secondly, it is vitally important that the security
and safety of humanitarian personnel be ensured so
that they can respond effectively to the protection and
assistance needs of civilians. Japan appreciates the
Secretary-General's proposal to reform and strengthen
the United Nations security management system and,
to that end, supports steps being taken to implement it.
At the same time, we consider it important to the
success of this reform that the system be established in
such a way that the analysis and views of relevant
humanitarian organizations on the ground are fully
taken into account, as the United Nations system must
make difficult decisions in which the protection and
assistance needs of civilians are balanced against the
risks to the security of humanitarian personnel. Japan
therefore believes in cost-sharing, based on the
principle of shared responsibility.

Thirdly, special attention should be paid to the
protection of the vulnerable, namely women and
children. The United Nations should set a good
example and urge the parties to armed conflict to
follow that example. In that context, we deeply regret
the report of the cases of sexual violence by personnel
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), which
we understand are now under investigation by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The result of
the investigation must be presented to the Security
Council for discussion. Also, Japan believes it is
important in any case of sexual violence that those
United Nations personnel involved, including
Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff, be
identified and punished appropriately and that
thorough measures be taken to prevent the recurrence
of such incidents. United Nations personnel must
respect and observe the guidelines contained in the
bulletin of the Secretary-General on special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
(ST/SGB/2003/l3). We expect that the Secretary-
General will consult with countries contributing troops
to peacekeeping operations, with a View to formulating
similar guidelines for peacekeeping operation
personnel and having troop-contributing countries train
their troops on that basis.

Despite the steps taken by the Security Council
based on the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2003/24, annex)
and Under-Secretary-General Egeland's efforts based
on the lO-point platform of action, it remains a huge
challenge to protect civilians in armed conflict. While
attention to this issue has increased in New York since
the Council began addressing it, on the ground it
continues to be a deeply serious problem. For its part,
Japan believes that further coordination is required
among relevant actors on the ground, including the
United Nations, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations, with the close cooperation
of the Government concerned. The whole point of
humanitarian protection and assistance is to alleviate
the suffering of civilians in armed conflict. Despite our
best efforts, however, after armed conflict breaks out
there is a limit to what we can do. We cannot remove
the source of the threat to civilians.

Thus, Japan believes that the most effective way
to protect civilians in armed conflict is, in the long run,
to prevent armed conflict in the first place and to
consolidate peace in post-conflict situations so that
conflict does not resurface. It is for that reason that my
country has been emphasizing the importance of
promoting human security, which is the basis of an
environment where vulnerable people can become
important partners in national rebirth and development
by being protected and empowered as members of a
community and by overcoming the difficulties of the
post-conflict period. Japan expects that the idea of
human security will be further mainstreamed in the
United Nations and that the Organization will be able
to act more effectively to prevent armed conflict and
ensure and maintain peace.

