Mr. Kobler (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would
like to take this opportunity to wish a very joyous
and blessed Eid Al-Adha to all those Muslims, and in
particular to all Libyans. It is a day for reconciliation- a
day to reunite in peace.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to congratulate New Zealand on
presiding over the Security Council this month.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7706), the paradox of Libya has become more
apparent. The country has a tremendous potential,
immense natural resources and a young population
eager to reshape its future. And yet, instead of making
use of all these blessings, long lines of Libyan men and
women wait in the heat in front of banks to withdraw
their daily limit of 200 dinars - about $40 - to cover
the rising costs of basic necessities.

Faced with few prospects for earning a livelihood,
rampant insecurity and endemic corruption, the
temptation for the young to leave the country or join
armed groups can be overwhelming. This is not a
foundation on which to build a stable country. It is high
time that the Libyans join forces to urgently address
the burning political, security and economic problems
of Libya.

Given the military events of recent days I would
like to briefly update the Council along the following
four points: first, the worrying security situation;
secondly, the political momentum created by the recent
decision of the House of Representatives; thirdly, the
need for national reconciliation; and fourthly, the
failing economy.

With respect to the seed situation, on the eve of
Bid Al-Adha, the fragile peace in Libya's oil crescent
suffered a fierce blow when units of the Libyan National
Army, under the command of General Khalifa Haftar,
attacked the oil terminals and ports in the oil crescent
area. This area was under the control of forces loyal
to the Presidency Council. I was concerned that this
might happen. This development will further hinder
oil exports, deprive Libya of its only source of income,
and increase the division of the country. This has to
stop. Libyan natural resources belong to all Libyans.
They must be protected and exported legally under the
authority of the Presidency Council. Otherwise, Libya's
citizens will pay the price.

I therefore called for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and urged all parties to avoid inflicting any
damage to the oil facilities. I also urged respect for
resolution 2259 (2015), which recognizes the Presidency
Council and the Government of National Accord as the
sole executive authority of Libya. Differences must be
resolved through dialogue, not military force. I have
many times sought to engage with General Haftar to
encourage him to embrace dialogue. However, my
repeated attempts have so far been without success.

On a positive note, forces loyal to the Presidency
Council made impressive progress towards ousting the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) from its last
remaining stronghold in Libya, in Sirte. Very soon,
ISIS will no longer hold territory in Libya. However,
the terrorist threat in Libya and beyond will remain,
and will require continued vigilance. I would like to
pay tribute to the more than 500 brave Libyans who
sacrificed their lives and the 2,500 who were injured
in the fight against ISIS in Sirte. But importatly, my
thoughts also go to the many thousands who fell while
fighting the scourge ofterrorism in other parts ofLibya,
in particular Benghazi.

I also want to thank those who supported the
operation to rid Sirte of terrorism at the request of
the Presidency Council, particularly the United States
for its air support, which without any doubt has saved
many lives, striking numerous car bombs before they
reached their targets, and strengthened the Presidency
Council's ability to defeat ISIS in Sirte. I would also like
to thank those Member States that provided medical
support, either in their territories or inside Libya. The
fight against ISIS is a Libyan-led fight, but the defeat of
ISIS in Libya benefits the entire region.

Now civilian and military authority needs to
be established in Sirte and security restored. To this
end, we convened a meeting with key ministers of the
Government of National Accord last week to develop a
plan after the liberation of Sirte. Reconstruction efforts
in Sirte must be a model case for other places, such as
Benghazi. The Council will recall my constant appeals
for a reconstruction fund for Benghazi after security
has been restored.

Libya remains a launch pad for thousands of
migrants. This year alone, in this season, 112,000
migrants reached Italy's shores from Libya. Three
thousand migrants drowned in the Mediterranean, and
many more thousands died in the desert on their way.
This senseless loss of so many human lives is simply
unacceptable.

Both the fight against terrorism and the flow of
migrants are symptoms of Libya's lack of unified and
effective security institutions: institutions to secure
Libya's borders, institutions to control the circulation
of weapons, and institutions to break the criminal
networks that prey on the vulnerable.

The security situation in Tripoli is still very
fragile. In this context, I welcome the nomination of the
commanders of the Presidential Guard. This is the first
step towards bringing the new Libyan security units
under the full authority of the Presidency Council.

On 5 August, we convened the first high-level
security meeting of more than 50 key Libyan security
actors to discuss proposals for improving security in
Tripoli and in the country. However, further progress
will be possible only if all Libyan security actors
from east, west and south agree on a unified chain of
command, with the Presidency Council as the Supreme
Commander of the Libyan army. This requires the
active engagement and commitment of the international
community.

Let me now come to my second point: the
political developments. The formation of an effective
Government of National Accord is critical for the
transition period in Libya. After months of political
stalemate, the House of Representatives on 22 August
decided to reject the current Government of National
Accord. Nevertheless, this decision is a new opening
for the Presidency Council to solicit the endorsement of
a unity Government.

Efforts must now be exerted to ensure that the
House of Representatives and the Presidency Council
work together towards meeting this important
milestone. In this regard, the role of the Libyan Political
Dialogue has remained relevant. Since my most recent
report to the Council, I have convened the Libyan
Political Dialogue twice to create additional political
space and leverage so as to forge a way through the
political impasse. Although there are differences of
opinion on the Libyan Political Agreement, even critics
and opponents recognize its framework and its value.
It remains the only way forward in Libya's transition.
There is no alternative.

Here I would like to thank Member States for their
unity and support for the Libyan Political Agreement,
in particular their strong support for the Presidency
Council. It is, however, vital that this political support
also be reflected by practice on the ground by all in
Libya and outside. Parallel Libyan institutions not
coming under the Government of National Accord shall
not be supported; red carpets should not be rolled out
for them.

During the most recent meeting of the Libyan
Political Dialogue last week, on 5 and 6 September,
the following lines were discussed and a political way
forward was suggested.

First, the Presidency Council should seize
the opportunity created by the return of the two
boycotting members to become an effective institution.
All members should now agree on a revised list of
Government ministers. I welcome the intention of the
Presidency Council to consult with the main Libyan
stakeholders, and I reiterate my request to reserve
30 per cent of the posts for women.

Secondly, the House of Representatives should
meet with all of its members in an atmosphere free of
intimidation to discuss the constitutional amendment
and the endorsement of the Government of National
Accord. I will continue to encourage all members of
the House of Representatives, including the boycotters,
to join the sessions.

I also call for the presence of Libyan and international
observers during these crucial sessions, let us say from
the League of Arab States and others, during these
crucial sessions of the House of Representatives.
Iurge all political actors to truly show statesmanship,
leadership and cohesion for the sake of Libyan men,
women and children, who just want to have their lives
back.

I come to my third point: the question of national
reconciliation. On 31 August, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya kick-started a round of
discussions with Libyan and international experts on
national reconciliation. This is but the small first step
of a process leading towards healing the wounds of the
past. We should help the Libyans find in themselves
the willingness to forgive and overcome the past,
and to build a new future together. No reconciliation
will succeed if the next generation does not actively
participate. Seventy per cent of the population is under
the age of 35, and this key part of society must be given
a voice and be able to shape Libya's future. Brain drain
is a serious problem for Libya.

One inspiring example of reconciliation I would
like to mention is the agreement signed between the
representatives of the cities of Misrata and Tawergha on
31 August, two weeks ago. The agreement is the product
of months of courageous and determined efforts by the
two parties, facilitated by our Human Rights Division,
and I want to congratulate all involved. I am happy that
after many years, the internally displaced will finally
be able to start returning to their homes before the end
of the year. This agreement should give hope to all
435,000 internally displaced people in the country.

I come to my last and often neglected point: the
economic situation. All our efforts can succeed
only if the Libyans address the country's growing
economic crisis. Libya is a resource-rich country, but
its economy is on the road to collapse. Oil production
is at its lowest point ever, with only about 200,000
barrels per day compared with 1.4 million barrels even
after the revolution. Government spending on salaries
and subsidies is at 93 per cent of its total budget, and
1.6 million out of 6 million Libyans - more than one
person per family - are on the payroll of the Central
Bank. The country is running a 75 per cent budget
deficit.

All this has resulted in the imposition of strict
capital controls and a lack of liquidity. Libyans are
frustrated that they cannot access their own money
and that their currency is rapidly losing its value. The
fundamentals of the economy need to be urgently
addressed. Libya will not be able to rely for long on its
foreign reserves. The war economy must give way to
the economy of peace. Oil production must resume, and
expenditure must be commensurate with the needs of
the country. To do so, it is imperative that the pipelines
open, Libyan financial institutions become unified and
a national budget be approved.

Libya is at a crossroads. While political space
has opened and progress is being made in the fight
against terrorism, the political divisions underlying the
conflict are deepening. Today more than ever, strong
action is needed to convince Libyan stakeholders to
build institutions that are open, participatory and able
to address the needs of all of its citizens.

Finally, allow me to say thank you to a dear
colleague who is leaving the Mission, Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ali
Al-Za'tari, for his distinguished service as the Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator in Libya. I always
appreciated his insightful analysis and his consistent
and resolute advocacy for protecting the weak and
vulnerable in Libyan society. I wish him the best of
luck in facing the extremely difficult challenges as
part of his new duties as Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator in Syria.

I look forward to the ministerial meeting on
Libya to be held on 22 September on the margins of
the General Assembly to demonstrate the cohesion
and determination of the international community in
helping Libyans to consolidate the gains achieved so
far, but also to address the burning questions.

