Mr. Sen (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this open debate on the threat posed to
international peace and security and to the
humanitarian situation in Somalia by the acts of piracy
in the territorial waters and off the coast of Somalia.
At the outset, let me welcome the Council's
adoption today of resolution 1851 (2008) in this
context. As one of the nations that share the Arabian
Sea with Somalia, India is particularly concerned by
the incidents of piracy that are an unfortunate outcome
of a larger and ongoing tragedy in the country.

India endorses the need for coherent international
efforts to anchor in Somali soil national and regional
political processes through an effective peacekeeping
mission, ideally under United Nations leadership. A
comprehensive approach that addresses the chaos that
has long enveloped Somalia is the best long-term
solution to the problem of piracy in Somali waters.

Nevertheless, recognizing the continuing tragedy
of Somalia and our inability so far to integrate political
processes in a broader peacekeeping effort cannot
justify the lack of a well-coordinated response to the
turmoil spilling out into the oceans. Piracy is a
challenge that must be met urgently, collectively and
cooperatively by the international community.

Piracy in Somali waters and off the coast of
Somalia is an immediate challenge, not only to
Somalia itself and the neighbourhood but to
international commerce and finance, besides
international peace and security. India is directly
affected by piracy. Attacks not only impact shipping to
and from Indian ports and our extended
neighbourhood, but also exact a heavy impact upon us,
since the international merchant marine has a
substantial proportion of persons of Indian origin.

For that reason India has responded to the
challenge of piracy at the request of, and in
consultation with, the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia. Over the last two months, India has
deployed two of its modern naval vessels to deal with
the challenge of piracy. We have had some successes in
that regard, including as recently as last weekend, but
we recognize that piracy remains a significant threat.

From that standpoint, India believes that the
international response to piracy in Somalia needs to
include, given the special circumstances in Somalia, an
enhanced and institutionalized coordination of
international effort to deal with piracy. Not only must
we institutionalize operational coordination among
navies in the area, but also a mechanism must be set up
for those involved in the anti-piracy effort to work with
countries of the region in responding to the challenge.
We welcome the announcement by the United States
Secretary of State of the decision to establish a contact
group in that regard.

India would also like to underscore the
importance of ensuring a central role for the United
Nations, given the international legitimacy that it
brings, and not solely as a clearing house for the flow
of information on anti-piracy efforts. Greater clarity is
required as regards the legal framework of dealing with
apprehended pirates. Moreover, common procedures
need to be worked out to prosecute those arrested.

There also needs to be a closer linkage between
the arms embargo and the anti-piracy effort. That
suggestion, which we endorse, was made by the
Monitoring Group on Somalia in its 10 December
report (S/2008/769). It is important to stem the flow of
weapons and to make those involved in planning,
financing and facilitating acts of piracy accountable,
including by blocking their access to revenue generated
from ransom. That is required as the payment of
ransoms is encouraging further acts of piracy.

Expansion of the capacity of Somali entities to
deal with acts of piracy, both from land, where they are
launched, and in Somali coastal waters is also needed.

Finally, the international community needs the
International Maritime Organization to lead a process
of evolving effective protection systems and strategies
for merchant vessels to adopt when navigating piracy-
infested waters. That will also help reduce the burden
that is currently devolved upon a limited number of
naval assets in protecting a large zone of impact.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that while there
is truth in the adage that an ounce of prevention is
better than a pound of cure, we are currently beyond
the phase where prevention can be contemplated.
Therefore, we have few options besides simultaneously
attempting to deal with the symptoms and trying to
cure the disease.

