Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom and Executive Director Yuri Fedotov for their
briefings. Let me also take the opportunity to welcome
Mr. Haysom upon his new assignment.
Our appreciation goes to the entire team of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their continuous support to the Afghan
Government and people. I also thank Ambassador
Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement. Let me also pay tribute to Australia
for its leadership during its two years as penholder on
Afghanistan.

As we all know, a few months ago Afghanistan
teetered on the brink of violence, following the
disputed election result. We commend President Ghani
Ahmadzai and Mr. Abdullah, Chief Executive Officer,
for their brave decision and for preventing the country
from slipping into violence. It was very possible for
the country to have remained in crisis, had the two
contenders not taken the right decision in parallel. In
the same light, we commend the UNAMA leadership,
the United States Government and the international
community for their tireless efforts in bringing together
both sides to end the political impasse for the benefit of
the Afghan people and the entire region. We note and
continue to encourage the positive working relationship
between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah.

Rwanda welcomes the reform agenda of President
Ghani's Government. Extending an invitation
to political opposition and armed groups to join
an inter-Afghan dialogue is indeed timely and a
cornerstone for the stability of Afghanistan. However,
we are discouraged by the Taliban's rejection of the
formation of the National Unity Government and its
call for a continuation of the conflict.

We continue to encourage the Afghan leadership
to maintain the spirit underlying the formation of an
inclusive National Unity Government with the full
participation of women. We echo President Ghani's call
for Afghanistan's international partners to support the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process. We also
further urge religious leaders to play an active role in
bringing peace to the country.

In less than 13 days, the Afghan National Security
Forces will assume full security responsibility for
the country. We believe that, since June 2013, the
Afghan National Security Forces have demonstrated
the capability of maintaining the country's security.
Accordingly, the Bilateral Security Agreement signed
on 30 September between the Afghan Government
and the United States, as well as the status-of-forces
agreement with NATO, are commendable. They will
provide the legal framework for continued military
assistance to build the capacities ofthe Afghan national
defence and security forces.
Meanwhile, Afghanistan has been facing and
continues to face security challenges caused by
insurgent terrorist groups that have caused many
deaths including of innocent women and children.
Multiple attacks have been taking place almost every
day, increasing the number of civilian casualties. As the
report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2014/876) notes, this
year alone has been one of the most violent since 2001.
Rwanda strongly condemns the barbaric acts that have
continued to claim Afghan lives. There can never be any
justification whatsoever for that. We pay tribute to the
Afghan security forces for demonstrating courage and
bravery and countering the insurgency in that regard.

The economic situation in Afghanistan continues
to have an adverse impact on the Government budget.
However, we welcome President Ghani's announcement
of a robust agenda, including commitment for reform
to ensure the realization of Afghanistan's self-reliance.
We commend the renewed partnership and its plan to
refresh the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.
It is important to strengthen governance, fight against
corruption and implement policy reform.

We continue to appeal to the donor community
to remain engaged, as witnessed at the London
Conference, in fulfilling its commitment to support
the new leadership as it strives to achieve a peaceful
and prosperous future for the people of Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation and regional integration are
imperative for bringing much needed foreign investment
to Afghanistan, ensuring its economic viability and
spurring economic growth.

In conclusion, the challenges that Afghanistan
is facing today in its aspiration to be a self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous country for all
Afghans require a serious commitment from the new
leadership, the region and international partners. We
fully support UNAMA and its partner agencies in
fulfilling their mandates by providing assistance to
the peace and rebuilding of Afghanistan. Rwanda will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people
and will continue to contribute to a stable, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan.

