Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to congratulate the Republic
of Poland on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. We thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important high-level
meeting, and we wish you every success.

The Middle East region is deeply divided, with
attempts to destroy its diverse ethnic, racial and
cultural fabric, with decades-long conflicts, new
conflicts, the emergence of terrorism and new forms
of violent extremism that undermine peace, sustainable
development and human rights. Countries' safety and
their very existence are at risk. Millions of people have
been forcibly displaced from their homes, which in turn
has destabilized other countries.

We must recognize that the main reason for
racial, ideological and sectarian conflicts has been the
presence of political, social and economic problems
and the spread of hate speech, which has sparked
conflicts that have claimed the lives of millions of
innocent people. The region needs stability based on
a system of collective security, respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in internal affairs and the rejection of
violence and extremism. The security of our region is
both collective and interconnected.

Iraq, with its geopolitical significance, its potential
and its cultural diversity, could help build understanding
that strengthens security and political stability in the
region. We also believe that any clash in our region will
jeopardize the security of Iraq. We therefore suggest
holding constructive dialogues between the countries
concerned in order to defuse tensions and overcome
differences among all parties so as to avoid further
escalation and prevent more war in our region, with
negative repercussions for all.

The Government of my country reaffirms that the
Israeli occupation is the cause of tensions in our region.
We can hardly fathom stability and security in the
region without reaching a solution that renders justice
to the Palestinian people and meets their legitimate
aspirations to freedom and to establishing a viable,
independent State. We also reaffirm the need for further
consultations to reach a political solution that prevents
more despair and acts of violence and extremism in the
region and beyond. We must all work on creating the
necessary conditions to achieve comprehensive peace.

At the same time, the uniqueness of the Holy
City of Jerusalem must be addressed as part of a
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which must also include the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is the only way to achieve peace,
stability and security.

The pillars oflasting security and peace in the region
are not limited to security and political agreements, but
they also require combating corruption, enhancing the
role of women, supporting young people and meeting
their aspirations and addressing the challenges of
climate change.

Corruption is one of the root causes of political
crises and societal divides in countries. It is one of
the reasons for emerging conflicts, and it is also
linked to the illegal arms and drugs trafficking and
violent extremism. Countries must consolidate good
governance, combat corruption and adopt correct and
effective policies to combat money laundering and the
financing of terrorism.

Furthermore, we must support women so that they
can hold leadership positions in the economic, political
and administrative spheres. That is key to achieving
sustainable development in our countries, as modern
civic States that guarantee the rights and dignity of
all. We must also meet the aspirations of young people
for a better future so that they do not fall victim to
the grasp of extremist ideas and join armed groups.
Young people must be integrated in their societies and
become productive citizens. We must step up the level
of education and increase opportunities of employment
in order to meet their needs and allow them to build,
instead of destroying, their societies.

Lastly, one of the threats to peace and security is
the unequitable use of water resources and the spread
of desertification, which has had a negative impact on
the environment. It has led to wide displacement within
and outside national borders. We therefore need clear
regional frameworks that regulate the equitable and
reasonable use of water.

In conclusion, Iraq reaffirms that the best way to
maintain regional security is peace and cooperation
among the countries of the region and a joint stance
against terrorism and extremism, with a View to
achieving our collective security, while respecting the
sovereignty of countries and rejecting any intervention
in the internal affairs of States. We must strengthen the
ties of friendship and deepen economic and cultural
integration. Peace and harmony could help launch the
process of sustainable development in our countries.

