Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority,
for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to the
statements made by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.

The Palestine and Israel question is at the heart
of the Middle East process and has a major impact
on the situation in the Middle East region. The
Palestinian-Israeli peace talks have long been at a
standstill, which is a source of great concern for China.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only way to achieve
a settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli issue. China has
always maintained that both sides should, on the basis
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map for peace in the Middle East, resolve
their differences through dialogue and negotiation and
achieve the ultimate goal of establishing an independent
Palestinian State and having two States living side by
side in peace and security.

We welcome and support every initiative conducive
to breaking the deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli talks
and pushing for a resumption of the talks between the
two sides. We hope that the two parties will continuously
build up mutual trust and create conditions for a
resumption of engagement and an early relaunching
of peace talks. The international community should
further intensify efforts to promote such talks. China
hopes that the Quartet will play a greater role in
pressing for a resumption of the peace talks. China
supports a greater contribution by the Security Council
in advancing the Middle East peace process.

As always, China opposes the Israeli practice of
building Jewish settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, as well as attempts to unilaterally change
the status quo of Jerusalem. We call on Israel to release
Palestinian prisoners and detainees and to improve
the living and medical conditions of Palestinians still
in prisons or in detention. We urge Israel to halt any
actions that may lead to tension and to take measures to
remove the barriers impeding the resumption of peace
talks.

At this stage, the security and humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Gaza,
remains grim. The relevant United Nations resolutions
must be effectively implemented. We hope that Israel
will expeditiously and comprehensively lift its blockade
against Gaza and allow access to medical aid, assistance
and all the materiel needed for reconstruction, so as to
alleviate the humanitarian situation.

As always, China firmly supports the Palestinian
people's just cause for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights. We support the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We also support granting United Nations
membership to Palestine.

China is prepared to work with the rest of the
international community and will continue to play a
constructive role in ensuring the early achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

Last week, a draft resolution on Syria failed to be
adopted (see S/PV.6810). That was because there were
major drawbacks in the draft resolution, which violated
the basic principles governing international relations.
Ambassador Li Baodong gave a detailed account of
China's position on that occasion, so I shall not repeat it.
I wish to emphasize that China has always maintained
that the destiny of Syria must be decided by the Syrian
people themselves. The Syrian question can only be
resolved through political means. The imperative for
the international community is to fully support and
coordinate with Mr. Annan in his mediation efforts;
support the implementation of the communique adopted
at the Geneva meeting of the Action Group, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and Mr. Annan's
six-point plan; push for an immediate ceasefire and
cessation of violence by all sides in Syria; and create
conditions for the early launch of an inclusive political
dialogue.

