The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Botswana, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Liechtenstein,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and to Mr. Yves
2
Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/579, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. In accordance with the
understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that the members of the Security
Council agree to the statement, which will be issued as
a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2 0] 0/25 .

It is so decided.


The President: At this meeting, the Security
Council will hear briefings by Ms. Valerie Amos,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Ms. Navanethem Pillay and
Mr. Yves Daccord.

I now give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos, and I
welcome her on her first appearance before the
Security Council.


