Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
first like to thank Argentina for its efforts in presiding
over the Council for the month of August. And I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency for September, and to
wish you success in our work this month. I would also
like to thank you, Sir, for your briefing in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), and to commend you for your
efforts on behalf of the Committee.

China has always greatly valued and supported
the work of the Committee and will continue to
cooperate closely with it in advancing all aspects
of that work in a pragmatic, orderly and steady way,
aimed at the comprehensive, balanced implementation
of the resolution. While all parties have an obligation
to implement the resolution accurately and in earnest,
sanctions are not the resolution's fundamental objective
or the criteria for judging the Committee's work. China
has always believed that the work of the Committee
and its Panel of Experts should help the parties to build
confidence, carry on dialogue and negotiations and
facilitate the diplomatic process of settlement.

The Committee's work concerning individual
cases where Violations are suspected is very sensitive.
All parties involved should carry out their work and
make decisions based on the merits of the facts and in
a pragmatic, objective and cautious manner. China will
continue to abide by those principles and to participate
actively and responsibly in the work. Finding a peaceful
negotiated settlement to the Iranian issue through
dialogue is the only correct and viable path. China has
always opposed the use or threat of use of force, and is
not in favour of putting excessive pressure on Iran or
taking new sanctions measures against it. The current
situation in the area is increasingly complicated, and
against that background all parties should continue
to make efforts to maintain and promote a process
of dialogue and to find a negotiated and appropriate
settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue. This is extremely
important to maintaining peace in the Middle East
and preventing further turbulence in the situation.
All the parties should therefore seize the moment and
mobilize every possible favourable factor with the aim
of holding a new round of talks between Iran and the
five permanent members of the Security Council plus
Germany, while expanding consensus and taking due
account of the consent of all parties.

China has taken note of the latest report
(GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, and encourages
cooperation between Iran and the Agency, so that all
can work together to achieve positive results in a new
round of negotiations, to begin on 27 September. China
has always taken an objective, responsible and fair
approach to this issue and will continue to work with
all sides to seek a settlement of the nuclear issue by
diplomatic means.

