The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like, at the outset of this meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Minister for Foreign of
Affairs of Botswana, His Excellency Mr. Mompati S.
Merafhe. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) (S/1996/827)

Letter dated 7 October 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Zimbabwe to the United Nations

addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1996/832)

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Costa Rica, India, Ireland, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Portugal, Tunisia, Zambia
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Moura
(Angola), Mr. Simdo (Mozambique) aner. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe), took seats at the Council table; Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Nsanze (Burundi),
Mr. Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica), Mr. Shah (India), Mr. Campbell (Ireland),
Mr. Chimimba (Malawi), Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia),
Mr. Sevilla Siero (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria),
Mr. Lamego (Portugal), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) and

 

Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to
the request contained in a letter dated 7 October 1996
from the Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, contained in document S/ 1996/832.

Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III),
document S/ 1996/827.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1996/822, which contains the
text of identical letters dated 1 October 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council.

Members have received photocopies of a letter dated
10 October 1996 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe to the United Nations, contained in document
S/ 1996/841.

The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr. Stanislaus I. G.
Mudenge, whom I welcome and on whom I now call.


