Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Coninsx
and Mr. Voronkov for their interesting briefings.

We take note of the fact that, even after its military
defeat and the territorial end of its self-proclaimed State,
Da'esh continues to seek a global role, in particular
through its affiliates and isolated attacks by individuals
who subscribe to its hateful ideology. In addition, the
situation in the detention camps and facilities in Syria
and Iraq remains a great concern, especially with
regard to radicalized women and to children. That is the
reason behind the policy of Belgium to repatriate those
people. Belgium believes that the threat is far from over,
including in Europe. There is a particular risk stemming
from individuals who were prevented by the authorities
from joining Da'esh and still wish to contribute to the
terrorist movement through an individual act. In the face
of such threats, a comprehensive approach, including
the prevention of violent extremism, is indispensable.

Belgium concurs with the Secretary-General's
analysis that there is still a risk in prisons, which
remain an environment conducive to alienation and,
potentially, radicalization. Part of the problem lies
is the lack of awareness of this constantly evolving
phenomenon and of appropriate training. Monitoring of
prisoners is also crucial.

In reconsidering its prison system, Belgium
has opted for a tailor-made approach based on an
individual risk assessment and management. At the end
of detention, monitoring continues at the local level,
through police services, psychosocial services and
local administrations, which continue to exchange the
necessary information.

Following the Secretary-General's previous report
(S/2019/ 103), several resolutions were adopted to help
the international community tackle the terrorist threat,
such as resolution 2462 (2019), on the financing of
terrorism, initiated by France; resolution 2467 (2019),
on the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism,
initiated by Germany; and resolution 2482 (2019),
on the link between organized crime and terrorism,
initiated by Peru. Belgium very much welcomes the
attention devoted in these resolutions to the importance
of human rights, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law in our efforts and policies
to combat terrorism. In particular, it is necessary to
guarantee the necessary space for the daily actions
of humanitarian workers in a situation affected by
terrorism. Belgium will co-organize a side-event on
this subject with the European Union during the high-
level week of the General Assembly in September.

Finally, Belgium is of the View that it is important
to closely monitor the polarization created within our
societies by the attacks perpetrated by or in the name
of Da'esh and the resulting responses. Indeed, recent
attacks inspired by extremist and violent ideologies in
some Member States should give rise to vigilance and
prevention. Belgium will continue to engage resolutely
in multilateral efforts to combat this global threat.

