Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for having
introduced the Force Commanders and for having
given us this opportunity to hear directly from the
people on the ground. I believe that this is particularly
important since peacekeeping really is the main tool at
the disposal of the Security Council, involves the
largest percentage of the United Nations budget and is
certainly the particular activity that occupies the
maximum amount of time of the Council.

India has contributed more troops and police
officers to peacekeeping operations than any other
country. With more than 100,000 personnel in over
40 peacekeeping operations, we are very familiar with
what all of this entails, what is possible and What
peacekeeping operations are capable of. We have also
engaged in the normative side of this particular debate,
both in the Council and the General Assembly. A
seminar was recently held in New Delhi in the tradition
of that constructive engagement. It broke new ground
in drawing from the operational experience of
peacekeepers in the further evolution of the
peacekeeping agenda.

Peacekeeping has matured. More than 80 per cent
of peacekeeping resources today are devoted to
operations that are more than five years old. As we
launch two new missions - the first new operations in
several years - we need to take stock of the situation.
I would like to stress the following points.

The first is the lack of resources and the whole
issue of trying simply to tell people to do more with
existing or even less resources. I understand efficiency
gains; I understand the need to squeeze more; but I
think it needs to be clearly understood that operating
on shoestring budgets and with ever-increasing
mandates is certainly just not possible or effective.

Moreover, mandates need to have clarity. The
Force Commander from my country, India, noted
ambiguity in mandates and how it translates into
people lower down the command chain really not
knowing what is expected of them. I think we in the
Council owe it to ourselves and the forces that we
deploy on the ground to be clear in that respect and to
understand that mandates and resources need to be
married and in synergy. In that context, it is
particularly important that the process of interacting
with troop-contributing countries, which has already
been begun, should be carried out in a much more
intensive manner in which we have much greater
clarity on what can actually be produced and done with
the kind of resources that are being placed at the
disposal of the force that we are creating.

I would also like to highlight one other very
important element - the willingness to work in
partnerships. Here, let me draw members' attention to
Africa. Two-thirds of the Council's meetings and
outcomes concern Africa. It is also central to United
Nations peacekeeping. India strongly supports the
development of greater African Union capacities in
peacekeeping. In this connection, I would like to quote
from the address of our Prime Minister at the second
India-Africa Forum summit in Addis Ababa in May. He
said:

"India has consistently supported the
development of African capacities. As a token of
our commitment to supporting Africa's
endeavours for seeking African solutions, I am
happy to announce that India will contribute
$2 million for the African Union Mission in
Somalia."

Similar assistance needs to be provided by other
Member States to build the African Union's capacity in
peacekeeping. India is also committed to the early
operationalization of the African Standby Force
through special training arrangements.

We know that the weakest suffer the most in
conflict. Women and children have suffered and
continue to suffer appallingly in conflicts around the
world. The international community has not just the
responsibility but the obligation to do its utmost to
ensure the security of women and children, particularly
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Indian troops
and police officers, which include the first fully female
units deployed under the United Nations flag, will do
their utmost to protect the vulnerable in their areas of
operation.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Force
Commanders and the men and women under their
command. It is they who turn the Council's words into
deeds. I would also like to pay tribute to those
peacekeepers who have made the supreme sacrifice
when serving the United Nations in its efforts to create
a better and safer world.

