Mr. Clinton: Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, for inviting me to this meeting,
Mr. Annabi for his work and Prime Minister Pierre-
Louis for her truly outstanding leadership. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon - whom
I am still inclined to thank for asking me to become
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti - and Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for their support for Haiti's
building effort.

My wife Hillary and I first travelled to Haiti in
December 1975, before many of you in this Chamber
were born and just two months after we had married.
Ever since then, I have been completely captivated by
the promise and peril of that country; by its unique
culture and history; by the gifts and the spirit of its
people and the burdens of oppression, abuse and
neglect that they have suffered; and by the beauty and
bounty of the land and the barrenness that plunder and
poverty have brought.

When I was President, I worked with many of
you in the United Nations to end the violent military
dictatorship there and to restore an elected President.
And when President Preval succeeded President
Aristide, I did what I could to support him in his first
term within the limits imposed by the United States
Congress, which was then hostile or indifferent
towards our Haitian neighbours - a condition that, I
am glad to say, no longer exists. There is an enormous
amount of support for Haiti in the new Administration
and in the United States Congress.
09-50519

In spite of the devastation caused by last year's
hurricanes and storms, in spite of the absence of basic
infrastructure and the inadequacies in health, education
and other areas, and in spite of deforestation and its
consequences, which are very severe, I am convinced
that Haiti has a remarkable opportunity to escape the
chains of its past, for several reasons.

First, the President, the Prime Minister and their
Government are committed to building a modern State
with a diversified economy, and they have the
understanding and the capacity to do so. Secondly,
Haitians, including a substantial diaspora in the United
States, France and Canada and elsewhere, are hopeful
and committed to contributing to a better future.
Thirdly, both multinational and national donors have
made substantial pledges of aid, not just to alleviate
misery, but to help to build a modern, sustainable
society. Fourthly, thousands of non-governmental
organizations are already doing useful work there.
Fifthly, Haiti's neighbours have recognized that Haiti is
part of our neighbourhood and that, perhaps for the
first time, by virtue of that recognition, all of us have a
responsibility to help the Haitian people change their
present and their future.

This new embrace can be seen in Brazil's
outstanding leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in the
positive initiatives of the Inter-American Development
Bank and the Organization of American States, in the
promise of the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity
through Partnership Encouragement Act of 2008
(HOPE II), adopted last year by the United States
Congress, and in the support that Haiti has received
from two countries in our hemisphere, Venezuela and
Cuba, with which the United States is often found not
cooperating. In other words, in our neighbourhood,
there is a deep, wide sense that we can and should
support Haiti.

AS Special Envoy, I have no responsibility for the
peacekeepers, although I do appreciate their
contributions to improving security. I am grateful to
every country that has contributed troops. Nor does my
job entail any involvement in domestic Haitian politics.
That is up to the Haitian people. My mandate, instead,
is to work with the Government and the people of
Haiti, the United Nations agencies involved in-country,
the donor community, potential investors,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and diaspora
groups to do the following six things.
3

First, we seek to support the implementation of
the Haitian Government's recovery programme,
focusing on generating new jobs, enhancing delivery of
basic services and being more sensitive to the needs of
Haiti's middle class, including, as the Prime Minister
just emphasized to me, the shortage of decent housing
for public-sector employees. Nor can we forget that
50 per cent of all households in Haiti are headed by
women and that, while maternal mortality rates are
among the highest in the world, so far, of all the aid
pledges, only 1.5 per cent go towards women's
empowerment issues.

The second part of our mandate is to ensure that
the recovery effort has assistance at the level of
commitment we had when I did this work for the
United Nations in the tsunami-affected areas. Our goal
is to build back better - better schools, hospitals and
housing, better public facilities and infrastructure, and
much more effective disaster prevention and
mitigation. Those here who were involved in the
post-tsunami rebuilding know that that part of our
endeavour was extremely successful, and I hope it will
be here.

Thirdly, we seek to encourage more private sector
investment in Haiti, with a focus on opportunities
available now and on the need to make Haiti even more
competitive to maximize its investment potential. We
need to be promoting, at first, the opportunities that
exist and that have been made possible by the more
secure environment to which MINUSTAH has
contributed so much.

In a few weeks, I will lead a trade mission to
Haiti to explore investment opportunities. In August,
the Government shortened the length of time it takes
between filing an investment proposal and its approval.
That is a very good beginning, but we need to do more
to rebuild the roads, the infrastructure and the power
supply necessary to advance agriculture, manufacturing
and tourism. Given the untapped economically viable
opportunities for clean energy and greater energy
efficiency, there is also no reason why Haiti cannot
become much more energy independent in a way that
will create substantial numbers of new jobs and cut
long-term costs to business, Government and
individual citizens.

I see that Costa Rica is currently a member of the
Security Council. Participants might want to ask that
country's representative what the economic benefits of
being the most clean energy country in the world are.
Every Caribbean country can achieve such energy
efficiency due to the benefits of size, temperature and
sunlight, but my focus is on what it can mean for the
poorest country in our neighbourhood, Haiti.

Fourthly, I will seek to urge philanthropists,
NGOs and civil society groups to invest more financial
and human resources and to work more closely
together. My team is currently working on a NGO
database to map out who is doing what to help us better
coordinate the literally thousands of NGOs working in
Haiti today. That is something that we did in the
aftermath of the tsunami with quite exceptional
success. Coordinating the work of NGOs with that of
the host Government, the United Nations agencies and
others can have a very tangible and real impact on the
population, especially in a country like Haiti which,
with the single exception of India, has more NGOs per
capita working there than any other nation in the
world.

Fifthly, I hope be able to project a more positive
image of Haiti to the international community so as to
push it into the spotlight, not as some sort of lost cause,
but as a country genuinely primed to claim a bright
future.

Sixthly, I hope to involve the Haitian diaspora to
an extent never before seen. It is a very impressive
group, not just in the United States, but also in Canada
and Europe. Recently, I attended the second annual
meeting of the Haitian diaspora in the United States in
Miami and hosted leaders from the Haitian community
in the north-eastern United States in my office in
Harlem in New York. I will continue this engagement.

Finally, Haiti can succeed, but not without the
help of the Security Council and the United Nations. I
urge all who made commitments during last April's
donor conference and in the immediate aftermath to
begin actually funding them as soon as possible. An
estimated $760 million have been pledged to the
Government of Haiti since then, but so far only
$21 million have been disbursed. The contributions
that participants generously pledged are urgently
needed now - now to create jobs, now to restore
services, now to fund the public budget, now to help
patient parents who cannot afford to send their children
to private schools, now to build back better and finish
prevention and mitigation projects that will minimize
09-50519
any storm damage that comes this year and create lots
of new jobs.

I ask participants to help me to ensure that the
commitments made by all Member States are honoured
in a way that is consistent with the priorities of the
Haitian Government's plan. Every now and then, the
Prime Minister, the President and I get criticized by
someone in the press in Haiti claiming that this
mandate is some vast colonial conspiracy by me to take
over Haiti. I assure the Council that that is not true. My
sole goal is to help them to do what they have decided
they want to do, and their knowledge and judgment on
that score are far, far superior to mine.

Anything that we can do expedite the actual
distribution of aid is going to have a positive impact on
the lives of ordinary Haitians. There will be
transparency, accountability and effectiveness in this
process. I believe that the United States Government
will fulfil its commitments in this way, and I am
grateful for the personal interest of the Secretary of
State and her Chief of Staff, Cheryl Mills. They have
made a real personal commitment, and Cheryl has
already been to Haiti twice to support the Government
in its priorities.

Beyond the commitments of the Government and
multilateral donors, some significant new individual
commitments have already been made, even in advance
of the trade mission. The Soros Economic
Development Fund has launched its Haiti Invest
Project, an equity investment programme with an
initial commitment of $25 million and a potential of
$150 million. That can do a lot of good in Haiti.
Michael Carey, an Irish businessman, and a group of
his colleagues recently established the Soul of Haiti
Foundation after a number of visits, and have offered
to host a delegation of Haitian business people in
Ireland in October. The former director of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency when I was President,
James Lee Witt, has committed $250,000 for disaster-
preparedness training for women in Haiti and has
already begun identifying training sites in coordination
with both the Government and the United Nations. One
of my partners in the Global Initiative, an Indian
businessman, Desh Deshpande, who feeds a million
children a day in India, has committed to work in Haiti
to help expand some very impressive school feeding
programmes already under way there. A citizen of both
the Dominican Republic and the United States,
Rolando Gonzalez Bunster, who is an energy

executive, has offered to install, initially, five Vestas
windmills made in Denmark, which can provide
economical, renewable energy at competitive prices
within just a few months. We know that there is
enormous untapped potential both for wind and solar
energy in Haiti.

The United Nations is also exploring ways to
replicate a community-led recycling project I recently
visited in Port-au-Prince, which has the best potential
of anything I have seen anywhere to reduce
deforestation in a way that creates 10 times as many
jobs as the production of charcoal does and cuts the
cost.

Essentially, in a neighbourhood I visited, a young
man and his nine fellow board members have
employed people for the first time in picking up and
sorting the garbage, and the organic waste is being
turned into compost and organic fertilizer. The paper is
being recycled with sawdust, and they are turning it
into little briquettes about this size. I meant to bring
one for every member of the Security Council, but I
forgot to bring them down here today. With four of
them one can cook dinner; they cost one penny apiece,
which is one fifth the cost of cooking dinner with
charcoal in Haiti. But the employment necessary to
collect the garbage, sort it, produce these briquettes in
a hand-held press and then sell them door to door is 10
to 20 times the employment that is generated by cutting
down trees that should be left standing and turning
them into charcoal.

It is a simple thing to think of a product that costs
a penny apiece - it literally could employ hundreds
and maybe thousands of people just in Haiti and help
us to turn back the tide of deforestation even as we
seek to increase agricultural capacity with mangoes,
coffee and lots of other products. These are things that
are important. In addition to the trade mission, many
here will know that the Inter-American Development
Bank is going to hold a trade conference on Haiti soon
to showcase that country to businesspeople and
investors from Latin America and the Caribbean,
Canada, the United States and Europe. We are working
at this.

Finally, let me say what I have no intention of
doing. I will not give the Council one more written
analysis of the problems of Haiti. If I file a report, it
will be only on what we have actually done or what we
have failed to do. I am very grateful for the team that
the United Nations has provided, including some fine
people who are permanent employees and worked with
me on the tsunami.

I am also grateful for the Secretary-General's
appointment of Mr. Paul Farmer as my Deputy. We are
both working with the United Nations for $1 a year,
and we appreciate the compensation. I have known
Paul Farmer for over 15 years. We have worked
together in Africa, in Rwanda and Malawi, since 2005.
He actually translated for me in 2004 in Haiti when I
went there and was working with the Government of
that time to help the country with its AIDS problem.
His work in the mountains of Haiti to provide
affordable and quality health care to some of the
poorest people in our neighbourhood has been
recognized all around the world. He has been involved
with Haiti since he was a student in 1983. When I
asked my daughter some 12 years ago what she knew
about Paul Farmer, she said that he was her
generation's Albert Schweitzer.

We are indeed fortunate that he has agreed to be
the Deputy Special Envoy to Haiti. He has a lot of
personal contact and credibility with the Haitian
Government. He has already met with representatives
of the United Nations and the non-profit world,
including George Soros and Jeffrey Sachs. He has met
with Paul Collier's team, which provided the United
Nations with an analysis and set of recommendations
on Haiti's economy. We are all working on this, and we
are 100 per cent committed to delivering tangible
results to the United Nations and, most important, to
the people of Haiti.

In closing, let me just ask each member of the
Security Council to recognize the actual and potentially
critical role that they can play. I am grateful for their
support of MINUSTAH and for the security it has
provided, which has made possible the progress that
has occurred so far. I am hopeful that investments in
the socio-economic sphere will match or exceed the
contributions that have been committed or those that
will be discussed here today with the people who will
speak after me.

I have been going to Haiti for nearly 35 years.
Two hundred and ten years ago, Haiti was the
wealthiest island in the Caribbean. It is now the poorest
country in our hemisphere, but when we look at the
Haitians here in New York, in Canada and in France,
and even at many of the Haitians in Haiti, we see that

they are intelligent, creative, innovative and successful.
They have suffered from misgovernment, abuse and
neglect from within and from their neighbours and
partners in the international community. We have a
great set of leaders down there now. We can turn this
around, and because we can, we must.

