Mr. Carroll (Holy See): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on the Security Council's working methods and
wishes to raise four points.

First, there is a need for genuine equity among
Member States with regard to the influence that they
can exert. on the decision-making processes in the
various United Nations bodies, including the Security
Council. Pope Francis, in his address to the General
Assembly on 25 September, affirmed that, beyond the
many achievements of the United Nations,

"the experience of the past 70 years has shown
that reform and adaptation to the times are always
essential as we work towards the ultimate goal of
ensuring that all countries without exception can
participate in our decisions and have a genuine and
equitable influence on them" (A/70/PV.3, p. 3).

My delegation believes that Member States would
like to have an equitable share in influence, especially
in the Security Council, the only United Nations body
with the power to make binding decisions. That calls
for greater interactivity; in particular, it requires real
open debates and a willingness to take into account
the Views of the wider membership and the actors in
the various conflicts being considered. Such views can
bring greater legitimacy to the Council, helping it to
better shape its understanding of crisis situations and
improving its ability to respond.

Moreover, in order to show greater consideration
of the views of the wider membership, the Council
may want to re-examine its practice of first adopting a
resolution on a matter that is only subsequently debated
by the wider United Nations membership. There are,
doubtlessly, good reasons for that practice. However, it
makes some of the wider membership wonder if their
inputs really matter and if the resolution has already
been decided on and adopted before they are heard.

Secondly, with regard to the question of the
transparency that the wider membership demands
from the Council, we hear that voice getting stronger
lately, not only in the context of the bigger question of
the reinvigoration of the work of the United Nations
as it turns 70, but also in the more immediate context
of the selection of the Organization's next Secretary-
General. In that regard, it is imperative that the
Security Council and the General Assembly maintain
a transparent working relationship. As laid out in
General Assembly resolution 69/321, the membership
deems that the criteria for qualified candidates must
include proven leadership and managerial abilities,
extensive experience in international relations, strong
diplomatic communication and multilingual skills,
while considering equal and fair distribution based on
gender and geographical balance.

Thirdly, on the question of fairness in the
application of the Charter of the United Nations and
all international agreements and treaties, my delegation
believes that the arbitrary interpretation of existing
laws and the application of double standards in dealing
with the parties in conflict are some of the underlying
causes of the feelings of victimization that turn into
hatred and violence.

Fourthly, the United Nations, and the Council
in particular, would acquire greater authority and
legitimacy if countries could discern clear and
effective criteria for the application of the principle of
the responsibility to protect and for the corresponding
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The responsibility to protect all peoples from
massive atrocities, instances of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is today
widely recognized and accepted. Yet, it is not easy to
carry out that duty in practice because of the prevailing
geopolitical interests and, not least, because actions
under that principle can lead to conflicts with a strictly
literal interpretation of another principle, that of
non-intervention, as enshrined in paragraph 7 ofArticle
2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Nonetheless,
owing to the unacceptable human costs of inaction,
the search for effective juridical means for practical
applications of the principle of the responsibility to
protect must be one of the most urgent priorities of the
United Nations.

The Holy See strongly supports any initiative
and any step towards achieving a more effective and
concrete application ofthe principle ofthe responsibility
to protect, especially in cases of mass atrocities.

