Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the United
States presidency for underscoring the importance of
strengthening the political objectives and dimensions
of peacekeeping operations. I also thank the Secretary-
General for a very innovative and reformist approach to
the entire peacekeeping continuum. We fully support
his vision to raise the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations - one that is both timely
and needed.

Recent developments in some operations make
this debate even more relevant and timely. Peace and
security today are threatened as never before. It is
therefore necessary to evaluate how the effectiveness
of the operations of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations can be enhanced, especially in the face of
asymmetrical conflicts and the rise of terrorism and
extreme violence.

Despite those limitations, in many countries
peacekeeping operations have helped countries to
close the chapter of conflict and open a path to normal
development. At the same time, United Nations
peacekeeping and the response by the international
community as a whole have been challenged and found
ineffective in some cases. These setbacks provide
important lessons for deciding how and when to deploy,
and what structure and streamlining is needed to
support United Nations peacekeeping. They also serve

as a political tool to restore and maintain international
peace and security.

My delegation offers the following observations to
ensure a sharper political focus, drawn from current
missions as a whole rather than specific cases.

First, peacekeeping, with its operational facets,
can never become the overriding focus. It must be
considered in conjunction with conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and development. Those concerns must
all be addressed simultaneously if the root causes of
political conflict are to be addressed and the risk of
conflicts recurring reduced. All efforts must be based
on timely early warning and analysis of the drivers
of intra-State or inter-State disputes that escalate into
violent conflict.

Second, engaging regional organizations and
neighbouring States in resolving conflicts is becoming
increasingly important. Recent success stories from the
Lake Chad basin and the Great Lakes region, which I
visited last month, call for more suchjoint initiatives by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the United Nations. Mediation efforts
by neighbouring groups of States and Heads of State
have yielded considerable success. They will need to
be reinforced by the peace missions of the Department
of Political Affairs, the collective United Nations
multilateral system, media and civil society - as
powerful agents of political change.

Third, the General Assembly and its Member
States are also positive political influences for funding
and bilateral assistance. Political objectives can only be
reached if both the host Government and the parties on
the ground take ownership and responsibility.

Fourth, political gains can be sustained only ifthey
are supported by disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; security sector and rule-of-law reforms;
and the promotion of human rights. Fragile States must
be offered security and assistance programmes to
promote their social and economic recovery and their
long-term development. It is also necessary to consider
if guarantees for the safety and security of United
Nations personnel can be reasonably obtained from the
main parties or factions.

Fifth, while considering new mandates or
extending existing ones, the Security Council must
take into account whether the parties to a conflict in a
country have committed themselves to a peace process
and whether a clear political goal is reflected in the
mandate. The Secretary-General and the entire United
Nations system should call for a periodic strategic
assessment to identify all possible options for United
Nations engagement, to determine what actions need
to be taken when political processes break down and
whether the mission should continue.

Sixth, the Security Council will henceforth be
expected to monitor peacekeeping operations more
closely and on an ongoing basis, considering the
present-day growing threats of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant/Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
other violent extremist and armed groups. That raises
the questions of whether we have sufficient means and
resources to do so and how to proceed.

Seventh, funding must also be considered from
the overall security, political, military, humanitarian
and human rights conditions on the ground when
missions begin and when their mandates are extended.
If missions are ended or downsized, we must also
consider the consequences of those measures and
whether the security vacuum will be filled by terrorist
groups. The key question is: How do we prevent such
groups from making inroads into new territories, thus
creating further regional and global insecurities?

Eighth, recent setbacks in the field provide insight
for a thorough ongoing evaluation of mission objectives
and their completion. It is critical to design proper
exit strategies and alternative future arrangements to
ensure stabilization after mission withdrawal. Such a
framework is necessary for every mission.

Ninth, we appreciate the immense efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
Department of Field Support to improve the system
of force generation. However, there is room for
improvement, such as introducing a rotational system
for troop-contributing countries (TCCs). This could
create a better environment among TCCs and increase
the overall effectiveness of field missions.

Political diplomacy and peacekeeping go hand in
hand. There is no body parallel to the United Nations,
with its peacekeeping operations and its three essential
pillars under the Charter. It is thus up to us to see
how best we can deploy and support United Nations
peacekeeping as one ofthe invaluable and indispensable
tools in the context of the New Agenda for Peace.
