Mr. Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation does not want to miss this opportunity to
address members of the Council to express our deepest
sorrow at the death of a great friend of Mexico, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Mrs. Anna
Lindh. It is a deplorable loss, and we join in what other
members of the Council have said.

We also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his briefing,
analysing the latest developments in and prospects for
consolidating peace in Kosovo.

Scarcely three weeks ago, the Council examined
the topic that we are addressing today. On that
occasion, we met as the result of a criminal act aimed
against the principle establishing multi-ethnicity as the
formula for coexistence within the province. On 26
August, near Klina in the Pec' region, another armed
attack was carried out against the Serbian minority. On
31 August, there were two explosions in the town of
Cernica, leaving one person dead and three wounded.
My delegation condemns once again those types of acts
and wishes to share its deep concern that those
atrocities are recurring themes that we encounter every
time that we discuss Kosovo.

For that reason, we wish to say that, in Mexico's
opinion, the road to a prosperous and tolerant Kosovo,
where law and respect for human rights prevail, is the
road that the extremist groups do not want to take.
Therefore, those types of acts that promote hatred and
anarchy must be stopped.

The international community formed an
outstanding strategic alliance with respect to Kosovo.
Substantial human and financial resources and political
will have been invested in the effort of reconstruction
and reconciliation. That effort must be maintained, and
we must achieve the objective set by the Security
Council.

Therefore, the Council must not confine itself to
condemning acts of violence. We must confront the
causes that bring them about, as a first step, in order to
implement later concrete strategies to prevent their
recurrence in the future. Mexico considers that the
strategy must be comprehensive, addressing
simultaneously questions of education, security,
development and the administration of justice.

In the area of education, activities and
programmes must be promoted at all levels that foster
mutual understanding of cultures, religions and
customs and mutual feedback between ethnic groups as
a basis for cultural understanding and coexistence. The
normalization of life in the province is the
responsibility of all Kosovars. There cannot be genuine
coexistence while there is mistrust.

Regardless of ethnic origin or religious beliefs,
all Kosovars are jointly responsible for forging that
inclusive future. Accordingly, we must even more
decisively support the promotion of the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons to their
homes under secure and normal conditions.
It is also necessary that the self-governing
provisional institutions earn the trust and respect of the
entire population, and the only way to do that is to
work in accordance with the law, with transparency and
a sense of equity and justice. In that context, Mexico
has viewed as positive measures the recent suspension
of seven members from the Kosovo Protection Corps
and the disciplinary action against eight others on
suspicions of links to organized crime and extremist
groups.

Mexico notes with satisfaction the efforts
undertaken by Mr. Harri Holkeri, Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), to initiate soon the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue on practical issues. Forging a mechanism for
direct dialogue will undoubtedly depend on progress
being made in political, social and economic items for
mutual understanding among all inhabitants of the
province.

In conclusion, I wish to say that the illicit traffic
in weapons and the volume of such weapons among the
population of Kosovo is a source of concern and should
become a cause of major attention by the Council.
Mexico believes that the traffic in and the possession
of weapons should be restricted to the full extent
possible, since their very existence can promote social
violence. We therefore welcome the third programme
of arms amnesty, organized by the United Nations,
which will be held in September.

In Mexico's view, to the extent that there exists in
Kosovo a will for dialogue, there will be a future and
irrational acts will be relegated to the past.

