Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing and the representative of the United States for
his briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/608)
indicates a reduction in the level of acts of violence,
but in Peru's estimation that has not yet been sufficient
to prevent the continued deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis resulting from the wave of refugees
and internally displaced persons who are fleeing the
violence in Iraq. Nor has there been a significant
change in the human rights situation, in spite of
improved cooperation between the Iraqi Government
and the Multinational Force, as shown in the most
recent human rights report by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). On the contrary,
in some cases the situation has deteriorated, in
particular with regard to religious and ethnic
minorities. Iraqi leaders have not taken advantage of
the decrease in acts of violence to unblock the
deadlocked political process or to prevent sectarian
fighting.

Living conditions continue to deteriorate. Even
the water supply is no longer guaranteed; cholera has
broken out and school attendance is of great concern.
The worsening situation means that the cost of
reconstructing Iraq's social, economic and political
fabric continues to increase. That is the price that Iraqi
civilians are paying for the lack of dialogue between
the country's leaders and the lack of a spirit of
compromise in order to make headway on the sensitive
issues on the political agenda.

Peru is extremely concerned by the present
internal political situation in Iraq. Neither the
parliament's failure to take decisions nor the
weakening of the Government due to boycotts and
resignations by some of its members contribute to the
stability of the country. This deepens distrust among
communities.

It is important to remember that the Iraqis
themselves bear primary responsibility for the future of
their country. We hope that the country's various
sectors will understand that international efforts at this
stage of reconstruction require their commitment to
dialogue and reconciliation. We hope that the Prime
Minister will make every effort to lead that dialogue
and to work to revive the spirit of compromise among
his fellow citizens.

We believe that, to achieve that goal, essential
elements for dialogue and national reconciliation
continue to be the following: security issues; the
distribution of oil revenues; resolution of the problem
of Kirkuk; constitutional reform; allocation of
functions between the central Government and the
regions; and de-Baathification. In order to encourage
dialogue and democratic reconciliation, the security
situation must first and foremost be brought under
control. Terrorism, as well as militias and other armed
groups beyond the control of the State, must be
eradicated.

In this struggle, human rights and international
humanitarian law must be respected by all with a stake
in maintaining law and order and public security. In a
democracy, use of force not subject to the law and
inconsistent with respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law cannot be permitted. A
single, credible and non-sectarian body is required to
legitimize the use of force in Iraq. Here, the militias
must be disarmed. Effective, credible and legitimate
security forces can be partners in stabilizing the
country and fully restoring its sovereignty. These
responsibilities must be transferred more quickly from
the Multinational Force to the Iraqi forces.

Peru also regrets the deterioration in the human
rights situation and urges Iraqi authorities and the
international community to continue to build a
democracy that respects human rights. There must be
no place for impunity in the establishment of
democratic institutions in Iraq. The raison d'etre of a
State is to protect the lives and the human rights of its
citizens. Those who attack the rule of law or human
rights should be called to account in a court of law.

In the endeavour to restore hope to the Iraqi
people, progress in rebuilding the infrastructure and
economic and social development are of the greatest
importance. The International Compact with Iraq is an
important framework for international assistance.
Conditions for its implementation will improve with
improvements in security, reconciliation and
transparency, and with the enactment of national laws
that reflect solid political agreements on the
management of natural resources. Iraq's oil wealth
must be dealt with in a responsible and transparent
manner. Distribution of oil revenue in a negotiated
fashion will help to improve the climate of
understanding among Iraqis, and will engender
confidence that those resources will benefit all citizens.

For any effort to stabilize Iraq to be viable,
neighbouring countries too must cooperate. Iraq and its
neighbours must continue to act cautiously and
diligently to address urgent issues on their common
agenda while avoiding unilateral action that would
complicate the delicate situation in Iraq. Peru urges a
stronger spirit of multilateral assistance for Iraq.

Finally, Peru expresses its support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. We consider that
it should continue, consistent with its mandate and with
the possibilities on the ground, to work to consolidate
all activities that can help attain political and legal
stability, institutional and economic reconstruction,
humanitarian assistance and the protection of human
rights in Iraq.
