Mr. Lflvald (Norway): My delegation welcomes
Denmark's initiative to hold this very important open
debate. In our view, there are four broad gaps in
current peacebuilding doctrine and practice. These are:
the lack of coherent planning of broad peacebuilding
operations; the lack of sufficient clarity of the activities
and cooperation among all actors in the field; the lack
of coherence among actors involved in peacekeeping,
humanitarian and long-term development efforts; and
finally, the lack of adequate coordination within the
United Nations system.

The proposed Peacebuilding Commission and the
corresponding Peacebuilding Support Office will go a
long way in addressing the aforementioned shortcomings.
We also believe that the Peacebuilding Commission could
serve as a most useful tool for enhanced donor
coordination and interaction.
In order to forge stronger cooperation among the
United Nations actors involved, key leadership and
management issues need to be addressed. As far as the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General are
concerned, their mandates need to be clarified. Also,
roles, functions and modalities for cooperation among
the various United Nations actors in the field must be
more clearly specified.

Finally, the need for a more integrated United
Nations at the country level must be combined with the
need to reflect the conceptual and operational divisions
among military, political, humanitarian and development-
oriented action.

The United Nations has both a comparative
advantage and a clear role to play in peacebuilding. Its
experience in conflict areas and its technical expertise
are unique.

Furthermore, the United Nations is present
before, during and after a conflict and is thus well
placed to provide assessments of, and strategic
planning for, peacebuilding efforts. For the United
Nations to play that role, close and continuous
cooperation between all relevant parts of the system is
necessary.

A sound division of labour, based on comparative
advantage, among Secretariat units, funds and
programmes, and agencies is the only viable approach.
However, the various aspects of peacebuilding are
interrelated, and competencies and relative advantages
may vary from country to country. Thus, a clearer
division of labour cannot replace the need for close and
flexible cooperation among the various United Nations
actors.

It is our view that we also have to look beyond
the United Nations itself. It is neither realistic nor
desirable for the United Nations to be the only provider
of technical expertise to broad peacebuilding
operations. Regional organizations should be given
important roles. The division of labour between the
United Nations and regional organizations should be
based on the principle of subsidiarity. In that context,
donors should also revisit their funding formats to
facilitate long-term cooperation at the regional level.

Assistance is often negligible during the most
critical period after a peace settlement. That persistent
funding gap needs to be addressed as an integral part of
the overall response to post-conflict peacebuilding. It
is our view that all activities included in the mandates
should be financed by assessed contributions.
In addition to the limitation of funds, the funding
rules and regulations of agencies do not support the
flexibility that complex peacebuilding efforts demand.
A standing fund for peacebuilding, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, could, if properly designed and
adequately funded, help substantially in addressing that
problem.

There is little chance of institutionalizing
democracy if peacebuilding itself is not democratically
organized and accountable to local partners. The
involvement of local actors in peacebuilding policy-
making is also crucial to assist in ensuring a better
match between assistance and local absorptive
capacity. Swift assistance in establishing key State
functions and institutions is crucial in that regard. This
has to be supplemented by support for civil society at
an early stage of the post-conflict phase. Externally
funded community projects supporting socio-economic
development are necessary in order to provide a sense
of purpose to communities divided by conflict.

Finally, we need to be more creative in
identifying ways and means to implement Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). True local ownership
implies the involvement of entire populations. Efforts
to build peace are less likely to succeed if women do
not play their rightful role. Nearly five years after the
adoption of that resolution, women are still scarce
around negotiating tables, in constitution-making
bodies and in political councils.

As we continue this debate, we need to recognize
that, despite the comparative advantages of the United
Nations in peacebuilding, there are limitations as to
what the Organization can achieve. Success and
progress must be judged against a realistic standard.

