The Secretary-General: Mr. President, let me
welcome you to Headquarters today.

May I first say how much I appreciate the sustained
attention which both the Council and the General
Assembly are giving to African issues. If meetings alone
could solve Africa's problems we would have none, but,
alas, they do not, which is why I appreciate even more,

 

Mr. President, the effort you have made to give this
meeting a practical and operational character, aimed at
making a difference not just in words but in action. As I
told the General Assembly last week, the United Nations
could hardly be any more broadly engaged in Africa than
it is already. What we need now is to be engaged more
effectively.

I also believe you are right, Mr. President, to focus, in
the first instance, on the need for better coordination
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations. This is particularly important in the area of
peacekeeping.

During this decade peacekeeping has acquired a strong
regional dimension virtually everywhere it has been
practised. Asians took the lead in Cambodia, as they did
again in East Timor. Similarly, in Bosnia and Kosovo
peacekeeping has been seen primarily as a task for
Europeans.

It is only natural that African States are expected to
play a leading role in their own back yards, and in many
instances they have risen bravely to the challenge. The
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
especially has made heroic efforts in the extraordinarily
difficult circumstances in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

What is not natural, or indeed fair, is to expect
Africans to carry out these tasks without help. Even the
Europeans, who are better equipped in so many respects,
have had significant help from others in keeping the peace
within their region.

A region such as Africa is therefore even more
entitled to expect help in strengthening the capacity of its
regional and subregional institutions. This was a need
which I highlighted in my report last year.

We in the Secretariat are doing what we can. We have
intensified our own cooperation with the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and are working especially closely
with them in helping implement the Lusaka accord on the
Democratic Republic of Congo. If the results have so far
been disappointing, that is partly for lack of a clear will to
implement the accord among the parties. But it is also a
question of resources. In these circumstances there is
always a tendency for ceasefires to break down and for the
region to slide back into war. That is why the most
immediate and practical decision I am looking for from the
Council is to act promptly in the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, before the fragile ceasefire is
further eroded.

But it is no less urgent that necessary resources be
made available to the Joint Military Commission to
enable it to play the role foreseen for it under the Lusaka
accord. We have already convened two meetings with
potential donors to highlight this need. We should now
explore jointly with the OAU how we can make the Joint
Military Commission more effective and align it more
closely with the work of the peacekeepers.

The same observation applies to the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), which has done
invaluable work in West Africa - notably in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. But, at least in the two
former cases, it has had to rely heavily on support from
individual States in the region - States whose peoples
can ill afford such sacrifices. The Council should consider
as a matter of urgency how such regional operations can
be more fairly and efficiently financed. Indeed, I cannot
emphasize too strongly the importance of ensuring that
wherever responsibility is assigned, adequate resources
are also provided to carry out that responsibility.

In the case of Sierra Leone I should like to
emphasize that, as indicated in previous reports to the
Council, the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) will require additional resources if
ECOMOG confirms its expressed intention to withdraw
all its troops from the country.

Regional and subregional organizations in Africa
simply do not have those resources at present. They are
obliged to finance their peacekeeping activities through
trust funds and, regrettably, these trust funds do not
attract donations on anything like the scale needed.

The United Nations itself is not much better placed
when, as is now so often the case, we are told to finance
our operations through voluntary contributions. I believe
the increasing resort to this practice is contrary to the
spirit of the Charter, and it is also inefficient. No
organization can consistently deliver quality performance
if it is obliged to live from hand to mouth. It should be
one of the highest priorities of the Council to find better
and more efficient ways of funding peacekeeping
operations.

Mr. President, you asked what additional instruments
the Council can bring to bear to help solve and, where
possible, to prevent conflicts in Africa. In suggesting a

 

few such instruments, I have in mind particularly the need
for the Council to show sustained and effective interest in
African conflicts, or potential conflicts, and to avoid giving
the appearance of sporadic or purely rhetorical reactions to
crises without any follow-up. It is vital that once the
Council has taken an initiative or adopted a resolution it
remains fully engaged in following up and supporting its
implementation.
One way of doing this would be to use contact groups
of interested members that would undertake to follow
through on proposed action on specific conflicts. A start has
been made with the group established for Somalia.

In some cases it may be appropriate to establish a
joint working group, bringing together members of the
Council, the Secretariat and the relevant regional or
subregional organization. This would be especially suitable,
perhaps, when there is a need to ensure that decisions such
as the deployment of peacekeeping troops are implemented
with a minimum of delay.

A third kind of working group that can be useful is
one that brings together members that are interested in a
particular aspect of conflict prevention or containment and
that would accept a specific mandate to work with the
Secretariat in following up some of the Council's
initiatives, with a clearly defined outcome in view. The
model here would be Ambassador Fowler's group, which
has done excellent work tracking the economic resources
that fuel certain conflicts and which is looking for ways to
enforce sanctions and embargoes once the Council has
decided on them. Other problems, such as the traffic in
small arms, would surely merit the same approach.

Fourthly, the Council could consider holding
meetings - perhaps alternately here at Headquarters and,
in appropriate cases, in Africa - to establish closer and
more regular contact between the members of the Council
and the heads and staff of various regional and subregional
organizations.

In addition to these, I believe many of the ideas that
emerged from last month's debate on conflict prevention
may be particularly useful in Africa - for instance,
missions with clear goals undertaken by the Council itself
on the model of the mission to Jakarta and Dili last
September; preventive action by the Council in response to
matters brought to its attention by States or by the
Secretary-General, including, in some cases, preventive
deployment of forces with the consent of the host country;
preventive disarmament or the establishment of
demilitarized zones; and the improvement of regional
capacities for early warning, as well as peacekeeping.

The suggestions I have made are not dramatic. But
they could, if implemented consistently over time, make
a real and perceptible difference in the quality of our
work for peace and security in Africa. I offer them in the
practical, down-to-eaith spirit in which you,
Mr. President, have convened this meeting. I look forward
with great interest to hearing your own comments and
suggestions, as well as those of other Council members.

