Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption by Germany of the Security Council presidency for this month, as well as to commend your efforts and those of your delegation in steering the work of the Council in an efficient and effective manner. I also wish to thank Mr. Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and his team for the outstanding briefing and for their efforts on the ground, in extremely difficult conditions, especially with regard to the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), on illegal Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. Today's meeting of the Security Council naturally follows the Council's ministerial meeting held on 24 June (see S/2020/596), in which the Secretary- General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and a large number of foreign ministers of States members of the Security Council participated actively. Highly significant interventions were made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Palestine (see S/2020/596, annex 19) and other ministers in attendance, who submitted their statements for inclusion in the record of the meeting. In those statements, they all clearly expressed their staunch opposition to Israeli plans to annex the occupied Palestinian territory. They also condemned those plans and the detrimental effects that they would have not only on the peace process and the principle of land for peace on which it was established, but also on the two-State solution - one of the pillars of international legitimacy, alongside the Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo Accords, the Madrid principles and the numerous resolutions of the Security Council on the Palestinian question - and on the security and stability of the entire Middle East region. That meeting confirmed, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that the international community stands united against annexation and that it is intent on opposing it. The Secretary-General of the Arab League clearly highlighted at the previous meeting that the only way to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict was by safely implementing the two-State solution, because all parties were convinced that Israeli annexation plans would both harm the current peace process and destroy any prospect of peace in future. The Palestinians would lose faith in the prospect of a fair, negotiated settlement, and the Arabs would lose interest in regional and international peace. Annexation would lead to dark days for the conflict and for the region as a whole (see S/2020/596, annex 3). The League of Arab States reaffirms the centrality of the two-State solution that the international community has adopted as the basis for resolving the Palestinian question, premised on the establishment of an independent State of Palestine within the borders of 4 June 1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. It reiterates its opposition to any peace plans that may be announced or implemented without direct negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli parties, or that include any proposals to change any of the main terms of reference of the peace process or to modify the status of the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. The League of Arab States opposes any attempts to recognize Israeli sovereignty over any of these territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It insists that an agreement must be reached on the five final-status issues through direct negotiations, under the neutral auspices of the international Quartet, whose role should be strengthened and expanded to include influential stakeholders in the peace process. The League of Arab States looks forward to continuing to work closely and in earnest with the Security Council to confront the dangers facing the entire Middle East, on the one hand, and the Palestinian question, on the other hand, in particular by cooperating effectively to address Israeli plans to annex the Palestinian territories. It encourages the Security Council to make earnest efforts, first, to put in place practical mechanisms, inter alia, to provide protection to the Palestinian people, and work to put forward alternative initiatives to improve the prospects of the two-State solution on the basis of internationally recognized principles, with a view to ending the occupation and all illegal Israeli practices targeting the defenceless Palestinian people. Secondly, the Security Council should reaffirm that the so-called annexation of any part of the occupied West Bank or the Jordan Valley would be null and void and would not be recognized, and work to put an immediate stop to the construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory. Thirdly, the Council should work to implement and revitalize regional initiatives, chief among them the Arab Peace Initiative, in support of the peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and eschew any course of action inconsistent with the terms of reference of the peace process, whose purpose is to realize a two- State solution based on direct negotiations addressing the five parameters for a comprehensive and just final settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Fourthly, the Council should strive to revitalize and expand the Quartet in order to restore its role in the peace process between the Israeli and Palestinian sides, leading to the establishment of an independent, contiguous and sovereign Palestinian State, existing in security and peace within the borders of 4 June 1967. Fifthly, the Council should make earnest efforts to ensure that Israel abides by the same international rules of accountability that are applied to all other States. There can be no preferential treatment, discrimination or double standards. The Council must send a clear message in that regard and unequivocally warn Israel against persisting in its violations of international law, international humanitarian law and international human rights law, particularly as regards partial or total annexation of the occupied Palestinian territory.
