Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): In the ill-fated
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, the Philippines lost a
mother and her two children. The Philippines expresses
once again its most sincere condolences to the families
that lost their loved ones and to the Governments of
the victims: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom, the United States and Viet Nam.

My delegation reiterates its condemnation of this
incident in the strongest possible terms. The Philippines
unequivocally supports calls for a full, thorough and
independent international investigation - calls that
have already been made by the Council and Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. The investigation should
shed more light and definitive information into the
circumstances surrounding this regrettable incident so
that the perpetrators of this most offensive of acts will
be held fully accountable.

The Philippines is concerned that the integrity of
the crash site has been compromised, and in this regard
urgently calls on the parties involved to secure the
site of the crash and to grant investigators immediate
and unfettered access to the crash site so that the
investigation can commence without further delay.
The remains of the victims need to be fully recovered,
accounted for and given proper burial. We need to bring
our loved ones home. We owe it to their memories and
to their families. The perpetrators need to be identified
and held fully accountable for this most revolting of
acts. We must be united in ensuring that all necessary
actions are undertaken so thatjustice is finally served.

My delegation is most grateful to Foreign Minister
Julie Bishop of Australia for her leadership in preparing
a draft resolution which later, with all her contributions
and support, commanded a unanimous action by
the Council. Resolution 2166 (2014) is an important
action-oriented step towards achieving our common
goal. The Philippines fully supports the resolution.
We have co-sponsored the resolution. Indeed, we
will support all efforts to secure justice for all and to
honour the memory of the 298 irreplaceable lives in the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17.

We really hope that resolution 2166 (2014) will find
its fullest implementation. This unspeakable tragedy
demands complete closure.

