Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today, one year after the
publication of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory. That advisory opinion has gained increasing
international support, not only because it was issued by
the highest judicial body but also because of its moral
and political significance with regard to the importance
of abiding by international legitimacy.

We are also meeting here today to consider the
report submitted by Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary of the Fourth Geneva Convention, with
regard to the issue of respect for that Convention in the
occupied territories. It has stated that the changes made
by Israel to the track of the wall are still insufficient
from a legal perspective and that they do not meet the
conditions set out in the Court's advisory opinion. The
situation has also given rise to concern within the
international community with respect to the
humanitarian, social and economic consequences that
the wall entails for the Palestinian people. The
suffering that the Israeli occupation was already
causing to the friendly and brotherly people of
Palestine has been doubled. We see rampant
unemployment, as well as an increase in the number of
checkpoints, which prevents food aid from arriving at
its destination. Thus material obstacles are placed in
the way of international efforts aimed at improving the
social and economic situation of the Palestinian people,
preventing them from living in circumstances that meet
minimum international human rights requirements.

Israel must at the earliest possible time stop
building the wall, dismantle what has already been
built and provide the necessary compensation and
damages, in accordance with the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. But, even though the
wall is illegal, the Israeli Government decided a few
days ago to build it around Jerusalem by next
September. That plan will isolate thousands of
Palestinian people from their properties and land and
from hospitals and schools in East Jerusalem. That will
adversely affect the final status negotiations by
imposing de facto conditions that run counter to all
international norms, thereby dashing Palestinians' last
hopes for an independent and sovereign State.

Israel has taken a unilateral decision to withdraw
from Gaza and some of the settlements in the West
Bank. That could signal a larger withdrawal that would
allow the Palestinian people to start building their
future State. The chance to create a positive
environment there must not be destroyed by the
continued construction of the separation wall and its
extension to areas that are considered holy sites,
stirring up emotions that could lead to the continuation
of violence and counter-violence.

The Sharm el-Sheikh summit held last February
reaffirmed one of the pillars of the new phase of the
direct Israeli-Palestinian dialogue. In that phase, the
Israeli Government said, the disengagement plan will
continue. Coordination and collaboration between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides must also continue in order
for such a plan to be successful.

In that context, Egypt reiterates that the balanced
and proper implementation of the agreements reached
at Sharm el-Sheikh is one of the principal guarantees of
continued Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and parts of
the northern West Bank.

Egypt will continue to make every effort to work
with both the Israeli and Palestinian sides to ensure
that the Palestinian Authority has the necessary level of
control in Gaza. In addition, it has provided security
forces, sent high-level envoys in recent days, and
provided also the necessary training to the Authority,
in accordance with the plan to create the infrastructure
needed to bring about peace and security. Egypt will
continue to work at all levels to ensure that the Middle
East becomes a region of peace, security and stability.

The Security Council must send a strong message
today reiterating the fact that achieving peace requires
implementing the decisions of the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, abiding by
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice, and dismantling the separation wall, in order to
alleviate the day-to-day suffering of the Palestinian
people. It must request that Israel, the occupying
Power, abide by all the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Both sides must work together in order for the
Israeli withdrawal to be successful, in keeping with the
road map and as a preliminary phase to further
withdrawals, and in order to begin final status
negotiations so as to arrive at a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement, in accordance with the
approach set out by the road map and adopted by the
Security Council.
