Mr. IliicheV (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Anthony Banbury, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General David Nabarro and Mr. Thomas
Mauget for their briefings on the situation concerning
the spread of the Ebola virus and on the existing needs
of the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER) in combating the outbreak.

We agree that the further spread of the epidemic in
African countries could carry the threat of destabilizing
the situation and potentially be fraught with the danger
of reigniting dormant conflicts and outbreaks of
violence - which could undo the significant efforts
carried out in recent times.

However, Ebola quarantine measures arguably
hamper the cooperation of the United Nations presence
in West Africa, including when it comes to the transfer
of equipment. We pay tribute to the courage of civilian
personnel and military contingents in the Mission, who
remain in the countries of the region in spite of the
gravity of the situation.

For its part, Russia supports international efforts
to combat the epidemic and mitigate its negative
impact on the economy, security and stability of
affected countries. We support the central role to be
played by the General Assembly and United Nations
specialized agencies in this effort. We are making an
active contribution to practical efforts in the area of
the epidemic, consistently stepping up technical and
financial assistance to Ebola-affected countries through
both multilateral and bilateral mechanisms.

Last April, when Ebola had no yetbeen characterized
as a threat to international peace and security, Russia
began to deploy supplies of medication and equipment
to West Africa through the World Health Organization
(WHO). Our country was among the first to deploy to
Guinea a specialized anti-epidemic brigade equipped
with mobile detection and virological laboratories.
We also began to provide food assistance to affected
countries through the World Food Programme. To date,
our overall level of assistance stands at approximately
$20 million.

Russia is active in providing logistical support to
the efforts of UNMEER. In October, at the request
of the Mission, we supplied five civilian helicopters
to Sierra Leone. On 16 November, at the instruction
of Russian President Putin, Guinea received a field
infection hosptial, as well as more than 150 tons of
medical and specialized equipment to deploy it. The
mobile hospital, which is to be staffed by a group oflocal
doctors, includes a diagnostic ward, three infectious-
disease wards, a resuscitation and intensive therapy
ward, as well as a special diagnostics laboratory. Not
only can the hospital can hold and treat 200 patients
infected with the most dangerous viral diseases, it can
also provide remote functioning during the required
quarantine period. Russia has also helped build a
hospital at the Guinean branch of the Pasteur Institute
in the Kindia region.

Russia is also making a significant contribution
in the area of scientific research into the virus. The
world-famous State Research Center of Virology
and Biotechnology in Russia is conducting research
into developing immuno-biological treatmetn for the
prevention and treatment of Ebola, both vaccine and
immonoglobulin treatment.

Under the auspices of WHO, this year and next our
country will support the introduction of international
medical and sanitary rules, with a view to improving
the preparedness of national health-care systems in
countries in need with a view to responding effectively
and in a timely manner to outbreaks of dangerous
infections such as Ebola. The inter-agency work
includes proposals from the United Nations World
Food Programme, UNICEF and WHO on funding
humanitarian projects in Ebola-affected countries. We
are also considering providing assistance through the
International Civil Defence Organisation, the World
Bank and the multipartner trust fund for Ebola response
of the United Nations Development Programme. Our
proposal still stands on providing, free of charge, two
sanitary aircraft equipped with special capsules for
evacuating patients.

Russia will continue to take part in implementing
an international strategy for combating Ebola, in
cooperation with all interested partners, so as to tackle
the epidemic and to prevent a deterioration in the
overall situation in affected countries.

