As Security Council President, Russia convened today's meeting in view of the international community's important role in devising consolidated approaches to settle regional crises. The long-standing Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies at the epicentre of the upheavals in the Middle East. This problem has remained a source of international and regional discord for more than seven decades, while providing an ideological rationale for terrorist and extremist groups around the world. Absent a settlement, the conflict has brought unspeakable suffering to the people of Palestine and Israel and to the Arab States and the numerous Palestinian diasporas located there, including people living in Palestinian camps. This state of affairs resulted from attempts to reverse the situation single- handedly, without collective or coordinated efforts, reaching a point where unilateral initiatives have not only ignored but have undermined the international legal framework for the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, as approved by the United Nations and set forth in Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. That has led to a new impasse that threatens to undermine stability in the region. While maintaining constructive partnership ties with all the countries in the region, Russia views the improvement of Arab-Israeli relations to be a positive development. At the end of the day, achieving a comprehensive and just settlement in the Middle East remains an integral part of Russia's policy in the region. At the same time, as the Arab States and Israel normalize their relations, the Palestinian question should not be sidelined. This problem will not go away. We hold the time-tested view that all-round stability in the Middle East, by definition, is unattainable without a lasting solution to the Palestinian issue. The leadership of all Arab States shares this view. We must focus on facilitating the resumption of talks between Israel and the Palestinians without delay. It is important that the political process be rooted in international resolutions and the existing agreements and understandings between the parties. The purpose of today's meeting, as we see it, consists of reaffirming the international legal framework for the Israeli-Palestinian settlement, primarily the two-State solution, with a Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace and security. However, we should not forget others final-status issues, like refugees, water resources and the status of the holy sites of the three world religions in Jerusalem. We also take into consideration the fact that the Arab countries remain committed to their well-known initiative. Still, the parties should strictly abide by the obligations they have assumed - to renounce unilateral steps in resolving final-status issues, to cease settlement activity and the demolition of Palestinian buildings, to eliminate from the agenda all plans for annexation, to stop the violence and to work together to fight terrorism. Of course, much will depend on the progress and outcome of intra-Palestinian dialogue. Russia and its Egyptian partners are helping Palestinian organizations unite under the Palestinian Liberation Organization platform. That is a crucial condition for the attainment of the Palestinians' national aspirations, based on the United Nations-approved proposals of the Middle East Quartet of intermediaries. We believe that the Quartet should act with more urgency. This is a unique mechanism for mediation that was approved in Council resolutions. It can - and must - play the role assigned to it in developing direct Palestinian-Israeli talks. Russia has proposed that the first stage of those talks begin without any preconditions, so the sides can come to an agreement through a bilateral dialogue without external pressure. History shows that a lasting settlement of any conflict is possible only when the protagonists hold talks on a mutually acceptable platform. For our part, we will continue working towards that objective with all the interested regional parties, at the Security Council and within the framework of the Middle East Quartet of international intermediaries. We are resolved to working closely with our colleagues in this format: the United Nations, the United States and the European Union. We also welcome parties in the region to join in those efforts. We noted that, in his September address to the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.10), Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed his openness to Quartet-ledtalks with Israel. Another instrument of this kind is the Moscow conference on the Middle East. International consensus on this issue has been enshrined in resolution 1850 (2008) and in decisions of the Quartet. The Russian initiative on holding a Palestinian-Israeli summit meeting in Moscow also remains relevant. Immediate attention should be given to the socioeconomic developments in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as to the grave humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, which has been further complicated by the coronavirus pandemic. In that context, we call on the international community to make use of its donor potential to help people in the Gaza Strip. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a key role in that regard, and we urge donor countries to support its activities. In October 2021, we will mark the thirtieth anniversary of the Madrid Middle East Peace Conference. The Conference defined a Middle East settlement that must be comprehensive, cover all negotiation tracks and take into account decisions and principles based on international law. We believe that the Madrid legacy remains relevant.
