Mr. Lucas (Angola): We welcome the important
debate that the Security Council is holding today. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing on an issue of the utmost
importance in contemporary life, characterized by the
increasing number of asymmetrical wars, in which
civilians are the main targets of the warring factions
and are subject to the coarsest violations of their basic
human rights. The meetings of the Security Council on
this issue translate the deep concern of the international
community at such a state of affairs. They provide an
opportunity to address the issue and to strengthen our
resolve to protect the countless human beings caught in
the middle of conflicts, whose lives have too often
been disrupted, with irreparable consequences.

In my delegation's view, the first efforts to be
undertaken by the international community -
particularly the Security Council, with its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security -
should address conflict prevention as the best means to
prevent war and the human suffering it always entails.
We see preventive diplomacy as the most feasible way
to resolve disputes before conflicts break out.
However, conflict prevention entails the necessary
preparedness, political will and operational readiness
on the part of the international community. A number
of conflicts in the past could have been prevented - or
at least some action could have been taken with a view
to their prevention - but quite often the international
community's inaction has allowed things to grow to
uncontrollable proportions.

In that regard, we share the view expressed in the
aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict regarding the need to strengthen the capacity
of the United Nations to plan and deploy rapidly, as
well as the concept of regional approaches to regional
and subregional crises in the formulation of
peacekeeping mandates.

Regional organizations are particularly well
suited to work with the Security Council. They can
provide accurate assessments of crisis situations, and
they can engage in preventive diplomacy and take
political decisions whenever a situation entails a risk of
crisis for the region concerned. It is our view that
regional organizations can play a fundamental role in
maintaining peace and stability and that their capacities
should be enhanced to carry out operations according
to international norms and standards. Furthermore,
regional organizations can play a key role in
comprehensive regional programmes for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants, as well as in the fight against the
traffic in small arms and light weapons.

The road map and the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, which we are
considering today, are important tools to address such a
momentous issue. We note with appreciation the
strategies outlined, the broad goals for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the areas to which the
international community must pay special attention in
setting out specific objectives to be achieved by the
United Nations, States and the rest of the international
community. My delegation believes that those elements
are important instruments for approaching such
important issues at their various levels of complexity.

By calling for a strengthening of the legal
framework relating to international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law; by calling upon
States and non-State actors to comply with their
provisions; and by calling upon the United Nations
system to take appropriate and comprehensive action
regarding the attainment of those objectives, the road
map makes a concrete contribution to universal respect
for humanitarian law. The establishment of provisions
relating to access to vulnerable populations and for
engaging the parties to conflicts in dialogue aimed at
sustaining safe access for humanitarian operations -
besides providing urgent assistance to populations in
need - can indeed improve the prospects of peace and
reconciliation by de-escalating conflict and lowering its
intensity. Angola was such a case when, in 1991, the
ability of the United Nations to open humanitarian
corridors made a decisive contribution to the
establishment of a dialogue in situ between the military
commanders, which was instrumental for the
attainment of a ceasefire.

The safety and security of humanitarian-
associated personnel; how to deal with the effects of
conflict on women and children; the provision of
security, law and order in post-conflict situations; the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation of former combatants, especially
children; mine action as a means to reinforce
confidence and to allow civilians to rebuild their
shattered lives; justice and reconciliation, seen in the
perspective of criminal and restorative justice and
healing the wounds of the past; the training of security
and peacekeeping forces in the highest standards of
respect for human rights; and the issue of natural
resources, armed conflict and measures to break the
fatal link between them are critical issues enunciated in
the aide-memoire and the road map. They constitute a
fundamental checklist that States, the United Nations
system and the rest of the international community
should apply in dealing with the sensitive issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the 10-
point action plan presented by Mr. Egeland. We also
support the endorsement of the revised aide-memoire
by the presidential statement on the issue we are
considering today. We deem it very important that the
Council apply both of those elements in adopting
country-specific draft resolutions - taking into
account the protection of civilians, including women,
children and humanitarian workers f and that United
Nations peacekeeping operations be provided with
mandates and resources to protect civilians and to
ensure unimpeded access to civilians in need by United
Nations personnel and humanitarian organizations. We
also support the inclusion in all country-related draft
resolutions of a call upon States - and, where
appropriate, non-State actors - to adhere to
international human rights, humanitarian and refugee
law and to reinforce the principle that there will be no
impunity for genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity.

It is our expectation that this meeting will make a
further contribution to the creation of a culture of
protection for civilians in armed conflict and that it
will increase the effectiveness of the United Nations
and the responsibilities of the international community
in facing such a serious issue.

