The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Prime
Minister Diarra for his eloquent, realistic and hopeful
words.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reiterates the need
for Ivorian political forces to implement fully and
without delay all the provisions of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement, as well as those of the
agreement signed in Accra on 8 March 2003
('Accra II'), with a View to open, free and
transparent elections being held in 2005. The
Council takes note with satisfaction of the
formation of a government of national
reconciliation and the progress made, particularly
the identification of cantonment areas and the
delegation of powers to the Prime Minister, and is
looking forward to new progress in accordance
with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The
Council also welcomes the 'joint declaration by
C6te d'Ivoire defence and security forces and the
armed forces of the Forces Nouvelles' of 4 July
2003 (S/2003/704).

"The Security Council emphasizes,
however, that much remains to be done to achieve
the full implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. In this regard, the Council endorses
the recommendations of its mission to West
Africa (S/2003/668). The Council calls on Ivorian
political forces to redouble their efforts in the
following areas: voting for the amnesty bill
submitted to the National Assembly by the
Government, the complete implementation of a
'disarmament, demobilization and reintegration'
programme, the extension of public services and
the authority of the State to areas still under
control of the Forces Nouvelles, the appointment
of ministers for defence and interior security, the
guarantee of equal security for all ministers, the
dismantling of militias throughout the country

and the termination of the activities
mercenaries and of the purchase of weapons.
"The Security Council renews its support
and encouragement to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for C6te d'Ivoire. It asks
him to keep the Council closely informed of
developments towards the full implementation of
the above objectives. It is pleased that the United
Nations Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (MINUCI) is
now operational and hopes it will soon be fully
staffed, including in such crucial areas as the
political and human rights components.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and France in contributing to a peaceful solution
to the crisis. It welcomes in particular the
satisfactory deployment of their peacekeeping
forces in the western part of the country to
support the implementation of the ceasefire
reached on 3 May. The Council calls on Member
States to continue to respond to the appeal made
at the donors' conference in Paris on 18 July,
attended by the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and to provide logistic and financial
support to the ECOWAS Mission in Cote d'Ivoire
(ECOMICI) so that it can continue to fulfil its
important mandate.

"The Security Council invites donor
countries to contribute to the reconstruction of
Cote d'Ivoire in compliance with the
commitments undertaken at Kleber.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the continued existence of regional factors of
instability, particularly the use of mercenaries and
child soldiers, and the spread of small arms and
light weapons which prevent a lasting solution to
the crisis in the region. The Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit recommendations to
the Council as soon as possible on ways to
combat such subregional and cross-border
problems, focusing in particular on better
coordination of United Nations efforts.
"The Security Council is convinced that a
lasting solution to the problems of the subregion
also requires genuine cooperation among all
States concerned, together with confidence-
building measures and the personal commitment
of heads of State in the subregion."

This statement will be issued as a document of Before concluding the meeting, I wish, on behalf
the Security Council under the symbol of the Council, to express once again our thanks to
S/PRST/2003/11. Prime Minister Diarra for taking the time to brief the

The Security Council has thus concluded the Council.

present stage of its consideration of the item on the The meeting roseat12.35p.n1.
agenda.
