Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal always hopes that
the Security Council will find peaceful solutions to
situations of conflict, and it feels no differently in the case
of Iraq.

We have always been of the view that full cooperation
by Iraq with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) is essential to fulfil the disarmament tasks, to
ensure compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and thus enable the Council to lift the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. The confirmation by UN SCOM
of full cooperation by Iraq, as promised in its letters of 14
November, would have enabled the Council to proceed
speedily with a comprehensive review of all disarmament
files, as proposed by the Secretary-General. But, after so
many efforts and attempts by the Council to bring Iraq to
the path of cooperation, the latest report of the Executive
Chairman of UNSCOM. states that Iraq has not lived up to
its commitments and that, in fact, it has not cooperated
fully with UNSCOM.

We appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General to
offer for the Council's consideration several possible
options to react to the UNSCOM. report. Portugal was ready
to consider those options, and said so this morning. In the
meantime, however, we have been informed of the decision
to withdraw all UNSCOM. and IAEA personnel from Iraq
for reasons of safety. The Executive Chairman of
UNSCOM. provided further elements on the degree of non-
cooperation by Iraq today to Council members.

The Security Council is thus confronted with a
declaration by Ambassador Butler that Iraq has not
cooperated fully. The United States and the United
Kingdom had made it perfectly clear last month that, in the
absence of full cooperation by Iraq, they would act without
returning to the Council. It is not, therefore, a surprise to
my delegation that a decision has been taken to act
militarily. Naturally, the Council will have to evaluate the
consequences of military action with regard to fulfilling the
goals of disarming Iraq and maintaining peace and
security in the region.

Portugal deeply regrets that a peaceful solution could
not be found. But the main cause of the current crisis is
the obstinate policy of Iraq's rulers in refusing to comply
with Security Council resolutions. As Chairman of the
Committee established under Security Council resolution
661 (1990), I have been particularly sensitive to the
consequences of this crisis on the Iraqi people and have
sought to do everything possible in the context of the
humanitarian programme to alleviate their suffering.

Portugal will continue to try to contribute actively to
find ways to minimize the effects of the current
circumstances on top of the already difficult living
conditions of the Iraqi people. But we must also
remember that the primary responsibility for the well-
being of all Iraqis falls to the authorities of that country.

