Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): May
I begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
having convened today's open debate on this very
important issue. We also thank you for the concept
paper (S/2013/447) that you circulated, emphasizing
different aspects of this issue. Our thanks go also to the
Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
important statements.

The continuing consideration of this matter by
the Security Council and the adoption of decisions,
resolutions and presidential statements reflect the
importance that the international community attaches
to protecting civilians in armed conflict. There can
be no doubt that international instruments on this
subject have contributed to promoting human rights,
preserving the dignity of humankind and protecting
rights against all violations. Thus human rights have
become internationally recognized rights, and their
flouting is a violation of international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and refugee law.

We have made great progress in terms of our
respective international instruments, including
provisions of a deterrent nature, sanctions and
tangible measures, as well as the handing down by the
International Criminal Court and other tribunals of
sentences for crimes against humanity. However, we
are witnessing grave violations that can no longer be
tolerated or accepted by the human conscience or the
international community.

In the light of the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations that lay down the mandate of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, and in
the light of resolutions on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the Security Council has endeavoured to
ensure respect for international standards guaranteeing
human rights and international humanitarian law. The
Council has also sought to assign responsibilities, and
resolutions have been adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter with a view to putting an end to human
rights violations by means of buffers, through the
establishment of international tribunals to prosecute
the perpetrators of the gravest crimes, consistent
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

Along the same lines, humanitarian concerns
are based on regulations in this sphere. The four
Geneva Conventions of 1949, and specifically the
Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, emphasize the
protection of civilians in the context of domestic
conflict. The four Geneva Conventions restate not only
respect for international humanitarian law but also
call on the international community to take tangible
measures. Article I of the four Conventions calls not
only for respect of international humanitarian law by
all States parties, but also calls on parties to ensure
respect for that law. In that context, we have elaborated
international instruments, including the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other international
instruments, aimed at putting an end to human rights
violations. We have also developed refugee law.

The General Assembly and the Human Rights
Council have adopted numerous resolutions pertaining
to the humanitarian situation of civilians in Syria
following the grave violations perpetrated by the Syrian
regime against its people. That regime is determined to
use the security solution to muzzle its people. We have
for weeks heard from Paulo Se'rgio Pinheiro, Chair of
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, about the situation there.
According to the report of that body, crimes against
humanity and grave violations of human rights continue
to be perpetrated in Syria, and this in conjunction with
a deterioration of the humanitarian situation, because
the regime refuses to grant access to humanitarian aid
for civilians. Moreover, the Commission headed by
Mr. Pinheiro has documented violations by the Syrian
regime of international humanitarian law, refugee law
and international human rights law.

There can be no doubt that the atrocities suffered
by the Syrian people are grave and serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Those violations also represent a
serious breach of the obligations under the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and various Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1894 (2009), which
calls on parties to conflict to fully implement all
relevant decisions of the Security Council and to take
all required steps to protect civilians and meet their
basic needs.

In the light of the grave current situation, the people
of Syria, who are unarmed, are looking to the Security
Council to take effective measures to put an end to
the grave violations of human rights and international
human rights law from which they are suffering and
to protect the people of Syria, provide them with
humanitarian assistance, and allow displaced persons
to return home.

The perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and violations of human rights law
are ignoring the grave consequences of their acts.
They are failing to respect existing international
instruments, despite the fact that they are respected by
all other countries. The Council's paralysis has seriously
damaged the profile of the United Nations and sends the
wrong message to the perpetrators of those violations,
who feel encouraged to continue along this same path.
That paralysis and the fact that measures cannot be
taken to protect civilians means that the Council has
failed to take action and is unable to deal with the
current humanitarian fallout. My country therefore
reiterates its support for the presidential statements and
resolutions adopted by the Security Council to protect
civilians, which seek to introduce effective measures
aimed at putting an end to the suffering of those people
pursuant to internationally recognized instruments,
including international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and refugee law. We restate our
respect for the rule of law and the aspirations of all
peoples and their choices.

