Mr. Lang (spoke in French): I have the honour to
present to the Security Council the main conclusions of
the task entrusted to me by the Secretary-General, in
2
coordination with the Security Council, on legal issues
related to piracy. Many observers have welcomed the
Secretary-General's initiative to consider in-depth this
issue, which has become a priority and of which the
Security Council is clearly and resolutely seized.

Allow me first to commend the remarkable work
carried out by the Secretary-General, in particular in
his report (S/20lO/394) on the seven options that the
Council reviewed in late August (see S/PV.6374). That
report guided my thinking and was an excellent basis
for my work. I would also like to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Ms. Patricia O'Brien and their colleagues. The
task very greatly benefited from their support, and we
had ongoing and honest exchanges.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Augustine
Mahiga, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, and Ambassador Thomas
Winkler, Chairman of the judicial working group of the
Contact Group on Somali Piracy. Our cooperation was
unwavering, honest, ongoing and enriching. We visited
the various countries of the region together.

As soon as I was appointed by the Secretary-
General on 26 August, I conducted numerous
consultations with 50 States, international
organizations, private companies and research
institutes. I went to most States in the region, in
particular Somalia, and to Puntland and Somaliland. I
visited prisons and talked with pirates detained not
only in Somalia, but also in Mombasa, Kenya.

I came from those consultations with a feeling of
extreme urgency. The situation is serious. I would even
say that it is worsening. Far from slowing down, each
day the phenomenon develops significantly. We have
seen the industrialization of the phenomenon, an
increasing number of pirates, sophisticated operations,
the increasing use of mother ships, the latest
technology, such as GPS, heavy weaponry, better
organization during attacks, seizures and the
negotiation of ransoms, and the gradual emergence of a
true industry and new professions linked to piracy,
including intermediaries, negotiators and interpreters.

Those signs of deterioration have been
complemented by intensified violence, the frequent use
of weapons, the occasional organization of simulated
executions, increasing recourse to private companies,
and the use of open force in taking hostages. We have
seen some examples of that over the past few days. In
addition, people are held longer - an average of 120
11-21518
days and sometimes up to a year. Lastly, we have seen
the geographical expansion of attacks to the entire
Indian Ocean. Such attacks, long restricted to the north,
today reach the southern and eastern Indian Ocean up to
1,500 kilometres off the coast. To some extent - I may
exaggerate a little here - the pirates are increasingly
becoming the masters of the Indian Ocean.

The situation is tragic for the victims, above all.
Nearly 2,000 hostages have been taken in two years.
Crews who have been taken hostage are sometimes
used as human shields in other attacks. It is a tragic
situation for the economies of the region, which have
seen loss of revenue, higher prices, lack of security in
the delivery of energy supplies, and the penetration of
piracy into the economy of local systems.

It is a tragic situation for Somalia itself, which
has endured difficulties in access to food aid and the
breakdown of traditional societies. Ultimately, it has
become an increasingly tragic situation for
international trade. Some 22,000 ships and 30 per cent
of the world's oil transit that area every year, and at the
moment we are seeing an astonishing increase in
insurance premiums for that area, which has been
classified as a war zone.

In brief, the race between the pirates and the
international community is progressively being won by
the pirates. It is difficult to accept that the international
community should be so persistently defied by 1,500
pirates. The status quo is therefore no longer
satisfactory. I believe that the extreme gravity of the
situation requires emergency remedies.

Hence, the plan I am submitting focuses on two
ideas and two questions. The first question is: How can
we improve the current solutions? The second is: Can
we formulate new and ultimately more effective
solutions? I shall respond briefly to the first question,
which addresses an issue that the Council is well aware
of.

The report proposes a series of measures to lift
the legal obstacles to prosecuting pirates at sea and
imprisoning them. For example, the report suggests the
incorporation of the crime of piracy into the domestic
legislation of all States and the adaptation of maritime
detention to operational constraints. Similarly, in order
to improve the situation, we suggest facilitating the
submission of evidence, for instance by making it
easier to give testimony via video teleconferencing.
Perhaps the main point is the report's proposal for the
11-21518

removal of a key obstacle hindering States'
prosecutorial jurisdiction - that is, the lack of
detention facilities in the States of the region. Concrete
proposals have been submitted for the Council's
consideration in the report.

However, I believe that we need to face the truth.
Even if these and other proposals are adopted to
improve the outstanding work already carried out by
our navies - including those of Kenya, Seychelles and
Mauritius, which we congratulate on carrying out a
task of great importance to the international
community and international law - and even if these
proposals enhance current solutions, we will still
encounter difficulties in eradicating piracy. It is quite
clear and undeniable that nine out of 10 pirates
captured by our navies have to be released because
there is no effective agreement among most States to
prosecute them. Thus, impunity prevails. Nine out of
10 pirates are released because no jurisdiction is
prepared to prosecute them.

That is why I decided to seek other options not to
replace but to complement the very important solutions
that the members of the Council have supported and
encouraged. The consultations I have held pursuant to
the task conferred upon me have enabled me to focus
on the key idea that only making the legal and
detention processes Somali-owned can ensure that
prosecution is effective and end, to the extent possible,
the impunity enjoyed by pirates.

It is well known that Somalia is the main source
and Puntland the principal victim of piracy. For moral
and religious reasons linked to the devastating
consequences - including drugs, prostitution and
alcohol consumption - the Somali people themselves
are growing increasingly hostile to piracy. They are
ready to support efforts on the ground against piracy.
The fight against piracy must be supported by the
populations affected.

I would therefore suggest that a genuine plan
agreed with Somaliland and Puntland would help us to
increase the pace of our fight. The plan would
incorporate reciprocal, clearly affirmed and clearly
publicized commitments in compensation for real,
concrete evidence provided by the local authorities of
their actions against pirates. The international
community could thereby support the economic,
security, legal and detention efforts of the authorities of
those two regions.
3

Somaliland has already demonstrated its resolute
commitment against piracy. I have met the leaders of
Puntland, and in particular President Farole, on
numerous occasions, and they claim to be determined
to fight piracy and have taken initial detention
measures, in particular against one commander of the
pirates. I received a letter from President Farole
yesterday confirming his resolve and commitment.

I should just like to add a few comments on the
proposals I am submitting to the Council. I wish to
assert clearly, simply and directly that there is a need to
tackle piracy on the ground with the agreement of the
Somalis, or at least certain Somalis. I dare say that we
must target both the head - the commanders - and
the body - the pirates themselves. The mafia-like
gang leaders and the ordinary pirates clearly work hand
in hand.

Regarding those who give the orders, the Security
Council has already considered and spoken on this
subject. Thanks to the task conferred upon me, I have
been able to meet with representatives of many
specialized organizations - Interpol in particular, but
others as well - on this matter. My initial conclusion
is that everything has not been done to reach the top
and to get our hands on the instigators of these crimes.
We know the names of some dozen of these
masterminds, who receive the increasingly vast
ransoms that fuel piracy. Organizations that launder
money from piracy have been identified.

The report contains three relevant proposals. I
will not go into them in detail as I do not want to speak
at great length. These three proposals concern the
strengthening of forensic policing capacities, the
gathering of elements for investigation and evidence
that are often overlooked - such as fingerprints and
DNA from the boats that have been released, the
registration numbers of engines on motherships, the
registration numbers of transferred banknotes, the
systematic monitoring of financial flows - and the
application of individual sanctions against those who
order attacks, whose names are well known. The
Security Council knows how to target, reach and attack
these criminal leaders. That, in brief, is what I wanted
to tell the Council regarding those who lead and are the
principal beneficiaries of these criminal enterprises.

Secondly and in conclusion, with regard to what I
would call the "basic pirates", those who actually do
the work at sea, the anti-piracy plan that I am
proposing to the Council includes both prevention and
clamp-down measures.

The prevention measures are above all economic
in nature. In this area it is very difficult to separate the
law from socio-economic reality. It is absolutely
crucial that young Somalis be given an alternative to
piracy. Support for economic development is possible
in very specific areas where a dynamic for
development can be put in place right away. I am
thinking in particular of the ports of Bosaso in
Puntland and Berbera in Somaliland. I am also thinking
about animal husbandry and livestock export, as well
as of developing telecommunications and, perhaps first
and foremost, fisheries.

The proposal with regard to fisheries - which
stems from different international experiences, in
particular lessons learned off the coast of Guinea -
calls for developing fisheries and for fishing
agreements to impose a requirement that 30 per cent of
fish be processed in Somalia. Along the same lines, it
is proposed that Somalia be able to declare the
contours of its maritime area with the help of the
United Nations. As the Council knows, as of today,
nothing has been defined - neither the limits of the
territorial waters nor the borders of the exclusive zone,
or the borders separating the different countries.

With regard to an issue that has often been
discussed here in the Security Council and in other
bodies, namely, the harm caused by illegal fishing and
the discharge of toxic waste off the coast of Somalia,
and particularly off of Puntland, I suggest that an
independent international committee of experts carry
out an objective study of the situation.

Other prevention measures are also proposed to
prevent pirates from taking to the seas and with regard
to monitoring and controlling of the coasts, the setting
up of police stations in pirates' villages and the training
of coast guard personnel who can monitor from land
the departure of suspicious boats.

Those are some of prevention measures. I have
not mentioned them all; the report before Council
members includes additional proposals.

I should like to conclude by referring to the plan
for clamping down on acts of piracy on land, which
entails a range of measures to be supported by an
agency whose specific local effectiveness I have been
able to witness for myself, namely, the United Nations
11-21518
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The staff of the
Office do a remarkable job in providing assistance for
the construction of prisons, in particular in Mombasa
but also in Puntland and Somaliland.

The proposal I have made to the Council calls for
the establishment of two specialized jurisdictions, one
in Puntland and one in Somaliland. The applicable law
would be Somali law, reformed under the aegis of
UNODC as a part of the Kampala process, in
association with the Transitional Federal Government
and other entities, such as Puntland and Somaliland.
This work, which consists of drafting Somali law, is at
an advanced stage and is very important from the
jurisdictional standpoint.

Furthermore, a parallel idea has been put
forward - upon which the Council will have the final
word - that the President of Tanzania, with whom I
met a few weeks ago, establish a Somali court in
Arusha during a transitional period. Following that
period of transition, during which we very much hope
that peace would be restored in Somalia as soon as
possible, the court would be transferred to Mogadishu.
The Tanzanian President has told me that he is open to
such a proposal.

The question of prisons and incarceration also
needs to be addressed. Prison capacity needs to be built
in Puntland and Somaliland - once again, with the
assistance of the United Nations Development
Programme and UNODC. This agency, which I have
consulted on many occasions, has told me that it is
possible to build prison capacity in less than a year or
faster in order to provide space for prisoners tried both
locally and abroad - in Kenya or in other countries.
UNODC is proposing a double-control system to
ensure that these prisons run smoothly, namely, internal
monitoring within the prisons through a standing
UNODC office that would train prison guards and help
with prison management, as well as external
monitoring that would carry out regular checks by a
surveillance committee, which UNODC has agreed to
set up and assist.

Another idea put forward by UNODC is to
associate each prison with a farm in order to enable the
prison to have a degree of self-sufficiency and to
facilitate prisoner training and social reintegration.

Another important issue that is not easy to solve
is the training of judges, prosecutors, attorneys and
prison guards. Again, though, it seems to me that

UNODC and international organizations such as the
United Nations and the African Union, which I
consulted on several occasions, the European Union
and other organizations must contribute to this effort.

Those are some of the main points. We cannot
look at all of the proposals; to do that would take up
far too much of the Council's time and patience. But I
would like to conclude with a final point. If the
Council decides to promote solutions such as those, it
would entail a degree of investment. I know the extent
to which we need to be attentive today to not wasting
public resources and to being frugal with public funds.

In that regard, I asked UNODC to undertake an
evaluation - and it is only an evaluation - of what it
would cost over three years to set up these new
jurisdictional and penitentiary capacities in Puntland
and Somaliland. The UNODC'S estimate is that it
would cost $25 million. I would like to draw the
Council's attention to how that figure - if it turns out
to be correct - compares with the cost of piracy today,
which is reaching considerable heights. Although
estimates vary, for Somalia and the Indian Ocean the
cost is between $5 and 7 billion. If we factor into those
costs of piracy the additional costs for naval operations
and the revenue losses to the countries of the region
associated with tourism, blocked ports and
impediments to trade, to say nothing of the increase in
the cost of transporting raw materials and industrial
and other goods, then the total costs are significant
indeed - and will inevitably continue to rise in the
coming years.

The choice therefore seems to be clear. If we
leave the situation as it is, with some improvements
here and there, we will not manage to resolve it. I
could be wrong, but that is my feeling: we will not
succeed in eradicating this problem. It will therefore be
very expensive for our countries and for international
organizations alike.

It will also be very expensive in human and
political terms. I do not want to be overly dramatic, but
let us try to look beyond the situation. Despite the
significant risk that it currently poses, piracy today is
fairly discreet from terrorism. There are some links
here and there in Somalia, but they are limited. But if
the scope of the phenomenon were to expand and move
decisively southward - and, again, I do not wish to be
overly dramatic - then we cannot disregard the
5
possibility that it may one day become more closely
associated with terrorism.

Those are some of the thoughts I wanted to share
with the Council. I believe that it is perhaps someone
looking in from the outside who can feel sufficiently
free to say these things. The Council bears a
responsibility to States and to the Organization. I
believe that, if in the course of the next few weeks our
Organization and the Security Council were to adopt a
clear, robust and resolute resolution that speaks to and
is awaited by the entire world, it would serve to
encourage initiatives and facilitate the mobilization of
the financial resources to which I have just referred.
And everyone would feel that that would indeed be a
resolute, robust and concrete action by the Council.

I apologize for taxing the Council's patience and
speaking at some length. I just wanted to share with the
Council the beliefs of someone who, thanks to the
Council, was able to meet with many leaders. My
message to the Council is that it should act quickly and
robustly.

