The United Kingdom very much welcomes this open debate. Security sector reform is not just a process focused on building military and police institutions; it is an important part of a broader peacebuilding enterprise and supports States in their own constitutional and political development. The United Kingdom has invested extensively in security sector governance and reform at home and overseas. We do so because, as we see it, a democratic, accountable and well-functioning security sector is an integral element in a broader system of Government that provides protections for all citizens based on the fundamental principles of universal human rights and respect for the rule of law. That is what makes security sector reform relevant not just in post-conflict reconstruction but also in conflict prevention, because trust between citizens and the State is premised on the existence of institutions that serve and protect the needs of those citizens. If that trust is undermined, instability is rarely far behind. Police are often the first point of contact between a State and its citizens; but when corruption and abuse are allowed to flourish, that social contract begins to erode. All too often, we have seen examples of security sector institutions harnessed as instruments of repression. Sadly, the world knows well the direction that leads. Security sector reform is therefore of great importance for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. It should be approached as part of a broader set of institutional safeguards - including law reform processes, work to strengthen accountability, judicial independence and access to justice. Those are the building blocks of societies in which the rule of law provides protections for people and peace can take root. But they also provide the enabling environment for sustainable development and investment. The General Assembly recognized that in its articulation of Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is fundamentally about peace, justice and accountable institutions. The Organization's work on security sector reform is a key part of international efforts to support countries to strengthen the rule of law at the national level. That is why the United Kingdom supports the Organization's global efforts in this field, including the United Nations Global Focal Point for Rule of Law arrangement - the principal mechanism of the United Nations for system-wide assistance on the rule of law, including security sector reform. This mechanism, funded through the United Nations Development Programme's Global Programme on Strengthening the Rule of Law and Human Rights for Sustaining Peace and Fostering Development, has enabled the United Nations to deliver critical results in support of national security sector reform efforts through effective joint approaches between United Nations peace operations and United Nations country teams in countries from Somalia to Libya to the Central African Republic. Meanwhile, the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund - to which, I might add, the United Kingdom also remains a key donor - has worked hard to carve out an impressive portfolio of work on security sector reform directly related to building and sustaining peace in countries affected by conflict. The United Kingdom will continue to be a staunch advocate for security sector governance and reform and will work with the United Nations and other partners to enhance the impact of our collective support through maximizing our joint efforts.
