Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I thank you
wholeheartedly, Sir, for scheduling this open briefing
on East Timor. We thank Mr. Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest situation in that
territory. It shows clearly that, since his last briefing,
we have again covered some ground, which gives us
reason for satisfaction. We would therefore begin by
expressing our deep appreciation for the United
Nations team in East Timor, led by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Sergio Vieira
de Mello. We, in fact, thought that it would be possible
for him to come and brief us this time.

On the return of refugees, recent reports say that,
since early May, there has been a drastic drop in the
number of refugees returning to East Timor. What is
more disturbing is that the ostensible reason is the
harassment of refugees inside East Timor. We would
like to recall here that we attached particular
importance to this issue in all our statements in the
past. It is crucial to ensure that the process of the
settling down of refugees be smooth in order to instil
confidence in them and also positively to contribute to
the question of national reconciliation. Everything
should be done to encourage the refugees to return, and
that should be done on the basis of real progress on the
ground in areas of concern to them.
In the context of encouraging disparate militia
elements to disband, we would like to welcome the
initiative taken by the Government of Indonesia to ask
these soldiers either to join its resettlement
programmes or to resign and return to East Timor.
Making the choice very clear to these trouble-mongers
is a very positive attitude which we believe would
facilitate the United Nations task considerably.

With regard to civil and judicial administration,
we note with appreciation the signs of effective
administration that have been apparent in recent days.
The opening of the civil service campus and the
commencement of training courses for the East
Timorese civil service are very important developments
and we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
behind them. We believe that the regulation recently
adopted on the establishment of foreign government
representative offices will open up opportunities for
more interaction with the international community and
facilitate communication and understanding of the
situation on the ground in East Timor. We are happy to
note that the Administration has started the collection
of customs duties, which will help to improve the
financial situation. The first public review of a
detention case is also a welcome sign that the judiciary
has started functioning.

The recent extensive flooding in West Timor
presented UNTAET with a difficult situation. The
Council has agreed with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that UNTAET should respond to the
request of the Government of Indonesia for assistance.
As we mentioned at that time, this operation and the
personnel involved should be covered by UNTAET's
mandate. For UNTAET, it would be one more step
towards closer cooperation with the Government of
Indonesia, if that is so desired.

We welcome the preparatory work for next
month's donor conference in Lisbon. We are also
encouraged to note that the various employment-
generating projects are contributing to the redress of
the unemployment situation, as reported by
Mr. Annabi.

Finally, the law and order situation remains an
enduring concern to my delegation, as it adversely
impacts on the return of refugees and the opportunities
for development programmes.

