The United Kingdom is grateful for the determination and skilful diplomacy shown by the German and Belgian delegations on resolution 2533 (2020). The co-penholders worked tirelessly to deliver what the United Nations andits humanitarian partners have told us they need in order to meet the needs of millions of people in Syria. Unfortunately, the co-penholders have been blocked in this task by Russia and China. Twice this week, they have vetoed draft resolutions that commanded overwhelming support in the Security Council. Twice they voted to block the flow of aid to some of the most vulnerable people in the world today. Twice they put their own political calculations above saving human lives. We are disappointed that the Council was left with no choice but to approve a resolution that does not meet the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. It reduces humanitarian access and puts lives at risk. We reiterate our thanks to the co-penholders for their unstinting efforts: this situation is the responsibility of Russia and China. The United Kingdom has committed over £3.3 billion in response to the Syria crisis since 2012, which includes support for saving lives through shelter, medical help, water and food for victims of the violence across Syria and the surrounding region. Humanitarian aid is not a political tool to be bargained with and should be based purely on humanitarian need. The United Kingdom's substantial assistance to the United Nations Syria appeal is not politicized. It is distributed by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners according to need and across all of Syria, whether in areas controlled by the regime or not. We believe that cross-border and cross-line access is vital for getting aid to north-east and north-west Syria, particularly given the need to prepare and respond to coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The loss of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing six months ago has crippled the health-care system in parts of north-east Syria. The United Nations has been clear that cross-line deliveries from within Syria have not adequately filled the gap left by the termination of cross-border assistance by Russia and China earlier this year. The loss of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing today deprives 1.3 million people in north-west Syria of cross-border humanitarian assistance that they rely on. Over the past few days, we have heard of more confirmed COVID-19 cases in that area, so that loss will hamper the ability of aid agencies to respond effectively to the outbreak of the virus there. The humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire. The further reduction of crossings places an added responsibility on the Syrian authorities to ensure that vital aid reaches all vulnerable populations. We urge them to improve cross-line access in keeping with the requests of United Nations agencies. We also urge them to cease their efforts to manipulate humanitarian aid to reward or punish communities that they view as loyal or disloyal. We see that policy evidenced by data in the Secretary-General's bi-monthly reports in response to our request for more detailed information on where the United Nations and its humanitarian partners are being denied sustained access. In addition, we call for strict adherence to the principles and parameters on United Nations assistance in Syria. We look forward to the Secretary- General's updates to the Council and thank him for his leadership on this issue. It is a matter of great regret that Russia and China have chosen this week to play politics with humanitarian aid, at a time when the world and the region is battling coronavirus. Their actions will result in the loss of life and an increase in human suffering.
