Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his briefing.

Venezuela reaffirms its full support and respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and believes
that the international community must continue to
support the implementation of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a way to contribute to a peaceful
solution of the differences among the parties concerned.
In this context, the European Union-led multinational
stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
carried out its work within the framework of the
mandate assigned to it, in cooperation with the
authorities, to ensure a safe environment for all the
ethnic communities in the country.

We reaffirm that it is incumbent on the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to carry out and lead the
efforts related to the future of their country, as part of
a process through which ethnic groups must genuinely
work through dialogue and with respect for the laws
and institutions of the country, peace, human rights,
cooperation and economic and social development.
The High Representative should therefore foster
constructive work as part of his primary responsibility
for promoting the civilian aspects of the Framework
Agreement. His efforts to move that work forward and
find common ground among the parties, commensurate
with the mandate that has been entrusted to him, must
ensure impartiality and transparency, as well as a
balanced and prudent approach in which the opinions
and views of all stakeholders are reflected.

The strengthening of relationships among Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours is a positive
development, which we welcome. In that regard,
we underscore in this process the ratification of the
border treaty between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro, the high-level meetings with Croatian
authorities in the context of dialogue and negotiation,
and the positive visit to Srebrenica.

Moreover, Venezuela rejects terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, as well as the spread of
extremism. In that vein, we deplore the murder of two
members ofthe armed forces ofBosnia and Herzegovina
on 18 November 2015 in Rajlovac, near Sarajevo. We
also commend the steps that are being taken to avoid
the recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters to fight
in the armed conflicts besetting the Middle East.
Nonetheless, it is necessary to remain vigilant on this
issue, which is so crucial to peace and security in the
context of fluid international cooperation to confront
the scourge of terrorism.

With regard to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
armed conflict in the territories that belonged to the
former Yugoslavia, we once again publicly express our
support for the work of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, the body set up to try those
responsible for such atrocities. The criminal tribunals
have played a pivotal role in the strengthening of the
rule of law and the promotion of long-term stability
and reconciliation, and since their inception, they have
been a vital tool for tackling impunity and ensuring
that the perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes do not escape justice. They have also paved the
way for creating jurisprudence that serves as a source
of inspiration for all national and international courts
that are responsible or will be responsible for trying
individuals accused of those crimes.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all parties
to redouble their efforts to maintain their resolve and
political courage, to build confidence and to develop
their capacity to work together in the framework of
international law, which are key elements of a just
and lasting solution that redounds to the benefit of the
parties and the entire region.

