The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Security Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document S/ 1996/368.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l996/393, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(8/1996/393) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall now
put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (interpretation from Chinese): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1057 (1996).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized to
make the following complementary statement on behalf of
the Security Council.
"As is known, the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (S/1996/368) states in paragraph 14:

'Despite the present quiet in the Israel-
Syria sector, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be potentially dangerous and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects
of the Middle East problem can be reached:

"That statement of the Secretary-General
reflects the View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.

