Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Lieutenant General Mgwebi, Major General Menon,
Lieutenant General Keita and Major General Uba for
their briefings this afternoon and for the commitment
that they have shown to the ideals of the Organization.
We too are very grateful for what they do every day in
their service to the United Nations to protect the world's
most vulnerable people, and we know that they and the
troops under their command are on the front lines.

Some of those troops, as has been noted by many
colleagues, have made the ultimate sacrifice, and I
would like to extend our deepest condolences with
respect to the deaths of peacekeepers this month in
both the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, as well as those of the
nine other peacekeepers this past year.

We recognize that leading a United Nations
peacekeeping force is extremely challenging. The Force
Commanders are working in increasingly dangerous
environments and, at times, with the half-hearted
commitment of political leaders to the agreements that
led to their deployment. Security Council mandates
have also become more complex and, admittedly in
some places, confusing. It is therefore very important
for us to hear today their ground-level insights to the
challenges, which they face.

One challenge of particular concern to us is
that of performance and accountability. As Force
Commanders, they have the most direct influence
over our peacekeepers in the field, and we count
on their leadership as the first line of accountability
for the conduct of the troops and police under their
command. That is particularly true with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse. All of us condemn such
abuse and call for zero tolerance, but they are the ones
who can most directly ensure that those crimes do not
happen on their watch. They also have the clearest
view of peacekeeper performance. If they encounter
performance issues, we need to know. If they help us
identify problems, we can help them address them.
It is much better for the Security Council to learn
of issues early from our own peacekeeping mission
leaders, than to have to deal with the consequences
later. Standardized, objective performance reporting
will help us greatly and we encourage mission leaders
to make effective use of the existing systems to track
and document performance and to embrace those now
in development.

I would now like to touch on individual briefings.

First, I thank Lieutenant General Keita for his
briefing on robust peacekeeping. We commend him
for the demonstrated willingness of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to take risks
and act decisively against armed groups; its support to
the Government; its proactive protection of civilians
and for the provision of security in the Central African
Republic. MINUSCA's robust and proactive response
in Bombari serves as an example for all peacekeeping
missions. However, the threats to MINUSCA in the
Central African Republic are quickly evolving and
require an immediate response. I would therefore like
to ask: Can it be said that there is enough flexibility
to determine operational requirements within
the mandate?

This comment is for Lieutenant General Mgwebi. In
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
as with all peacekeeping missions, we must look at ways
to improve the performance of the Mission, including
by unlocking the Force Intervention Brigade so that it
can be more mobile, and by building the capacity of
the troop- and police-contributing countries serving in
them. Ensuring accountability for poor performance,
conduct and discipline remains a priority for the
United States. With regard to MONUSCO, Lieutenant
General Mgwebi mentioned the difficulty of moving
troops quickly, given national caveats. What can we
do to ensure that action can be taken quickly when the
situation demands it?

This comment is for Major General Menon.
We know that the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) has faced a number of
serious challenges since its creation in 1974. In recent
years, those challenges have arisen from the fact that
its area of operations has changed so dramatically.
The mission has patiently worked with the parties and
garnered the support of the Council for major upgrades
to its equipment and force protection, as well as to
plan for a successful return to the Syrian side of the
area of separation. We commend the General's work to
execute that difficult strategy and to plan so diligently
for UNDOF's future. Could we have additional details
on how force protection concerns are being addressed,
while ensuring that the mission fulfils its mandate? Are
there particular technologies that could be useful in the
unique environment in which the mission operates?

With regard to the briefing by Major General
Uba, we have seen how difficult it can be to draw
down peacekeeping missions. The force of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia has undergone a significant
reduction since resolution 2333 (2016) was adopted
last December. The 2017 presidential and legislative
elections are now six months away. How is the
remainder of the force being prepared to provide a
back up role for security during the elections? Finally,
as we continue our review of peacekeeping operations,
we expect to see drawdowns in other missions. What
other lessons learned from UNMIL's drawdown can be
applied usefully to other missions?

