Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017), renewing the
mandate of United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), including the Force Intervention
Brigade. We understand that it has indeed been a
difficult negotiation process, and not everyone has
secured what they wanted. In the end, we are pleased
that the Security Council was able to achieve consensus
through compromise. We believe that maintaining that
spirit of unity within the Council on this and other
matters is absolutely important. France should be
commended for ensuring that that is what transpired
during negotiations on the draft resolution, of which we
are very appreciative.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at an
important political juncture. The agreement reached
by the Congolese political actors on 31 December 2016,
with the mediation efforts of the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo, has without any doubt averted a
major political crisis. The immediate implementation
of the agreement is indeed the key to preserving the
stability of the country and paving the way for a
peaceful political process.

It is indeed appropriate that the Security Council has
called on all stakeholders in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to redouble their efforts towards a speedy
conclusion of the ongoing talks on the implementation
modalities in line with the 31 December 2016 agreement
and proceed without further delay to preparations for
the presidential and legislative elections due to take
place before the end of 2017. Mobilizing the necessary
resources for the electoral processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure long-term security
and stability in the country and the region in general is
indeed critical. It is also important that the countries of
the region, the African Union and the United Nations
act in unison and put their full weight behind those
efforts to ensure a smooth transition process and the
holding of elections as envisaged in the agreement. In
that regard, we would like to refer to the communique
adopted by the Peace and Security Council (PSC) of
the African Union two days ago on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which underscored
the latter point.

The deteriorating security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is taking a heavy
toll on the civilian population. We are particularly
concerned about the activities of armed groups in
the eastern part of the country and the resurgence of
negative forces. Those have enormous implications
with regard to peace and security not only for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also for the
Great Lakes region. That needs to be addressed
seriously within the PSC framework agreement. The
role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes region and his continuous regional and
international engagement in the promotion of peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, including through the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
in consultation with countries of the region and the
guarantors, remain very important.

In the light of the current political and security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
continued support of MONUSCO in maintaining peace
and security in the country and ensuring conditions
conducive to a smooth political process cannot be
overstated. The adoption of today's resolution is
therefore very important, and we hope that the Mission
will carry out its mandate, strategic priorities and tasks,
as outlined in the resolution, with greater efficiency
and effectiveness.

We commend the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and pay tribute
to the military and civilian personnel of MONUSCO,
who are doing everything they can to implement the
mandate of the Mission in a difficult and challenging
environment. It is imperative that the Mission be
given the means and capabilities necessary to carry
out its tasks, including addressing the threat of the
negative forces.

Finally, we are deeply saddened by and shocked
and really angry at the brutality that ended the lives
of Michael and Zaida, two members of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
it is not enough to lament what befell them. No stone
should be left unturned in the search for the murderers
to ensure that they are held accountable. We convey our
deepest condolences to their families, their colleagues,
as well as to the United States and Sweden, for the loss
of their nationals.

