Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. O'Brien
for his important briefing today and for all of his
sterling work.

I would like to begin as Mr. O'Brien did by
wholeheartedly condemning the terrorist attack on
desperate civilians as they were being evacuated as
part of the four towns agreement. It is utterly tragic
that over 120 people, including a very high number of
children, were brutally killed. The United Kingdom
condemns that terrible attack. We will work to ensure
that whoever is responsible is held to account.

I also wish to salute the unity and bravery of the
humanitarian response, including the response of the
White Helmets. Despite a ceasefire being in place since
the end of 2016, we continue to witness terrible ongoing
violence. In April alone, we know that the regime or
its allies have carried out aerial attacks on at least six
hospitals and three schools in Syria - I repeat, six
hospitals and three schools. That is utterly deplorable.
I hope that others will join me in condemning all
such incidents. All of us need to do everything in our
power to bring the suffering to an end. I therefore ask
my Russian colleague: What is Russia doing with its
leverage to ensure that the regime stops attacking
schools and hospitals?

Once again, such attacks bring into laser focus the
urgent and desperate humanitarian needs of 13 million
people in Syria. I am especially concerned about the
difficulty in reaching the 1.5 million people who live
under siege-like conditions and the further 3.2 million in
other hard-to-reach areas in Syria. All of them urgently
require food, water and medicine. Roughly 5 million
Syrians live in besieged and hard-to-reach areas, but
the only regime-besieged area to be reached in 2017
was Khan al-Shih where 6,000 people were reached
with aid. The other besieged areas reached are Deir
ez-Zor, besieged by Da'esh, where the United Nations
carries out air drops and the four towns besieged by
the Iranian-backed Hizbullah and armed opposition
groups. That is a tiny proportion of aid reaching those
people who are in most need of it.

Let me be clear - the Syrian regime is using
starve-or-surrender tactics. That is abhorrent and a
clear breach of international humanitarian law. I am
especially concerned about the 420,000 innocent
civilians in the besieged part of eastern Ghouta, where
supplies are rapidly running out. There are urgent
medical needs, shortages of basic food items and no
water or power supplies. I finally support Mr. O'Brien's
call for a pause in fighting to allow the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to safely enter
eastern Ghouta.

At the International Syria Support Group meeting
in Geneva on 20 April, Russia committed to pressing the
regime to allow the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to access Duma, one part of eastern Ghouta.
What is the situation one week later? The regime has
not acted. There is still no convoy. We owe it to the
people of Duma to do everything we can to improve the
situation. The United Nations has received the requisite
assurances from the relevant armed opposition groups
to allow them to deliver assistance to Duma and it
has identified a safe route to enter. The only things
now lacking are for the Al-Assad regime to issue a
facilitation letter and to pause its aerial bombardment
of the area for long enough for the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to enter. If Russia is unable
to ensure that the regime allows access, we call on
the Security Council to act to ensure that the United
Nations is able to deliver urgent supplies to Duma, in
the first instance.

I will reiterate now what I have said many times
before. There can be no sustainable peace until there
is a political transition. The Al-Assad regime bears
overwhelming responsibility for the suffering of the
Syrian people. I implore the whole of the Security
Council to work in unity to end the conflict for the sake
of the Syrian people.

