Mr. Wolf (United States of America): First, I
want to thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
thorough and troubling report, and in particular for his
helpful suggestions for action.

We are pleased that the United Nations has
remained engaged on the grave humanitarian problems
facing Africa in general, and Zimbabwe, Uganda and
Darfur in particular. The United States believes that a
food crisis is a threat not only to the welfare of the
peoples of Africa but also to regional stability and
security, which is one reason we have tripled our
commitment of aid to Africa in the past year.

The misery and terror sown by the actions of the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in northern Uganda are
perhaps not as well known to the world as the
situations in Darfur and Zimbabwe, but its murderous
assaults, kidnappings, burnings of villages and fields
and, especially, its kidnapping of children for use as
soldiers or sexual and economic slaves marks the LRA
as one of the most detestable groups of its kind, one
that we should all be looking for ways to counter in
order to bring its atrocities and interference to an end.

The Sudan remains a top priority for the United
States. Among our international partners, the United
States plays a lead role in supporting the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Abuja talks,
providing life-saving humanitarian assistance in Darfur
and southern Sudan, and spearheading efforts to end
the violence in Darfur and to hold accountable those
responsible for atrocities. President Bush was the first
head of State to speak out publicly on the humanitarian
crisis in Darfur. We were the first to highlight Darfur at
the Security Council, the first to state that genocide
had occurred in Darfur and the first to call for
accountability for perpetrators of violence and
atrocities, as well as being a lead donor on
humanitarian assistance, with more than $506 million
in food aid to Darfur and eastern Chad since the Darfur
crisis began. We appreciate Under-Secretary-General
Egeland's reminder of what remains to be done by us
all.

Economic collapse and food insecurity are now
chronic conditions in Zimbabwe, as we heard. Millions
of Zimbabweans have fled to South Africa and
elsewhere. Given the shortage of fertilizer and inputs
during the current planting season, next year's harvest
will be worse than this year's, with grave implications
for food security. Food insecurity and economic
meltdown are the result of bad policies, non-
transparency and the breakdown of the rule of law.

The United Nations should remain engaged with
the Government of Zimbabwe on fundamental
economic and policy reform. The United Nations
should continue to press the Government of Zimbabwe
on the urgent need for dialogue with donors and
international financial institutions. United Nations
engagement can influence the behaviour of that
Government, as we saw when the Government of
Zimbabwe signed a memorandum of understanding
with the World Food Programme on the eve of Under-
Secretary-General Egeland's visit, and when Special
Envoy Tibaijuka's intervention helped to end
Operation Restore Order.

The United Nations should also urge the
Government of Zimbabwe to reach out to all
Zimbabweans, political parties and civil society groups
to engage in a dialogue aimed at reaching a sustainable
political settlement. Repressive legislation should be
repealed. Zimbabwe needs a broad-based
representative Government to face the country's huge
economic and humanitarian challenges.

We believe that a visit by Under-Secretary-
General Gambari to Zimbabwe early in 2006 would
keep up the momentum of Under-Secretary-General
Egeland's visit and should include the Sudan, Uganda
and other countries in the region. Under-Secretary-
General Gambari should encourage African nations to
step up their engagement with all Zimbabwean parties
to promote timely solutions to Zimbabwe's economic
crisis. For example, South Africa's $470 million loan,
if conditioned on political and economic reforms in
Zimbabwe, could be an element of a possible African
solution.

The important thing is to restore democracy,
economic growth and food security in Zimbabwe. If
the conditions are right for genuine progress,
Secretary-General Annan should visit Zimbabwe
himself following Under-Secretary-General Gambari's
visit.

We also believe there is an important - indeed,
leading - role for African countries to play in
resolving the crisis in Zimbabwe, and we encourage
them to work with the United Nations and the
international community to engage the Government of
Zimbabwe in a constructive dialogue.

