Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his first briefing and for the impact he has
already had on the work of the United Nations in Iraq.
I also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his briefing on
behalf of the Multinational Force.

My delegation, like others, notes with satisfaction
that the security situation in Iraq continues to improve.
The decline in sectarian Violence and terrorist attacks
is encouraging because this improvement in security is
increasingly the fruit of the efforts of all Iraqi
communities together, and because it was recently
accompanied by political acts that could potentially
give Iraqis confidence in dialogue.

Following the adoption of the Justice and
Accountability Law, which Mr. De Mistura rightly
highlighted, we hope that similar progress will be
achieved in other areas, such as the management of
hydrocarbon resources, the implementation of article
140 of the constitution and the revision of the
constitution. The Constitution is, indeed, the only tool
capable of giving Iraqis confidence in a strong State
that guarantees each community its right to participate
in a common future.

The international community must continue to
encourage efforts in that direction, primarily, of course,
by helping to tangibly improve the living conditions of
Iraqis, but also by supporting the Iraqi Government's
efforts to strengthen its cooperation with its immediate
neighbours. The Sharm el-Sheik and Istanbul
ministerial meetings yielded tangible results on the
question of refugees and border security. We hope that
agreement on the meeting to be held in Kuwait, on the
establishment of the three working groups and on the
ad hoc support mechanism will make it possible to
consolidate those gains.

I would like to stress the driving role played by
the United Nations in Iraq despite the constraints
imposed by the security situation. In that context, I
would like to reiterate Belgium's full support for the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
their determination to enable the United Nations to
play the strengthened role assigned to it through
resolution 1770 (2007).

