Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
extremely grave situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories has already had such serious
negative implications for the entire Middle East region
that it has become a cause of great concern for all
countries and peoples of the world. One of the threats
arising today is Israel's ongoing construction of a huge
racist wall, designed, inter alia, to seize large tracts of
Palestinian land and annex them to the Zionist entity;
to lay siege to the Palestinian people, increase their
isolation and cut them off from their natural physical
environment; and to turn Palestinian territory into
isolated pieces of land subject to oversight and control
by the colonial military settlements, which continue
their creeping expansion, undermining the territorial
integrity of the would-be Palestinian State and
preventing the population of the territories from
travelling to their capital in East Jerusalem and gaining
access to their holy places of worship.

The construction of this wall falls within a larger
scheme that is plain to see. The scheme is now being
implemented in graphic detail in the Gaza Strip, one of
the most densely populated regions in the world, which
Israel is tearing apart by force into four segments, with
a View to attaining the political and economic
subjection of the Palestinian population to Israeli
control and to severing its only outlet to the world: the
Arab Republic of Egypt.

What is called a wall is in fact an integrated
system of large projects, including highways, bypass
roads, observation towers, electronically operated
bunkers for automatic weapons, lighting systems on
both sides of the wall and military barracks. The wall is
three times that of the Berlin wall. Construction costs
are so astronomically high that the Israeli State has
been unable to finance the wall on its own and thus has
had to make use of foreign credit guarantees.

The expansionist policy pursued by Israel since
its creation in 1948 and practised for more than half a
century has created a huge humanitarian crisis for the
Palestinian people. That has resulted in the
displacement of some 4 million Palestinians, who have
been uprooted by Israel from their land and turned into
refugees. Among that population, an entire generation
knows almost nothing beyond life in refugee camps in
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan
and several other countries and whose members are
prevented by Israel from returning to their homes.

Israel has continued to build colonial settlements
in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied
by it since 1967, despite United Nations opposition to
the Israeli settlement policy, which is in open defiance
of the will of the international community and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly, which consider the construction of
Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories to be
a violation of the norms of international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

The construction of this wall is the culmination of
a security scheme covering all settlements illegally
built by Israel on the occupied Palestinian territories
since 1967 and consolidating those settlements as a
prelude to devouring the territories and annexing them
to the Zionist entity.

The Israeli representative said this morning
before the Council that after his country withdrew from
southern Lebanon in May 2000 it had built a wall
similar to that now under construction in the occupied
Palestinian territories and that Israel had moved part of
that wall 95 centimetres, at the cost of millions of
dollars, in deference to the Secretary-General's wishes.

If those words are true, and if that is Israel's
logic, then the question that arises today is: why has
Israel not withdrawn in response to the calls by the
international community and world public opinion?
Why does Israel not respond to the call by the
Secretary-General and the international community to
stop the construction of the wall on Palestinian
territory? Those calls have been made for more than
two years now. Why has Israel waited for 22 years -
and waged three wars and hundreds of air raids until it
was forced to withdraw from southern Lebanon - to
build this wall?

That withdrawal took place because we upheld
our rights and because the international community
also upheld those rights. Israel's withdrawal from
southern Lebanon came under pressure from the
resistance in southern Lebanon. Despite Israel's
construction of the wall, Israel continues to occupy the
Shab'a farms. The construction of the wall along the
Blue Line did not prevent Israel from committing acts
of aggression against Lebanon and waging air raids and
other deliberate strikes against Lebanese territory.

The Palestinian people endure nothing but
tragedy as a result of this overt plunder of its territories
and assets and of the standard accusation against the
Palestinians of being terrorists. Palestinians are
pressured and executed because they demand their
legitimate rights not to have their homeland torn apart
and to prevent the pillaging of their natural resources
by Israeli settlers under the protection of the Israeli
occupation army.

The continuation, by Israel, of the construction of
the wall will isolate Israel itself from the whole world
and from its natural physical environment -
politically, humanely and economically. The near
future will prove that Israel, instead of forcing the
Palestinian people to live in isolation, is actually
creating a much greater isolation for itself, an isolation
in a ghetto similar to those horrendous ones known in
European history. The Government of Israel will thus
destroy all prospects for the revival of the peace
process, especially the peace offered in the Arab peace
initiative, adopted at the Beirut summit in 2002.

If the Government of Israel continues to brush
aside the advice offered by the friends of peace and the
international community, and persists in the
construction of the wall, that construction will be yet
another testimony to the continued injustices
committed by the Government of Israel against the
Palestinian people and proof of the selfishness and
inhumane attitude of the Israeli people.

Lebanon, which has been directly affected by the
displacement of the Palestinian people since 1948 and
continues to live side by side with this valiant people
and to resist this tragedy, does not accept that these
people continue to live in isolation as prisoners of the
occupation within a new, large Israeli prison.

Therefore Lebanon appeals to the Security
Council to adopt the draft resolution, submitted by the
Arab group, which considers the construction by Israel,
the occupying Power, of this wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories as a violation of the 1949
armistice line. The draft resolution also states that this
construction is illegal on the basis of international law
and requires the end of construction on the wall, the
demolition of those portions that have already been
built and the restoration of the status quo ante.

Until the establishment of a comprehensive and
just peace leading to the establishment of a sovereign
Palestinian State that would include all national
Palestinian territory - according to the 4 June 1967
borders - with Jerusalem as the capital, we hope that
the Council's resolutions will uphold the status of the
United Nations and its central role in bringing about
justice and building peace.

