Mr. Heumann (Israel): I would like to join others
in welcoming Ms. Virginia Gamba, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

I would like to start by sharing with the Council
some of the voices of war's youngest Victims, the
children who suffer from armed conflict around the
world. Razan, just seven years old, is from Syria.
She said,

"I like to be alone, to be able to go out and no
one kidnaps me. And for there to be no fighters or
anything, and no bombing."

Fatima Mohammed Ali grieves as her 3-m0nth-old
daughter fights severe malnutrition in Yemen, saying,
"There are times that I wish for death instead of living
this life." Martha was captured as a teenager by Boko
Haram in Nigeria. She recalls,

"They told me not to walk around outside, and
when I did they would beat me. They told me not
to talk, and I would talk, so they beat me. They
told me not to sing; I would sing, and they would
beat me. When I sing in my tribal language I forget,
but ifI sit quietly I remember everything and will
just cry."

The cries of children in war-torn areas transcend
borders and boundaries. Thousands of children have
perished in armed conflict. Thousands more may not
have lost their physical lives, but they weaken in spirit
every day. The hopes and dreams of boys and girls can
crumble like the debris of bombed-out buildings. Just
last week, the world witnessed the horrific picture of a
Syrian baby dying of malnutrition. Once again, we saw
the cruelties of the Al-Assad regime, its disregard for
human life, through the eyes of a child weighing less
than a bag ofrice, struggling in the hands ofa frightened
nurse. Too many children are killed and maimed all
over the world. A child in armed conflict may be forced
to become a soldier on the front lines, a slave trapped in
besieged territory or a killer of innocent people.

Israel knows these tragedies far too well. We
understand what it means to face enemies who
systematically exploit children as weapons of war
and place our children in danger. We live every
day with the threat of the next terror attack. Hamas,
the party controlling Gaza, which is acknowledged
internationally to be a terrorist organization, has tried
time and again, year after year, and by every possible
means to harm our people. The construction of its vast
terror tunnel network was no unplanned decision. It is
part of an ongoing systematic operation to infiltrate
Israel through an underground maze, and it has one
purpose and one purpose only - kidnapping and killing
innocent Israeli children. In June, Hamas built a terror
tunnel directly beneath an elementary school operated
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). This past
weekend, another such tunnel was found under another
UNRWA schoolyard, in yet another demonstration of
Hamas's ruthless exploitation of Palestinian children,
as well as of its misuse of United Nations facilities.
First we found Hamas hiding rockets in schools.
Then we saw it hijacking hospitals and turning them
into military command centres. And now we see it
jeopardizing the safety of UNRWA schoolchildren by
tunnelling directly under their classrooms.

We simply cannot tolerate these blatant violations
any longer. Nor can we ignore the trend encouraging
incitement and the glorification of terror, through
which young children are taught to kill. Palestinian
children go to schools named after heinous killers.
They cross streets honouring terrorists. They watch
their leaders on television hand out candy in celebration
of the murderers of innocent Israelis. It is therefore not
surprising that dozens of Palestinian teenagers commit
brutal terror attacks on our people. In one of the
cruellest recent attacks, a Palestinian teenager broke
into the house ofa 13-year-old Israeli girl, sneaked into
her bedroom and stabbed her to death. That act and his
decision to commit it were a direct result of ongoing
Palestinian incitement. We have come to a reality
where children kill children. We cannot tolerate it any
longer. The Council must send a clear message to the
Palestinians that enough is enough.

We congratulate Special Representative Gamba on
her new appointment and appreciate her joint efforts,
with the Secretary-General, to improve the latest
report on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821) by
comparison with those of previous years. But we also
expect it to include the crucial context we have just
provided. Without that, without objective narratives
and truth, we learn only a fraction of the reality. The
integrity of this institution depends on our reporting
complete information.

Another crucial issue that we expect to be addressed
immediately is the institutionalized bias against Israel
that results from the composition of the report's formal
fact-finding working group. The working group is
responsible for collecting the information that goes into
the draft report. Its members include United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
We were astonished to learn recently that one of those
NGOs, Defense for Children International-Palestine
(DCI-Palestine), has clearly established links to a
terrorist organization. DCI-Palestine is closely tied to
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PF LP),
an acknowledged terrorist organization that made
airplane hijacking a preferred tool of terror. Hassan
Abed Al-Jawad, a current board member of DCI-
Palestine, is also a leader ofthe Bethlehem-based PFLP.
And, as ifthat were not enough, a former DCI-Palestine
board member, Shawan Jabareen, was jailed after being
convicted of recruiting for the PFLP. Including an NGO
linked to the PFLP in a report on children and armed
conflict is no different from using Da'esh recruitment
magazines andjihadi chatrooms for a guide to pacifism.
It is entirely unacceptable, and we hope that the Special
Representative will address the issue.

Despite all these absurdities, the reality on the
ground is that Israel goes the extra mile. Israel acts
in full accord with international law and international
human rights law. It goes to extraordinary lengths to
avoid harming civilians, even if that puts our soldiers
at risk. Israel will always safeguard all children's
rights and security, with no discrimination or special
treatment. In fact, since 2013 we have treated hundreds
of wounded Syrian children who have been injured
under the Al-Assad regime because children are
children and they all deserve to be safe and secure.

We must let children grow and change the world,
and I would like to end with a quote from a girl named
Hannah. After escaping Boko Haram in Nigeria,
she said,

"I am still struggling with the memories, but I
am trying to focus and to continue with school and
become a businesswoman."

Protecting our children is protecting our future. We
must never take a child's life for granted. We must let
children be children, regardless of their race, religion,
birthplace or heritage.

