France welcomes the adoption of resolution 2548 (2020), renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum on Western Sahara (MINURSO) for one year. France welcomes the efforts of the United States of America to take into account the unanimous request by the members of the Security Council with regard to the swift appointment of a personal envoy of the Secretary-General and the need for the parties to fully cooperate with MINURSO, especially with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The swift appointment of a new personal envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara is indeed necessary to revive the momentum begun by President K6hler with the Geneva round tables. We have full confidence in the efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard. At the same time, we reiterate our full support for MINURSO, which plays an essential role in assuring respect for the ceasefire and constitutes a key factor in ensuring stability of the region. It also helps create conducive conditions for the resumption on the political process. France recalls its concern at the rise in violations recorded in the most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/938). We call on the parties to fully implement the ceasefire agreement. France is also concerned at the ongoing blockade in the Guerguerat buffer zone, which risks creating tensions that could undermining the political process. We express out full support for the statement by the spokesperson of the Secretary- General calling for the parties to show restraint in order to avoid any escalation, especially in Guerguerate. We also support his call against impeding commercial or civilian traffic, or altering the status quo of the buffer zone. France supports the efforts of MINURSO in this regard. Inconclusion, we recall, more broadly, France's full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General towards a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution in Western Sahara, in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. In this context, France views the Moroccan self-government plan of 2007 as a credible and serious basis for discussions towards a resumption in dialogue.
