Mr. Otunnu: It is a great honour for me to appear
before the Security Council, and it is a great honour for
me to appear under your presidency, Sir. I congratulate
you on the leadership which you have provided,
especially on the plight of children affected by armed
conflict.

We are on the eve of a new millennium. There will
be much to celebrate because in the modern era our
civilization has achieved breathtaking advances in
virtually every field of human endeavour. And yet these
quantum leaps in human progress coexist uneasily with a
darker side of our civilization. Witness our capacity to
inflict and tolerate grave injustice, our capacity for deep
hatred and cruelty towards our fellow human beings. See
how we can destroy entire communities in the quest for
power or in the name of ethnicity, religion, race or class.

A crucial measure of our civilization must be its
human quality. It has to do with how we treat our fellow
human beings and, above all, it has to do with how we
treat the most innocent and most vulnerable members of
our community, those who represent the future of every
society - our children.

On the eve of the new millennium, we are
witnessing an abomination, an abomination directed
against children in the context of armed conflict. At this
moment, in approximately 50 countries around the world
children are suffering from the impact of armed conflict,
in its midst and in its aftermath.

In the last decade alone, we have seen 2 million
children killed, over 1 million orphaned, 6 million
seriously injured or permanently disabled, 12 million
made homeless and 10 million left with serious
psychological trauma. Children, especially girls, have
been made the targets of rape and other forms of sexual
violence on a large scale.

At present, half of the total population of refugees
and internally displaced persons in the world are children.
An estimated 800 children are killed or maimed by
landmines every month. It is estimated that a quarter of
a million young persons under the age of 18 are currently
under arms, serving as child soldiers in various theatres
of conflict around the world.

War is nothing new to the human experience.
Neither is the incidence of civilian casualties in times of
war. But the magnitude of what we are witnessing attests
to a new phenomenon: a qualitative shift in the nature and

 

the conduct of warfare. It is not war as we have known it
in the modern era.
This transformation is underscored by several
developments. Almost all the major armed conflicts in the
world today are internal. They are being fought by multiple
semi-autonomous armed groups within national boundaries.
They are marked by a particular brand of lawlessness,
cruelty and chaos. In particular, they are characterized by
the systematic and widespread targeting of civilian
populations. In these situations, the belligerents routinely
ignore international humanitarian laws, which have
traditionally moderated, if not governed, the conduct of
inter-State warfare.

The conflicts tend to be protracted, lasting years, if not
decades, often in recurring cycles, thus exposing successive
generations of children to horrendous violence. And most
cynically, children have been compelled to become
instruments of war, recruited or kidnapped to become child
soldiers. Moreover, the indiscriminate use of anti-personnel
landmines and the proliferation of light weapons have
underscored the particular vulnerability of children in these
situations.

Civil wars are fought among those who know each
other well, among enemy brothers and enemy sisters. They
pit compatriot against compatriot, neighbour against
neighbour. A key feature of these struggles is a
demonization of the so-called enemy community, often
defined in religious, ethnic, racial or regional terms. In the
intense and intimate setting of today's internecine warfare,
the village has become the battlefield and civilian
populations its primary target. It is against this background
that today up to 90 per cent of casualties in ongoing
conflicts around the world are civilians, the vast majority of
whom are women and children. This is the world upside
down.

This abomination is due in large measure to a crisis of
values, both at the international and the local level. The
traditional limits on the conduct of warfare - international
instruments as well as local injunctions and taboos - are
being cast aside. This has given rise to an ethical vacuum,
a setting in which international standards are ignored with
impunity and where local value systems have lost their
sway.

To reverse this trend of abomination, we must take
concerted measures at both the national and the
international level. In this connection, I wish to propose a
number of measures and areas of engagement, in the light
of which we can move towards prevention, protection and
recovery.

The first area of engagement concerns the wide gap
which currently exists between the existence of
international norms and their non-observance on the
ground. Over the past 50 years, the nations of the world
have developed an impressive repertoire of international
humanitarian and human rights instruments. Several of
these address the rights, protection and welfare of
children. The most pertinent in this regard are the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Geneva
Conventions, along with their additional Protocols.
Together, these instruments contain a number of
provisions designed to ensure the protection and welfare
of children in situations of international as well as internal
armed conflict.

But the value of these provisions is limited to the
extent to which they are applied. Today, the gap between
these norms and the situation on the ground remains
unacceptably wide, and it is growing. Words on paper
cannot save children in peril. To bridge this gap, the
international community must be prepared to demonstrate
its commitment, determination and readiness to use its
collective influence and weight to ensure the observance
of these norms and, therefore, the protection of children.
The Security Council can lead the way by sending forth
a clear message that the targeting, use and abuse of
children are simply unacceptable. A message needs to go
out that it cannot be "business as usual" when atrocities
and abuses are systematically committed against children.

Secondly, at a very fundamental level, I believe that
perhaps the most damaging and disorienting loss a society
can suffer is the collapse of its own local value system.
In most societies, even in times of war, fundamental
values and rules mattered. Distinctions between acceptable
and unacceptable practices were maintained, with taboos
and injunctions proscribing indiscriminate targeting of
civilian populations, especially women and children.

For example, I grew up in a society where the
concept of lapir was very strong. Among the Acholi
people, lapir denotes the cleanliness of one's claim,
which then attracts the blessing of the ancestors in
recognition and support of that claim. Before declaring
war, the elders would carefully examine their lapir to be
sure that their community had a deep and well-founded
grievance against the other side. If this was established to
be the case, war might be declared, but never lightly. But
in order to preserve the original lapir, strict injunctions

 

would be issued to regulate the actual conduct of war. One
did not attack children, women or the elderly; one did not
destroy crops, granary stores or livestock, for to violate
such taboos would be to soil one's lapir, with the
consequence that one would forfeit the blessings of the
ancestors and thereby risk losing the war itself. Moreover,
in declaring war there was always the presumption of
coexistence in the post-conflict period. Therefore, in
prosecuting a war effort one took great care to avoid
Violating taboos and committing acts of humiliation that
would destroy forever the basis for future coexistence
between erstwhile enemy communities.

There are many examples of such a value system in
many other societies around the world. But today, to
paraphrase the poet William Butler Yeats, things have
fallen apart; the moral centre is no longer holding. In so
many conflicts today, anything goes. Children, women, the
elderly, granary stores, crops and livestock - all are fair
game in the single-minded struggle for power, in the
attempt not just to prevail but to humiliate, not just to
subdue but to annihilate the enemy community altogether.
This is the phenomenon of total war.

Tragically, many societies that have experienced
prolonged periods of conflict have seen their local value
systems collapse under its pressure. I believe that such a
society must, in the first place, draw from the deep well of
its own tradition a renewed sense of ethical rootedness.
This can then be related and linked with the norms that
have been developed at the international level. We must
ensure, in that context, that the institutions that traditionally
inculcate values - parents, the extended family, elders,
teachers, schools and religious institutions - are
strengthened. It is only in this way that a society caught in
the throes of a deep moral crisis can regain its moral
bearings.

A third area of engagement has to do with exploring
concrete initiatives to prevent or mitigate the suffering of
children who are actually caught up in the midst of ongoing
violence.

First, with regard to access to populations in distress,
when communities are cutoff from the outside world, when
they are out of sight, they are entirely at the mercy of the
belligerents. That is when they are the most vulnerable; that
is when gross abuse and atrocities are likely to occur and
multiply. For this reason, the international community must
insist on having access to such communities. Humanitarian
relief agencies and human rights organizations must be
given access to populations in distress, to provide relief and
succour, to bear impartial witness and to draw attention
to rules and norms applicable to the conduct of war.

The international community must also insist that
facilities normally reserved for children or which have a
significant presence of children - facilities such as
schools, hospitals, children's playgrounds and school
buses - should be considered battle-free zones.
With regard to the recruitment and participation of
children in hostilities, children simply have no role in
warfare. The international community should insist on this
fundamental principle and therefore seek firm
commitments from belligerents neither to recruit nor to
use children in hostilities.

Finally, there is a need to monitor and control more
carefully the flow of arms - especially small arms -
into theatres of conflict where children are being
systematically brutalized and abused. Similarly, greater
effort must be made to prevent the supply and use of
landmines in such theatres of conflict.

We now live in a world in which interdependence
has become a central fact of international life. The
various armed groups also depend in no small measure on
the goodwill of the wider international community, from
which they seek political legitimacy and diplomatic
recognition and on which they depend for the flow of
arms and money to prosecute their war efforts. In our
interdependent world, no group, no Government and no
entity could ignore concerted international pressure in
favour of the protection of children.

A fourth area of engagement concerns the needs of
children after conflict has ended. When war is over, it is
not really over for the children for whom the culture of
violence has become a way of life; nor for the children
left carrying deep scars in their hearts and minds; nor for
the children who have simply lost out altogether on their
education and youth. In the aftermath of conflict, we must
work to heal these wounds. Healing is important to
restore spiritual, emotional and physical health. Healing
is necessary to facilitate reintegration into society. But
healing is also critical, because without it, it is difficult to
break the cycle of violence. Without healing, the victims
of today's abuse may become the abusers of tomorrow;
without healing, the wounded children of today could
become the channel for transmitting violence from one
generation to the next. This is the reason why any plans
for post-conflict peace-building should make the needs of

 

children a central concern from the outset, not merely an
afterthought after the fact.

In this context, some of the issues requiring concerted
action by national Governments, as well as the international
community, should include the demobilization and
reintegration of child combatants; the treatment of
psychological trauma; the return and resettlement of
displaced and refugee children; mine clearance and the
development and rehabilitation of children affected by
mines; and the provision and rehabilitation of basic medical
and educational services, including vocational training.
These are some of the areas requiring concerted action.

Lastly, a fifth area of engagement concerns the need
for taking preventive action. This means addressing the
very conditions that give rise to conflicts in the first place:
political exclusion and gross disparities in the distribution
of resources between different regions and different sectors
of the same country. We must work to transform these
distorted relationships. Both international and national
actors need to take political, economic and social measures
that can generate within communities a sense of hope in
place of despair, a sense of inclusion and participation
instead of exclusion, a sense of belonging instead of
alienation, a sense of one country instead of centre and

periphery.

In addition to these specific areas, I would request that
when the Council considers the imposition of sanctions it
especially take into account the needs of children, their
impact on children and how best to protect them in those
circumstances. I would also hope that whenever the
Security Council considers peacemaking efforts,
peacekeeping mandates and peace-building plans, the
central needs of children will be there from the outset and
will inform the plans and the way.

In conclusion, let me say that I have a deep fear, a
nightmare scenario, that we may be exposed to so much
that we are in danger of accepting as normal what in fact
represents a radical departure from any acceptable norms at
both the local and the international level. I would hope that,
beginning with the message that the Council will send forth
today, we may resolve as we enter the new millennium,
regardless of our cultural traditions, religious affiliation,
political ideologies, to agree on a common project: to make
our world one that is safe for children - all of our
children.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President and members of
the Council for your commitment and concern about the
plight of children affected by war all over the world.

