Mr. Vukasinovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
I would like to thank the leadership of both the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals for their reports (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434) and today's detailed briefings on the
progress of work of their respective institutions.

We note the continued progress and steady work
of the ICTY as it approaches the end of its mandate
and forecasted closure at the end of this year. We also
understand that certain circumstances continue to
impede the work of the ICTY, but we hope that the
Tribunal will finish its work in an efficient manner
within the anticipated time frame in line with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

We welcome the continued activities carried out by
the Residual Mechanism in the reporting period as it
increasingly assumes its designated responsibilities. We
hope that the Mechanism will draw and build upon the
best practices of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and fulfil all conditions necessary
for the successful completion of its mandate, with
continued support from the international community.

Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY has been steadfast and
full, as evidenced by the statistics of the Tribunal. In
the same vein, we remain committed to contributing
actively to the Tribunal's efforts to accomplish its
mission, and we will continue in the same manner with
the Mechanism.

In addition to cooperating with the ICTY, Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to improving the
efficiency of domestic war crimes proceedings, bearing
in mind that only an independent judiciary, as a basic
pillar of democratic institutions, is able to render
justice in an impartial way. In that regard, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continues to further strengthen its
national judicial system at all levels in order to bring to
justice all those responsible for war crimes. The justice
sector reform strategy adopted for the period 2014-
2018 remains crucial to the long-term reinforcement
of the rule of law and the further consolidation of the
judicial system, including measures to improve judicial
independence and efficiency.

We welcome the support of the European Union
for the implementation of the strategy, and the support
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), principally in connection with
witness-protection activities and the appropriate
assistance and support to victims.We are further pleased
that the European Union has agreed to extend the joint
European Union/ICTY training project for national
prosecutors and young professionals from the former
Yugoslavia, as it has played a very important role in
building the capacities of the national justice sector for
the past eight years and the efficient transition from the
ICTY to national war crimes prosecutions.

The national war crimes strategy plays a crucial
role in enhancing public trust in judicial institutions,
and above all in the promotion of reconciliation. Its
consistent implementation will continue to improve
the consistency of juridical practices throughout
the entire country at all levels. The implementation
of the strategy is a complex process in which many
institutions at all levels of authority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina participate. Despite numerous challenges,
important results have been achieved. This is reflected
in a steady increase in the efficiency in prosecutions
of war crimes cases and some progress in resolving
outstanding Category II cases, as well as in issuing
important indictments.

We believe that consistent cooperation among
the Prosecutor's offices and the relevant authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia,
in accordance with the principles of international
justice and rule of law, is crucial to investigating and
prosecuting pending war crimes. The promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
therefore remains our priority, as a matter of principle,
dedication to justice and reonciliation in our region.

Finally, the fight against impunity is a crucial
precondition for sustainable peace, reconciliation
and the rule of law. And it does not end with 2017.
Processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to achieving our goal of building
a peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina
integrated into the European Union.

