Mr. Kouchner: In my presentation I would like
to focus on three areas. First, what have we done so far
in Kosovo in our lS-month presence, from the moment
we arrived in a war-torn Kosovo? Secondly, where do
we stand today on our biggest immediate challenge: the
preparation of the municipal elections to be held on 28
October - the first democratic elections in Kosovo for
at least a generation? And thirdly, what are the biggest
challenges ahead and what will be our policy priorities
after those elections?

Let me start with how I assess the work that we
have done so far since the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) arrived in Kosovo some 15
months ago - very briefly, because I know that
members are aware ofthese matters.

On the political front, we have managed to
include political representatives from all communities
in our work. We created the Joint Interim
Administrative Structure (JIAS) last December.

In the Kosovo Transitional Council, we have 36
members from all communities and from all parts of
society debating critical issues. These are lively,
stimulating and very important debates. And the
debates are very frank - between the communities,
not between UNMIK and the Kosovars.

In the Interim Administrative Council (IAC), the
pillar heads of UNMIK work together with the leading
Kosovo Albanian representatives and with Mrs.
Trajkovic from the Serb National Council. Every
regulation of UNMIK is discussed here before I, in my
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, take the final decision.

The 20 joint UNMIK-Kosovo administrative
departments are all up and running. They have about
60,000 Kosovars from all communities on their payroll;
that figure will eventually rise to some 65,000. In other
words, the Council is in charge ofthe payroll of 60,000
to 65,000 civil servants in Kosovo.

I believe that there are a number of other
achievements in Kosovo of which members are aware.
With the help of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) pillar of
UNMIK, we have managed without major problems the
return of close to 1 million refugees. Please note that
not only have we managed to deal with those one
million persons, but we have also managed to deal with
an additional 100,000 returnees, freshly returned
mainly from Germany, Switzerland and other European
countries. I have asked those countries to stop these
returns, because winter is coming.

With the help of the United Nations pillar, we
have established a functioning civil administration in
all areas of public life everywhere in Kosovo. But I
have to say that we got the necessary staff very, very
slowly, though now this is close to being done.

With the help of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) pillar, we have
developed the media sector and have started a broad-
based effort to build democratization. I will say more
about the election process later in my statement.

With the help of the European Union pillar, we
have laid the foundation for a functioning market
economy. That is easy to say, and easy to set up - but
not easy to adapt to the real conditions of life on the
spot.

With the help of KFOR, we have demilitarized
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and, with OSCE,
we have started to build a genuine Kosovo police. We
now have a bit fewer than 2,000 Kosovo police
officers; our goal is to have some 4,000 Kosovo police
officers in the coming six months to one year.

More recently, in another important example of
cooperation with KFOR, we took over the Zvecan lead
smelter of the Trepca complex to address an immediate
public health emergency and at the same time to lay the
foundations for administering Kosovo's assets and
creating a multi-ethnic workforce. The whole operation
was done for the benefit of the local population of all
communities. I have received the most recent numbers
from the blood tests among the workers, children and
pregnant women in Zvecan; believe me, this was really
a health emergency. Already, Serb workers have started
again to work at the Zvecan smelter.

My last example of exemplary cooperation by all
pillars of UNMIK and KFOR was ensuring security on
the critical day of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
elections last Sunday, 24 September, although I would
say that I sometimes would have wished that
cooperation to be even stronger and more united.

Of course, there are not only achievements and
successes. We at UNMIK, we here in the Security
Council, and we in the international community at
large should be very frank with ourselves. One key
mistake was that we often tried to implement "pure"
but unrealistic policy programmes, instead of taking
the still-existing conflict circumstances into account.
But UNMIK and KFOR are not a post-conflict mission;
they are a low-intensity-conflict mission. We had to
learn that the absence of war does not mean that the
mission area has already entered into a post-conflict
situation.

Let me give a few examples. In economics, it was
a mistake to try to develop a pure market economy,
while neglecting such immediate and basic social needs
as shelter, housing, utilities and social employment. In
education, it was a mistake at the beginning to insist on
multi-ethnic schools, thus de facto preventing minority
children from receiving any schooling at all. In justice,
we tried to build a local judiciary and failed to bring in
international judges and prosecutors, which was
necessary. There is also a need to give the Special
Representative special powers to build a proper
judiciary system. In the media, we tried to work for
self-regulating regimes, while the need to take strong
decisions was unavoidable. When a Kosovar
newspaper publishes the name of a suspect, you cannot
accept that, because the so-called suspect will be
killed.

I think that we have by now corrected this
approach. You have to do both at the same time:
address the immediate needs and lay the foundations
for sustainable long-term solutions. Of course, the
biggest problem that we face is the situation of
members of non-Albanian communities. Serbs and
Roma, in particular, are often still excluded from daily
life and are still under great personal security risks. We
have tried to counter this truly deplorable situation
with a multitude of initiatives, such as the agenda for
coexistence, which includes special assistance
programmes for the Serbs and the establishment of
specialized local community offices. I inaugurated
several of these offices just recently. These offices
work exclusively to facilitate access to services for and
to increase protection of minority members.

Another key problem that is still very bad is the
fate of missing persons and detainees. I am sorry to
bother the Council with this problem. I have addressed
this issue here several times already. I am glad that
UNHCR has appointed a Special Envoy to address
their fate, but I fear that not much will be achieved for
missing and imprisoned Kosovo Albanians if the
international community does not press Belgrade hard
to change its so-far uncompromising stance. At this
very moment, 68 prisoners recently released from Serb
prisons are holding a hunger strike in Kosovo in
solidarity with their colleagues still incarcerated. They
have reported that they were tortured during their
detention. I am extremely concerned about the
remaining prisoners, who have been held in Serbia for
17 months and who may now be forgotten by the world
during this time of political turbulence in Serbia
proper.

Let me go to my second point: preparations for
the 28 October elections. Together with OSCE, we
have worked for 14 months to prepare the best possible
elections. I would like to address three areas: the
technical preparation, the ongoing electoral
campaign - including, of course, political violence -
and the non-participation of the Serbs in the electoral
process.

The civil administration and institution-building
pillars of UNMIK - the second and third pillars -
have worked hard to conduct a full-fledged voter-
registration process. I am confident that we will be able
to have a complete and accurate final voters' list ready
for the elections on 28 October. Given the magnitude
of the task, the fact that there was very little data to
start with and Belgrade's policy of non-cooperation,
this process has been very complicated, but I am
confident that we will have a solid basis for the
elections. Around 1 million people have applied to be
registered as voters. In addition, we have had a very
lively candidate-registration process, with over 5,000
candidates belonging to 19 parties, 2 coalitions, 3
citizens' initiatives and 15 individual candidates.

The electoral campaign started on l3 September.
So far, it has gone well, with no major incidents. This
was not necessarily to be expected. In August, we
experienced a significant upsurge of political violence
directed in particular at members of the Democratic
League of Kosovo. UNMIK, UNMIK police and
KFOR, in another concerted effort, have set in motion
a mechanism to address this kind of violence, offering,
inter alia, special protection measures for a wide range
of candidates. I am happy to report that, since the
creation of this mechanism and the beginning of the
political campaign, the political violence has decreased
substantially. If members are interested, I am ready to
distribute statistical charts based on figures collected
since the beginning of our mission.

But, of course, violence remains a very difficult
issue every day in Kosovo. And, of course, the
electoral campaign will go on for another four weeks.
We will have to remain very cautious and be able to
react quickly to any problems. I think it is fair to say
that, both from the technical point of view as well as
from the point of view of a clean and calm electoral
campaign, all the elements are there to hold successful
elections on 28 October. I hope we will.

In this respect, how can we judge the third
element: the non-participation of members of the
Kosovo Serb minority in these elections? Of course, I
respect the decision of the Serb National Council. I
respect their argument. It is true that both the security
situation as well as the small number of Serb returnees
make it difficult for them to participate, but in my view
it was a wrong decision and a political mistake. These
elections will be just the first of many. Nothing will be
prejudiced by participating in them, neither on the
Albanian nor on the Serb side, and we are working
hard to address the problems of the Serbs. As an
example, KFOR and UNMIK police are working every
day to improve the security situation of all minority
members. Together with Bishop Artemije, we have set
up a Joint Committee to facilitate the return of
displaced Serbs to their homes in Kosovo.

Let me conclude by saying that I am happy that
the Kosovo Serbs are willing to participate in the
elected municipal structures and that the Albanians
have already accepted such a process. At the end of the
day, we will have representative municipal assemblies
with participants from all national communities. It will
take time, but we remain determined to foster
coexistence and thus lay the foundations for eventual
reconciliation. The first democratic elections will be a
very important step in such a process.

(spoke in French)

I would now like to briefly address the third
point. What is ahead? Where are we going? What will
happen in Kosovo after the municipal elections? How
do we envisage the path ahead? In my view there are
several problems or solutions.

First of all, we will have to implement the
electoral results in the municipalities. We have to turn
the results of the municipal elections into a reality, and
it might not be easy. We hope everything happens in a
proper and calm way. We know that each candidate
signed an attestation according to which he promises to
respect not only the outcome of the elections, but to
assume all democratic responsibilities in the towns that
are involved. The democratic tradition in Kosovo, even
if it did exist a long time ago, has not existed for some
years.

But, I believe that the Kosovars really are ready
for and aspire to establishing true democracy. On
behalf of the United Nations and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), I
travelled around in the provinces to explain the
position of the United Nations mission. I called it my
"outreach campaign". I spoke with thousands and
thousands of people in each town who came to hear
what our position is and to ask questions.

The general impression that I can give you -
which I believe to be the right one - is that the voters
as well as the candidates want there to be a democratic
election. They are ready for democratic government in
the municipalities and elsewhere.

But that does not suffice. Even if that does
happen - and I hope that it does, remember that this
mission was said to be impossible - even if it
becomes even slightly possible - and I would be the
first to rejoice - that would not be sufficient. The
ambiguities of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
remain. We have to explain what appears in resolution
1244 (1999), that is to say, its very reason for being:
self-government and substantial autonomy.

We want the municipal authorities to function
with those principles in mind, i.e. self-government and
substantial autonomy. For that purpose, account must
be taken ofthose elections so as to strike a new balance
amongst the administrative elements that have been
established over the past 15 months. Some parties will
show themselves to be stronger than others. That also
must be taken into account. And I will make proposals
along that line.

I have therefore been proposing to the Kosovars
whom I have been meeting in all these 30
municipalities of Kosovo a pact. We changed the name
from a contract. The pact is that municipal elections are
to be held in a proper, democratic and calm way and
then a discussion of substantial autonomy would
follow. Take your municipal fate in hand in a
democratic and proper way, by means of a vote, and
then we can hold further discussions. UNMIK and the
Kosovars can find the best way to give them greater
responsibility, because greater responsibility is what is
needed. Greater responsibility would be given to an
administration that would then be closer to the
Kosovars.

Some points must be made quite clear. I call upon
them to reduce ethnic violence. The Serbs have to be
free to travel from their enclaves - I won't call them
ghettos, but they are a lot like them. Not only must the
political authorities who have signed statements, but
the Kosovars themselves must agree to allow Serbs to
become full-fledged citizens in the Kosovo they have.

In that connection I am encouraged - I have
spoken to you about this and you can look at the
figures - by the improvement in the level of violence
and especially since the campaign began. Communities
must all enjoy the same rights. This is still not yet the
case. One hears that it will take an entire generation to
accomplish that, well I know that. But I think that the
degree of political maturity in Kosovo is such that it
could happen faster.

Secondly, we have to develop the economy of
course. And that is a very big job. It is not
privatization- that is too technical, too theoretical
when you look at the reality - but there has to be
some opening of enterprises. In the former Yugoslavia,
you had public State property, State property,
cooperative property, etc. We have to work to give
investors confidence and develop the economy. We're
still too dependent on donors, and the European Union
in particular, which has shown itself to be very
generous.

Lastly, we definitely have to place our trust in the
Kosovars, whatever the difficulties may be, whatever
residual hatred may appear, despite our fatigue, even
with the depression that we feel in the evening when
we see that we have not made enough headway.
Nonetheless, the Kosovars must be given
responsibility. There is no democratic solution in
Kosovo without going through the phase of
administration being handed over to the Kosovars and
democracy given to them as well.

Otherwise - there are some unfortunate signs
that show us that we might not achieve our end -
otherwise, as I say, the international presence, in
particular the military presence might become
occupation forces, and that's why I think that we have
to get ourselves out of this uncertain situation as soon
as possible so that the Kosovars can be given a positive
view of what their future can be, as well as the future
of their children.

