Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her comprehensive briefing.
As the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) approaches its end,
we salute her invaluable role in bringing stability
to Haiti and acknowledge our deep appreciation
to her, the entire MINUSTAH team and the troop-
and police-contributing countries for successfully
completing such a long and challenging mission.

Kazakhstan recognizes the significant contributions
that MINUSTAH and other United Nations institutions
have made in Haiti in the past several years to the
effort to achieve stabilization, promote the rule of
law, ensure good governance and support the local
judiciary and law enforcement. MINUSTAH has been
particularly instrumental in creating a secure and stable
environment, participating in the reconstruction efforts
after the 2010 earthquake and supporting Haitian
authorities with reforms and institutional development.

We welcome the positive steps taken by the
Haitian Government towards restoring democratic
institutions and establishing economic recovery, which
has focused on agriculture, infrastructure and human
capital. Kazakhstan believes that President Moise and
his Government will be able to overcome their current
challenges and ensure stability and constitutional
order, as well as complying with Haiti's international
obligations. We fully agree with the observation in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2017/840) that it is
critical to ensure that Haiti makes full use ofthe window
of opportunity created by the current relative stability
to advance dialogue, with a View to consolidating the
security and stabilization gains that have been made
over the past few years, making for greater social and
political cohesion and reinforcing State institutions
so that they can meet the needs of the Haitian people.
As Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan, outlined during the Council's
meeting on peacekeeping reforms on 20 September
(see S/PV.8051), our country fully supports the shift
from conflict resolution to prevention and sustaining
peace, together with structural changes and the new
configuration of United Nations entities.

The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is supposed to be a role model
for future missions, with a particular focus on the
nexus of security and development. With a View to
consolidating security and stability, MINUJUSTH
should focus on building the capacities of the Haitian
National Police, making serious efforts to combat
impunity, ensuring the independence of the judiciary
and establishing a transparent and efficient prison
system. We urge the Government of Haiti to make sure
that the Haitian National Police's strategic development
plan is implemented rapidly and effectively, with help
provided as required by the international community in
order to ensure professional training and experience.

The human rights situation should be closely
monitored. Given the unfortunate experience of
misconduct in MINUSTAH, MINUJUSTH must be
held accountable to the highest standards of integrity
and discipline. The zero-tolerance policy on sexual
abuse must be strictly enforced. It is also essential for
MINUJUSTH that the United Nations country team
work in a coordinated manner with the entire United
Nations system, breaking down silos in order to achieve
optimal results for sustainable development in Haiti. It
also means that the Mission must collaborate closely
with neighbouring countries and regional partners,
which have made commendable contributions to
investment in Haiti. There must be coordination between
the various actors and international organizations, the
private sector and civil society, and women and young
people should be fully engaged.

Kazakhstan has already been an integral part of the
international support to Haiti, making contributions
to humanitarian efforts to support emergency relief
and development activities following the devastating
earthquake in 2010. In 2016, Kazakhstan supported
the World's Innovation Pole of the Greater North of
Haiti, which is aimed at establishing the infrastructure
for a knowledge-based economy in Haiti. As the only
Central Asian country accredited by the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), we have supported two
regional CARICOM. projects, aimed respectively at
developing water resource management in the region
and institutional support for the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs of CARICOM. member States, including Haiti.

The issue of cholera in Haiti should remain a
priority for the entire United Nations community in
the coming months. Kazakhstan joins the Secretary-
General's call to the international community and
donors for voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, as
envisioned in General Assembly resolution 71/161.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan's
firm commitment to supporting Haiti's efforts to
achieve peace, progress and prosperity.

