The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. The Council
commits itself to work closely and in a focused
and action-oriented manner with him in order to
better address the multifaceted and
interconnected challenges and threats confronting
our world within its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
as provided for by the Charter of the United
Nations.

"The Security Council pledges to uphold the
24

purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and reaffirms its commitment to
the principles of sovereign equality, national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States, underlines further the
need for respect for human rights and the rule of

law, including protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and the importance of adhering to the
principles of refraining, in international relations,
from the threat or use of force in any manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations, and of peaceful settlement of
international disputes.

"The Security Council, recalling that the
2005 World Summit Outcome recognized that
development, peace and security and human
rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
emphasizes that the challenges and threats
confronting the international community demand
a resolute and coherent response, based on the
collective security system of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council reaffirms its
commitment to address the whole range of threats
to international peace and security, including
armed conflict, terrorism and proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

"The Security Council recognizes the
essential role of the United Nations in the global
effort to combat terrorism, which in all its forms
and manifestations constitutes one of the most
serious threats to peace and security. The Council
therefore welcomes the adoption by the General
Assembly of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. It stands ready to play its part
in its implementation. The Council, in keeping
with its responsibility in the international
community's efforts to combat the scourge of
terrorism, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, underlines its determination to
intensify its efforts, including in translating the
commitments made at the Security Council
summit meeting in the course of the 2005 World
Summit meeting into practical results. It
reiterates further that States must ensure that any
measures taken to combat terrorism comply with
all their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights law, refugee
law and humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reaffirms its resolve
to take appropriate and effective actions against
any threat to international peace and security
caused by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of
delivery, in conformity with its primary

07-203 84
responsibilities, as provided for in the United
Nations Charter.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of more effective international efforts
to prevent conflict, including intra-State conflicts,
and encourages the Secretary-General, as already
requested in Security Council 1625 (2005), to
provide the Council with more regular, analytical
reporting on regions of potential armed conflict,
and stresses the importance of establishing
comprehensive strategies on conflict prevention
in order to avoid the high human and material
costs of armed conflict.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for improved United Nations capacity to assess
conflict situations and for the effective planning
and management of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for quick and effective responses
to any Security Council mandate. The Council
also recognizes the importance of a more
strategic approach to the oversight and direction
of peacekeeping to maximize the prospects for
successful transition in the countries concerned,
and so as to make possible the most effective use
of scarce peacekeeping resources. To this end, the
Council requests the Secretary-General, in
managing and reporting on peacekeeping
missions to focus on the steps needed to achieve
the objectives of the mission, both by the host
Government and by the international community,
and to propose to the Council, as appropriate,
initiatives to accelerate the transition process.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of post-conflict peacebuilding to
assist countries emerging from conflict in laying

07-203 84
the foundation for sustainable peace and
development and, in this context, welcomes the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
that should play an important role to achieve the
objective of improving United Nations capacity
to coordinate with regional organizations,
countries in the relevant regions, donors, troop
contributors and recipient countries and to
perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through
stabilization, reconstruction and development. It
appreciates the progress made thus far in the
initial work of the Commission on Burundi and
Sierra Leone. The Council underlines the
importance of close interaction between the two
bodies and will regularly address the work of the
Commission in its own discussions and will take
into account the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to working in partnership with the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat, other
United Nations organs, regional, subregional and
other intergovernmental organizations, with non-
Council members, including those Member States
that are parties to a conflict, and with troop-
contributing countries, financial and other
stakeholders in pursuit of the common objective
of maintenance of international peace and
security."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/ 1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.rn.
