Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would also like to thank
Mr. Wane and His Excellency President Mogae for their
comprehensive briefings, which have updated us on the
situation in South Sudan.

Japan would like to express its deep concern over
the situation on the ground, in particular regarding
the Sudan People's Liberation Army's advance
towards Pagak. It undercuts the unilateral ceasefire
declared by President Kiir and contradicts his claim on
Independence Day that war is not an option. We call for
restraint from both the Government and the opposition.
It is also worrying that residents and aid workers are
again evacuating from Upper Nile state due to the
advance on Pagak. An effective use of the humanitarian
high-level oversight committee mechanism is urged in
order to enhance humanitarian access.

Japan is encouraged that the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) is currently
working with the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community to revitalize the 2015
Agreement by engaging with previously excluded
groups. The Government of South Sudan is also
preparing for an upcoming IGAD ministerial meeting
for that same purpose. The Council should unite in
urging all parties to constructively engage in the
process so that, based on those collective efforts, the
revitalization forum, slated for September, will yield
positive results.

The recently launched national dialogue is equally
important. We commend the work of the National
Dialogue Steering Committee, especially its efforts to
reach out to parties outside of South Sudan, as well as
to grass-roots organizations in the country. Dialogue
at the national level requires grass-roots trust-building
and reconciliation activities at the local level. Japan is
working closely with the United Nations Development
Programme in connection with local efforts to enhance
transparency and credibility so as to ensure genuinely
inclusive national dialogue.

The national dialogue also requires an environment
conducive to its ends, including through an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the release of political
prisoners. Japan's Ambassador in Juba has also
emphasized those points to President Kiir directly, First
Vice President Taban Deng Gai and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. Japan renews its call on all parties to
stop fighting.

Lastly, with regard to the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force, we look forward to an
expeditious completion of its deployment, including
through the prompt resolution of land-allocation issues
and accelerated administrative processes. Further
cooperation among troop-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and the Government of South Sudan is
important for that purpose.

