Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Three weeks following the return to New York of the
mission to Central Africa that it was my honour to
lead, I am pleased to welcome the holding of this
further meeting, which provides an opportunity for
representatives of the countries we visited to address
the Council. I should first like once again to express
our gratitude to them for the reception afforded the
mission in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania.

Rather than reiterating what I said here three
weeks ago, at the 5305th meeting, I should instead like
briefly to point out the key lessons learned from the
mission regarding the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi. Members of the Council may also
refer to the mission's report (8/2005/716), which
addresses other matters and makes several
recommendations.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is on the right path. However, there are still
considerable challenges to overcome. First of all, the
elections in which the Congolese people fervently hope
to participate will require enormous efforts, especially
as regards logistics. A strict timetable must be followed
between the holding of the referendum scheduled for
18 December and the legislative and presidential
elections that must occur prior to the end of the
transition period, namely, 30 June 2006. On several
occasions during its visit, the mission emphasized the
importance of adhering to that date.

Secondly, given the actions of armed groups,
security in the eastern part of the country is a matter of
concern, which the mission discussed at great length
during its visit. Whether the armed groups are
Congolese or foreign and whether or not they pose a
serious military threat, it is the Congolese people who
are the first to suffer from their actions. We must
therefore help the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in its effort to reform the armed forces to enable them
fully to address the problem. Courageous efforts have
already been made in Ituri and in the Kivus,
specifically in Virunga National Park. In accordance
with its mandate, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is providing support for those efforts.

Establishing the rule of law constitutes the third
challenge to the future of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Government needs to demonstrate the
full resolve necessary to that task. The international
community, and especially the countries of the region,
should offer it unwavering support.

In Burundi, the transition has been a success. The
Burundians can be proud of what they have
accomplished. The peace and national reconciliation
process has set a stunning example for the region.
Throughout our stay in Burundi, two issues were at the
heart of our discussions and, I believe, remain core
concerns. First, how are we to ensure the consolidation
of the role of the international community, beginning
with the United Nations, in the new phase that has
begun following the restoration of peace? The United
Nations, whose support has been crucial to the success
of the transition, must now withdraw and make way for
others. In that respect, the principle of gradual
disengagement that we discussed recently with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who has honoured us with
his presence, enjoys consensus and should be
supported by a commitment not only from donors and
investors, but also from States of the region. That will
play a very positive role in the service of peace in
Burundi, and we will follow it very closely as we
assess the situation.

The second issue is the problem of the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL), which continues to
pose a challenge. We must commend the mediation
efforts of the Tanzanian authorities to encourage that
movement to join the peace process. We hope that the
FNL will return forthwith to the negotiating table. I
recall that the Security Council affirmed its readiness a
year ago to consider imposing sanctions on individuals
who threatened the peace and national reconciliation
process. I believe that, should the Government so
request, the members of the Council should be
prepared to follow through.

Within the framework of the resolution adopted
on Burundi and of draft resolutions now under
consideration by the Security Council, our mission has
drawn a variety of conclusions since its return. It was
very fruitful both in keeping the Council better
informed and in allowing it to send clear messages. I
reiterate that I was most honoured to lead the mission.
I believe that Council members will be pleased to hear
the reactions of the countries of the region.

