Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): To
begin, please allow me, on behalf of the Chinese
delegation, to welcome President Chiluba and thank him
for his briefing on the situation in Africa. We express our
appreciation for the proposal made by Gabon and for this
open meeting, which has been arranged by the Council
President.

China has always attached importance to the
question of Africa. We have always supported the just
demands and reasonable proposals of the African peoples,
and we endorse the idea that African peoples should make
their own efforts to strengthen their political stability and
economic prosperity. We also support the African
countries in their efforts to strengthen their unity and
strengthen their regional cooperation.

It is our consistent view that the Security Council
should increase its input on the question of Africa and
cooperate in a concrete manner with the efforts of the
African regional organizations.

China highly appreciates what has been done by
President Chiluba and his contribution on the question of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Without his
tireless efforts and high-quality mediation skills, the
Lusaka Agreement would not have been signed.

It is our view that the United Nations and the
international community should pay more attention to the
question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo is the heart of Africa,
and a conflict in that country not only affects the Great

 

Lakes region, it also affects the peace, security and stability
of the African continent as a whole. The signing of the
Lusaka Agreement is the beginning of the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but the full
implementation of this Agreement will be a difficult
process. It needs the active participation of the international
community and of the Security Council. It is our view that
if the international community and the Security Council do
not now invest the necessary material and manpower to
address the root causes of the conflict, the conflict could
break out again, and we would be facing higher, more
tragic costs.

We have taken note of the six points President Chiluba
made at the end of his speech. We believe they deserve our
attention and study.

