Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary- General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing. I listened attentively to the remarks made by other members of the Security Council, especially the representative of the Niger on behalf of the African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. I think that many of their views merit our high-level attention. The recent situation in Mali has triggered widespread attention on the part of the international community. China has been following closely the recent developments in Mali. We are pleased to note that the President and Vice-President of the transitional Government have been sworn in and that the Prime Minister has been appointed. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) issued a communique on 5 October on its decision to lift the sanctions on Mali. We welcome these positive developments and commend the efforts of the Malian stakeholders and ECOWAS on their commitment to a peaceful resolution of the crisis. That said, in order to restore peace and stability in Mali, many challenges remain. The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is stalled. In central and northern Mali, the security and humanitarian situation have deteriorated, compounded by new and complex factors related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is our sincere hope that all parties in Mali will put the interests of the country and the people first, remain on the track of dialogue and cooperation and build on the positive momentum, so as to form the transitional government without delay and advance the transition in a steady manner. As to the focus for the next steps, we believe that it is important to continue to implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Since the agreement was signed, in 2015, considerable progress has been achieved thanks to the efforts of all Malian stakeholders. However, much remains to be done. We urge the transitional Government and Malian stakeholders to renew their commitments to the agreement and to advance its implementation in conjunction with the transitional process through, inter alia, institutional reform; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and the consolidation of State authority. Fighting terrorism is another priority. The Secretary-General's report(S/2020/952) points to the increased frequency of terrorist activities, with terrorist organizations capitalizing on current fragilities, thus aggravating the security situation in northern and central Mali. Those trends are cause for heightened vigilance. We encourage the transitional Government to work more closely with the international community and employ all the means available to fight terrorism and violent extremism. China endorses the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) through its continued support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel within the parameters of its mandate. Sustainable development must continue to move forward in order to eliminate the root causes of instability. Just now, the representative of the Niger stressed, on behalf of the African members of the Council, that we need to take a holistic approach. I fully agree with that. I also think that it is important for Mali's transitional Government to increase its commitments to, and investment in, socioeconomic development, including efforts to secure tangible results in the Northern Development Zone and provide health care, education and other essential services to its people in order to effectively improve their standard of living. We call on the international community to act and assist Mali in its fight against COVID-19, support its economic and social recovery and help it achieve independent and sustainable development at an early date. At the international and regional levels, there must be increased support and greater synergy. That means we need to continue to support African countries in finding African solutions to African problems and support the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union in their important roles to help advance Mali's transition. We applaud the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and MINUSMA for continuing to perform their duties under complex circumstances, and support their ongoing vital activities to maintain peace and stability in Mali. We urge Malian stakeholders to increase coordination with MINUSMA and ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. As we speak, Mali finds itself at a crucial juncture. Malian parties must use this transition as an opportunity to open a new chapter for national peace, stability and prosperity. Together with the rest of the international community, China stands ready to continue contributing to peace and development in Mali.
