Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me, at the
outset, thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate on the issue of children and armed conflict.
I want to congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts.
We wish her great success and look forward to working
closely with her. I would also like to thank our briefers
today for their statements.

Children constitute a third of humanity, and, I dare
say, the most important third, as they represent our
future. Being also the weakest and most susceptible, it
is imperative that all of us, nationally and as members
of the international community, act for their well-being
and development. Situations of armed conflict are per
se situations of suffering, but children tend to be the
worst affected. We therefore firmly believe that the
international community has the responsibility, and
indeed the obligation, to do its utmost to provide succor
to children affected by armed conflict.

We have engaged constructively in the ongoing
efforts to make the United Nations more relevant and
effective in the area of children affected by armed
conflict. We have also actively engaged in the work of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
to address the plight of children in situations on the
agenda of the Security Council.

As the largest contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations over the past six decades,
Indian peacekeepers have been at the forefront in
creating an environment of peace and security in which
national authorities can fulfil their obligations towards
the most vulnerable sections of those affected by armed
conflict. Based on our wide-ranging experience, we
wish to stress that the major challenge is the question
of resources. While some members of the international
community never tire of pushing to expand the mandate,
they are unwilling to provide adequate resources even
for meeting the requirements of the agreed mandate.

Since the adoption of resolution 1379 (2001), which
brought the issue of children and armed conflict to the
Security Council's agenda in 2001, significant progress
has been made, and the United Nations deserves credit
for the same. However, a lot more remains to be done.
As the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflicts commences
her work, we think that it is the right time to take stock
of the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Council and consider the way forward. We are sure that
today's debate will provide an opportunity to reflect
on the functioning of the United Nations processes and
mechanisms, and help us identify gaps and address
them.

Let me therefore underscore our key concern,
which has also found an echo in the words of several
representatives that have spoken before me today. We
believe that the earlier this is addressed, the better the
result will be for children in armed conflict. This will
also rebuild the consensus that the issue has enjoyed so
far in this Council and, I might add, that is important.

Paragraph 16 of resolution 1379 (2001) requested
the Secretary-General to report on situations that
are on the Security Council's agenda or that may be
brought to the attention of the Security Council by the
Secretary-General, in accordance with Article 99 of the
Charter, which in his opinion threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security. All subsequent
resolutions, including resolution 1882 (2009), which
makes reference to other situations of concern, draw
their legitimacy from paragraph 16 of 1379 (2001). In
spite of that clearly spelled-out mandate, the Secretary-
General's reports include situations that do not meet
the threshold for being an armed conflict or a threat
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The fact that the Legal Counsel also has issues with
such referencing should have led to the removal of such
situations, not their continued inclusion with a blase
disclaimer. This should be rectified and the mandate
strictly adhered to. Mandate creep also distracts from
efforts to urgently address the plight of children in
situations of armed conflict that are on the Council's
agenda, where lack of resources is the critical problem
for the relevant United Nations entities.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism of the
United Nations envisaged the involvement of and close
cooperation with the country concerned. In addition to
ensuring the veracity and reliability of data collection,
developing such capacity will significantly assist the
country concerned in its fight against impunity and in
ensuring accountability. It is also important that United
Nations access to armed groups is carried out under the
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and the Government concerned, in keeping with both
the letter and the spirit of the Council's resolutions.

It is important that there be regular and substantive
consultation between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
relevant resolutions, including of provisions concerning
listing, delisting, persistent perpetrators, impunity and
accountability, among others.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's strong support
for the United Nations on issues of children and armed
conflict, and reaffirm that we will continue to work
closely on this with a View to increasing efficiency,
cost effectiveness and the impact of United Nations
efforts and those of Member States in dealing with this
important issue.

