Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I should like
to express my appreciation to the Chadian presidency
for convening today's meeting on the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We also thank
Mr. Zerihoun and Mr. Simonovic' for their briefings on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

It is unfortunate that, despite the international
community's efforts to address the human rights issues
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea over
several years, the situation has continued to worsen,
ultimately warranting the Security Council's attention.
Earlier this year, the commission of inquiry issued
its landmark report (S/2014/276, annex), which raised
international awareness of the gravity of the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Following the report's release, we at the United
Nations have dealt with the issue in the Human Rights
Council and in the General Assembly.

While the General Assembly has adopted multiple
resolutions since 2005 on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, this
year's resolution 69/188 was unique in that it contained
recommendations on the Council's role in these
efforts. Therefore, the Council's decision to place the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
on its agenda is a necessary starting point for further
discussion and engagement. Such engagement is crucial,
as we now understand the human rights violations in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to be so
systematic and widespread that they not only cause
mass suffering among North Koreans, but also pose a
threat to regional and international peace and security.

The Council has taken necessary measures in other
cases in the past in which human rights violations
were committed on a scale large enough to constitute
a threat to peace and security. Likewise, the Council
needs to pay due attention to the grave situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In that regard,
we would like to stress the commission of inquiry's
conclusion that many of the violations found in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea have amounted
to crimes against humanity. It also recommended
that the Council play a crucial role in ensuring
accountability, including by considering referral of the
situation in Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
the International Criminal Court.

In addition, my Government takes serious note of
the announcement by the United States Government
on 19 December that North Korea carried out a
cyberattack on Sony Pictures Entertainment and posed
threats to movie theatres, which were also mentioned
in Mr. Zerihoun's briefing earlier. In that regard we
would like to express deep concern over such acts,
which seriously undermine the openness and security
of cyberspace and escalate international tension.

We believe that addressing the North Korean
human-rights issue is vital, not only in promoting human
rights as a universal value, but also in maintaining
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula and in the
region. In that context, the Republic of Korea has been
working together with the international community to
improve the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and to provide assistance
to the North Korean people. We will redouble those
efforts in the coming years. We urge the authorities
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to take
steps to improve their human rights situation. As the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea previously
expressed its willingness to do so, we hope that
Pyongyang will begin engaging with the international
community through human-rights dialogues, including
with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and through technical cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights.

In closing, the Republic of Korea hopes that the
Council will continue to play a Vital role in ensuring
that the North Korean people will eventually be able to
enjoy their inalienable human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

Speaking at this meeting is probably my last duty
in the Council. When we first arrived in the Council
two years ago, one of the first issues we tackled was the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's missile and
nuclear issues. In the Council, my country has dealt
with many issues to which we have not been party,
with a view to contributing to the work of the Council.
Yet, somehow, our term in the Council started, and is
ending, with the North Korean issue.

It must be just a coincidence, but I say that with

a heavy heart, because, for South Koreans, the people
of North Korea are not just anyone. Millions of South
Koreans still have family members living in the North,
even though we never hear from them and even though,
by now, the pain of separation has become a cold fact
of life. We know that they are there, just a few hundred
kilometres away from where we live. We cannot read
the descriptions in the commission of inquiry report
without it breaking our hearts. We cannot watch video
clips from North Korea without flinching at every
scene. We cannot listen to the stories of North Korean
defectors without sharing their tears, without feeling as
if we are there with them experiencing the tragedies.

As we leave the Council with the debate on the
human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, we do so with an ardent wish. The
ardent wish is for the situation to improve for the people
of North Korean, our innocent sisters and brothers,
who are on the street, in the countryside, in the prison
camps, who are suffering for no reason. We only hope
that one day in the future, when we look back on what
we have done today, we will be able to say that we did
the right thing for the people of North Korea, for the
life of every man and women, boy and girl, who has the
same human rights as the rest of us.

