Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would also like
to join those who have expressed satisfaction for the
very comprehensive briefings presented this afternoon
by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, and by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello.

These briefings present a situation that we and the
Council find very serious indeed, particularly with
regard to the human rights violations and the atrocities
which are so well documented, as a result of the
missions to the eastern part of the Congo,

These violations are a clear impediment to peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For that
reason, I think that the proposals contained in Mr.
Vieira de Mello's report deserve our clear support. It is
our View that they should be looked at very seriously
for implementation by the Council. The perpetrators
have to be held to account for their crimes and be
brought to justice. The situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will continue to deteriorate
unless we see a clear movement towards the holding of
the session of the inter-Congolese dialogue and
implementation of the Pretoria Agreement. In that
connection, we also commend the work that has been
carried out by the facilitator to enable this dialogue to
be pursued. It is our view that the Council will have to
send a very clear signal to the belligerents in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of our support with
respect to the rapid implementation of the agreements
signed for the cessation of hostilities.

Finally, we commend the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) for the work that it has been
doing. My Government is a key participant. We have
taken steps to reinforce peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we will continue to do so.
We will continue to play our role by providing our full
support for the implementation of signed agreements
because it is only when we move to the implementation
of agreements that we will see a transformation and a
clear change in the situation which has been presented
to the Council this afternoon.

