Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Gabonese presidency for having convened this debate
and, more broadly, to use Mr. Fedotov's expression, for
highlighting the issue of drug trafficking and organized
crime as a factor leading to emerging and continued
conflict. It is important that the Security Council
monitor closely developments related to this threat.

I thank the Executive Director for his briefing,
which has shed light on the impact of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime on international
peace and security. The 201] World Drug Report,
which was presented yesterday, reminds us once again
that this is a global threat.

Since the last meeting of the Council on this topic
in February 2010 (S/PV.6277), a number of elements
have compounded our fears. Our analysis of the impact
of drug trafficking and organized crime on
international peace and security has deepened, and
credit for that, it must be stressed, is due to, inter alia,
the work being carried out by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The report
entitled The Globalization of Crime: A Transnational
Organized Crime Threat Assessment, which was
published during the special high-level meeting of the
General Assembly of June 2010 (see A/64/PV.96 and A/64/PV.97), showed precisely how drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime threaten governance
and the stability of States.

The income from drug trafficking is a form of
revenue for armed groups which, as we all know,
finances criminal networks that are involved with
various types of illicit trafficking. Some of those
criminal organizations have - as many speakers have
noted - acquired operational capacities that often
greatly surpass the law-enforcement capacities of the
affected countries. The resulting corruption and
violence undermine States' authority, especially those
that are most vulnerable.

Unfortunately, the facts have confirmed those
analyses. The Security Council has again expressed its
deep concern about the continued increase in drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in
Guinea-Bissau. Concerning Afghanistan, we have once
again called for strengthened international and regional
cooperation to address the threat that heroin trafficking
is posing to the international community as a whole.

There is a further concrete example, which was
seen in the conflict experienced by Kyrgyzstan in June
2010 and to which Mr. Fedotov referred. The conflict,
which claimed hundreds of lives and resulted in
thousands of internally displaced persons, had many
causes. But it is clear that one of those causes was
undoubtedly the clashes between various drug-
trafficking networks. In this context, it is essential, as
stated by the Council in its presidential statement
(S/PRST/2010/4) of 24 February 2010, that we pay
greater attention to cross-cutting threats, both in our
assessment of threats and our response strategies.

Here, France would like to pay tribute and to
welcome the setting up by the Secretary-General of a
working group on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, chaired by the UNODC and the
Department of Political Affairs. This is an instrument
that appears highly relevant in connection with a
comprehensive examination of policies on cross-
cutting threats, as part and parcel of United Nations
action in that context.

The threat is all the greater because we are facing
a changing and manifold threat. Criminal groups are
able to adapt easily. They have boundless imagination
and can always find new routes and new methods of
trafficking. If we do not want drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime to always be one step
ahead of law enforcement agencies, we must
strengthen cooperation between States at all possible
levels. That is the goal of the initiative that France
launched within the framework of its Group of Eight
(G-8) presidency, convening a meeting in Paris on
10 May with the participation of 22 ministers from
Europe, America and Africa responsible for combating
drugs, to deal with the fight against trans-Atlantic
cocaine trafficking. That ministerial meeting revealed a
convergence of views on the analysis and the thinking
on the means. The talks opened with the adoption of a
plan of action that led us to hope to be able to act more
consistently. I should like to refer to some elements of
the plan.

First is to improve intelligence capacity by
strengthening sharing and exchanges of information
among States on criminal networks, which know no
boundaries. The second element is to strengthen
maritime cooperation to facilitate the interception of
drug cargoes. The third element, which the Executive
Director also underscored, is to further strengthen
criminal justice mechanisms so that no one can exploit
lawless areas as a rear base for criminal networks. The
final element is to confiscate proceeds so as to deprive
drug traffickers of the product of their crimes.

The issues of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime are dealt with by various United
Nations bodies, including the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice and, more recently, the
Peacebuilding Commission. Each body has a role to
play against a phenomenon that clearly affects the
economy, society and health. But we should never
underestimate the security aspect, and hence the role of
the Security Council. We would like the Council to
remain seized of the issue and for the Executive
Director of UNODC to present regular briefings.

Before concluding, I would like more generally to
express our gratitude to Mr. Fedotov for UNODC's
multifaceted work in very important areas, such as
combating human trafficking, but also strengthening
the national capacities of States that have to fight
piracy. We appreciate that work and the dynamism of
his team here in New York.

