Mr. Heusgen (Germany): A recent study showed
that in 2016, there were 408 million young people who
lived in settings affected by armed conflict or organized
violence. Based on the statement just made on behalf of
our African colleagues, the number could be as high
as 600 million. We know about conflict-stricken places
in Africa, such as Libya, and others like Syria, but
the stories we heard are all about individual fates. We
heard from the young woman from Afghanistan, who
spoke such individual fates. I thank the presidency for
putting this item on the Council's agenda.

At the same time, young people who grow up in
conflict settings, are deprived of economic opportunities
and education and suffer under poor governance and
incompetent police and security services are more likely

to join extremist groups. A recent study conducted by
the United Nations Development Programme, Journey
to Extremism in Africa, shows that very clearly. It
is therefore the responsibility of the international
community and, in particular, of each individual State
to ensure that young people are educated and provided
with economic opportunities so that they can become,
as our colleague from Equatorial Guinea said, positive
agents of peace.

Let me quote one of the first sentences in the
intervention by the Secretary-General's Envoy for
Youth. She said, "young people care about peace".
We heard wonderful statements by Ms. Sofia Ramyar
and Ms. Wevyn Muganda in which they outlined their
activities. I can only encourage them and congratulate
Ms. Ramyar on the courage she shows in Afghanistan,
in a society in which women still do not have the
opportunities they deserve. We are very happy to
hear that, during the most recent peace talks, at least
20 per cent of the participants around the table were
women. Women and young people must have a chance
to participate regularly in peace processes.

The good thing is that there are many examples of
activities in which women participate. Our briefers are
fantastic examples. We all know of Greta Thunberg,
who was able to mobilize 1.6 million people in 125
countries to take a stand and ask world leaders to do
more about climate action. Malala Yousafzai stood
here at the United Nations and inspired us with her
courage and determination. In April, we were briefed
by Nadia Murad (see S/PV.8514), a young woman who
gave a very emotional testimony of the suffering of
Yazidi women in Iraq. She took a stand and fought for
the rights of women and girls. We heard the testimony
of wheelchair-bound Syrian refugee Nujeen Mustapha
(see S/PV.8515), who talked about the fate of young
Syrian refugees.

The voices of young people must be heard and
amplified, and then turned into action. That is a top
priority for Germany. Ms. Sofia Ramyar mentioned
some of the activities Germany conducts in Afghanistan.
In general, we have action plans for the development
activities we regularly include in our policies. There are
several examples. We support a youth cultural centre
in Bamako so that young people are involved in other
activities, instead of becoming extremists. In Lake
Chad, we have a project that supports the survivors of
sexual violence. We support Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in her activities to reintegrate
child soldiers. We support an educational centre for
Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh.

In Germany itself, we try to bring the United Nations
into the classroom. We award a youth peace prize. We
bring youth representatives to the United Nations. We
not only support Afghan youth representatives; we also
bring German youth representatives. I am very pleased
to see two of them here in the Chamber. We have a
so-called youth check, whereby we systematically
consider the effects of legislation on young people and
their future.

I very much thank the Peruvian presidency for
putting this important issue on the Council's agenda.
We should have regular meetings with youth briefers to
update us on crisis settings. We need youth participation
and engagement. We think that it is a crucial factor for
sustaining peace and security.

