Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): First and foremost,
echoing my Government's note issued early this
morning, I would like to express my country's
condemnation and regret regarding the terrible attack
against the United Nations in Abuja. We express our
condolences to the families of the victims, to the
people and Government of Nigeria and, through the
Secretary-General, to the whole United Nations family.
Brazil supports a firm condemnation by the Security
Council of this outrageous act.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing this morning.

11-4815]

I commend your delegation, Mr. President, for

promoting today's debate and for the thoughtful

concept note that you have provided (S/2011/496, 
annex). As one of the largest contributors to

peacekeeping today, India is particularly well placed to
lead a discussion on the future of these operations.

The complexities of the situations that Blue
Helmets encounter demand a constant effort to improve
the functioning of the peacekeeping system. At the
moment, we face two main challenges.

The first challenge is ensuring that peacekeeping
generates a truly sustainable peace. In the current
financial climate, there will always be pressure to do
less or to draw down earlier. However, especially in
times of straitened means, we must break the cycle of
violence and establish the basis for long-term peace.
Renewed attention must be given to early
peacebuilding and the promotion of political solutions
to conflict.

The second challenge is making our troops on the
ground more effective. Our performance can and
should be constantly improved. We must work harder
to build a common understanding of what is expected
of peacekeepers, including through the development of
baseline standards. We also support the Secretariat in
its continued efforts to elaborate more advanced,
scenario-based training, especially regarding the
protection of civilians and response to conflict-related
sexual Violence.

The United Nations must also ensure that
countries willing to contribute have the material
conditions to prepare, train and equip them in an
adequate fashion. This must include both direct support
to troop-contributing countries and cooperation to
increase the capabilities of regional organizations such
as the African Union.

The draft presidential statement to be adopted
today signals the Council's firm commitment to the
guiding principles of peacekeeping: consent of the
parties, impartiality, and use of force only in self-
defence or in defence of the mandate. It also underlines
that peacekeeping is built upon the concept of
partnership and highlights the central role of troop-
contributing countries in that partnership.

Each country makes a distinctive contribution.
The individual capabilities and viewpoints that each
troop-contributing country has to offer must be
recognized and encouraged. The Charter itself
underlines the need for the Council to consult countries
that provide armed forces to it.

Strengthening triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries is therefore very important. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations can
make crucial contributions in this regard.

In Haiti and elsewhere, Brazil has sought to make
its distinctive contribution to peacekeeping. Brazilian
troops, police and military observers are present in
seven peacekeeping missions across four continents.
Brazil's culture and experience have led us to give
particular emphasis to, for example, civil-military
cooperation, military engineering, and pairing military
operations with social action.

Brazil's long-standing commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping reflects our determination to
make a positive contribution to maintaining
international peace and security. The United Nations
can continue to count on Brazil to maintain and enforce
the highest standards of conduct and discipline and to
send the most capable and qualified volunteers to serve
under the United Nations flag.

