Ms. Bangura: I want to thank the Security Council,
under the presidency of the Kingdom of Jordan, for
inviting us to contribute to the efforts to end violence
in the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to
the Permanent Representation of the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg for supporting this initiative.

Exactly one year ago, I briefed the Council
following my visit to the Central African Republic
from 5 to 13 December 2012 (see S/PV.6899). I
noted the horrendous trends of sexual violence and
warned that, if parties were not made to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, the
consequences would be grave. I referred to two joint
communiques, the first signed between the United
Nations and the Government and the other with armed
groups participating in the national steering committee
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
aimed at consolidating the commitment of the parties
to the conflict to prevent crimes of conflict-related
sexual violence. I also recalled that the Central African
Republic was a forgotten conflict, and I warned the
international community to pay particular attention to
the management of regional aspects of the crisis.

Today, the situation in Central African Republic has
deteriorated and many of the worst predictions have,
unfortunately, come true. Communities have taken up
weapons, killing each other based on religious affinity.
Part of the tragedy is that this extreme animosity is
new; previously, those communities lived with each
other, worked side by side and intermarried. Clearly
this could have been prevented.

The participation of children in the commission
of those atrocious crimes may signify the point of
no return, beyond which the cohabitation of certain
communities may be impossible in the near future.
There should be no doubt that the violence in the
Central African Republic will stain the conscience of
its people and the world forever.

At the invitation of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Babacar Gaye, I dispatched Nancee
Oku Bright, my Chief of Staff, to participate in a joint
mission to the Central African Republic, together with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, from 17 to 21 December 2013. The
mission was assisted by a joint technical-level mission
organized in conjunction with the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
from 12 to 23 December, which travelled to Bouar and
coordinated with a fact-finding team deployed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human Rights, during the same period.

The delegation observed the unfolding situation of
violence in the Central African Republic and, in some
cases, eye-witnessed near-lynching incidents and empty
villages with homes still burning. We learned about the
growing strength and organization of armed groups, in
particular anti-Balaka, who have colluded with former
elements of the Forces arme'es centrafricaines (FACA)
and are targeting Muslim combatants and civilians.
Likewise, Muslim civilians have created militias to
protect themselves and have engaged in retaliatory
attacks, reportedly with the aid of Sele'ka and Chadian
elements.

Sexual violence continues to be pervasive in the
conflict. Between January and November 2013, the
United Nations recorded at least 4,530 cases of sexual
violence perpetrated by armed men, largely believed
to be Se'le'ka, in Bangui, Boali, Bossembe'le', Damara,
Mbaiki, Sibut and Prefecture de l'Ouham Pende.
Following the 5 December attacks by anti-Balaka
and FACA elements on military positions in Bangui,
there are reports that conflict-related sexual violence
has continued to be used. The team received reports
of sexual violence used by anti-Balaka and ex-Seleka
militias during house-to-house searches and retaliatory
attacks. The mission also confirmed that forced
marriages, sometimes involving children, were being
contracted mainly by ex-Seleka elements.

There are also numerous allegations that internally
displaced person camps, most of which shelter elements
of armed groups, are the locus of conflict-related sexual
violence. Victims are afraid to come forward to report
these crimes due to the continued presence of elements
of armed groups in communities and the absence of
law and order. I am very disturbed by the finding of
the mission that adequate provisions were not made to
assist victims of sexual violence during the year-long
conflict.

There are, however, some encouraging signs
that the situation could improve. The involvement of
religious leaders - Muslims and Christians alike - in
ongoing initiatives to reconcile communities in the
Central African Republic is commendable and should
be supported by the international community.

The efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
under the able leadership of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Babacar Gaye, in the management
of two delicate political transitions are worthy of high
praise. In that regard, the international community,
which has responded decisively in deploying the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic and the French Operation
Sangaris, deserve commendation. I also welcome the
recent announcement of the European Union of its
intention to deploy a mission to the Central African
Republic. The international community should provide
the necessary support required for the implementation
ofresolutions 2121 (2013) and 2127 (2013).

However, important steps are required to be taken
to stop the violence in the Central African Republic and
limit the damage that is being inflicted on the citizens
of that nation and on the conscience of humanity
as a whole. The historic appointment of the first-
ever female interim President of the Central African
Republic is a source of hope and inspiration for all.
Women's leadership at the highest levels of government
is a powerful symbol of progress and change, but no
leader can steer this transition alone. I therefore urge
the international community to lend her its full support
and cooperation so that she may be a force for unity
and peace in a country that has known too much chaos
and war.

Secondly, there is a need to conduct a comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, which should include the repatriation of
foreign combatants. Immediate steps should also be
taken to improve the protection of civilians. This will
help dissuade the creation of community-based self-
defence groups. Subsequent efforts to build a national
army should take into account the application of human
rights standards, as prescribed in resolutions 2121
(2013) and 2127 (2013).

Thirdly, the international community must
improve the coordination of its efforts in the Central
African Republic. The establishment of simple tools,
such as emergency hotlines and coordinated rapid
response mechanisms, can save lives. International
forces operating in the Central African Republic also
need to be sensitive to the specificities of the conflict,
which requires an in-depth understanding of the
crisis and its causes. This requires the deployment of
specific expertise in civil-military coordination and
the protection of civilians. Furthermore, the proactive
management of regional dynamics could pay rapid
dividends and lay the foundation for solving this crisis.

I congratulate the Council for its attention and the
important steps it has already taken to stop the violence
and ensure accountability for crimes. I commend the
Council for establishing sanctions mechanisms and
a commission of inquiry on human rights violations
in the Central African Republic and call for their
expedited implementation. The importance of
deploying various fact-finding missions by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights cannot
be overestimated.

Finally, I once again call for an increased focus
on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence
by international partners to ensure that services are
available to victims of sexual violence, especially in
places of displacement and isolated locations.

