Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): Let me express our
appreciation for the way in which you, Sir, have been
conducting the work of the Council. This open debate
is yet another important contribution by Tunisia to the
work of the United Nations in the search for peace and
stability in Africa.

We warmly welcome the presence of Minister
Joao Bernardo de Miranda.

We recall that two years ago, in February 1999,
when Brazil was still a member of the Security
Council, the renewal of the United Nations Mission in
Angola was considered amidst a deep sentiment of
frustration and impatience, both with the violations of
the sanctions and with the persistence of war. Today,
the situation has improved. UNITA's capacity to wage
war is almost entirely broken and the sanctions have
contained its war machinery.

We have always held the View that the full
implementation of the sanctions is essential for peace
to be fully restored in Angola. The sanctions regime
outlaws any financial and logistical support for UNITA
and shows that the international community does not
accept Savimbi as a credible interlocutor in the peace
process.

It is our hope that this meeting will provide the
opportunity for the renewal of our commitment to
remain vigilant and to strictly implement the measures
established by the Security Council. We are sure that,
under Ambassador Ryan's leadership, the sanctions
Committee will maintain the path of creativity and
innovation inaugurated by Ambassadors Fowler and
Heinbecker. We thank Ambassador Ryan for his lucid
presentation of the report before us. Brazil is also
encouraged to see that the hard work of the Monitoring
Mechanism is being effective. We commend
Ambassador Larrain and the other members of the
Mechanism for their personal dedication.

The sanctions regime can be fully implemented
only when no armament can reach UNITA's hands;
when UNITA is prevented from making any financial
transaction; when the illegal trade in diamonds is
curtailed; and when the ability of UNITA's
representatives to travel and operate abroad is denied.
We have gone a long way towards severing the links of
UNITA with its sources of material means to continue
with the war.

The situation does not invite complacency,
however, as the potential still exists for a return to
previous levels of breaches of the sanctions. Indeed,
the ever-increasing illicit traffic in arms and diamonds
worldwide encourages greed in those who might be
available to re-supply UNITA with armaments. It is
therefore fundamental that the Council remain firm
with those who persist in violating the sanctions.

The implementation of the sanctions is no special
favour whatsoever to the Government of Angola. It is
an institutional responsibility ofthe Security Council to
strive for the fulfilment of the resolutions it has
adopted. If strict observation of the sanctions means
depriving UNITA of its tools of war, it also means
laying the ground for the long-waited stability and
prosperity in Angola.

Follow-up is a standing need. Brazil hopes that
the Mechanism or any other group mandated with
assessing the implementation of the sanctions, can
proceed with the full support and cooperation of the
international community. Cooperation means taking the
allegations and recommendations made by the
Mechanism seriously and acting upon them. Member
States can also cooperate by assisting in the setting-up
of an appropriate air-traffic control system and, as the
report puts it, by taking action "through concerted law
enforcement".

We commend those States that have understood
the work of the panels and of the Monitoring
Mechanism as a motivational anchor - as a lever for
action aimed at curbing illicit activities.

Sanctions alone cannot resolve the instability in
Angola. The serious humanitarian situation should be
addressed on a priority basis. United Nations bodies, in
their respective areas of competence, should continue
to help the Government of Angola to generate the
necessary environment for humanitarian assistance in
the field. A comprehensive and long-standing solution
to the humanitarian question, however, depends on a
political process that leads to the transformation of
UNITA into a political party committed to democracy,
tolerance and pluralism.

Unfortunately, UNITA's leadership continues to
avoid abidance by its commitments to peace and
national reconciliation. The guidelines for achieving
peace and stability are contained in the Lusaka
Protocol and in the Peace Accords, which have been
agreed upon by the parties and rightly upheld by the
international community and the Security Council.

Sanctions are not the result of an impromptu
decision by the Council. In their background, there is a
history of systematic violation of peace agreements and
Council resolutions by UNITA. Sanctions will work
only if the Council maintains the pressure. The report
of the Mechanism challenges the Council to rise to the
international community's expectations. We hope that
it will lead to renewed efforts.

The history of sanctions in Angola over the past
two years shows that, if there is political will, a lot can
be done. The level of success is encouraging indeed.
We should proceed with our efforts to transform the
sanctions regime in a rare but highly needed example
that determined action by the international community
can indeed make a difference to the lives of people.

