Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The full text of my statement is in electronic
format and is also available at the documentation
counter next to the Conference Officer. I will be reading
from a summarized version of my statement.

I would like first to highlight the relevance of
this debate, as the risk of the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) challenges global security and
human existence itself. Regrettably, the proliferation of
such weapons has not abated, as has been shown by the
actions of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the use of chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq.

In 2004, the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change, entitled "A more
secure world: our shared responsibility" (see A/59/565),
noted that the United Nations was created to prevent
war but acknowledged that the greatest threats would
result from, among other factors, the proliferation and
possible use of nuclear, radiological, chemical and
biological weapons and from terrorism. It stated that
the threats would come from both State and non-State
actors. It also stressed that the technological revolution
offered unprecedented opportunities for cooperation,
and an unprecedented potential for destruction.

That visionary analysis made possible the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), which marked a turning
point in the non-proliferation architecture. The analysis
was subsequently backed by facts, such as the existence
of a smuggling network of nuclear-weapon technology
and evidence of the intentions of terrorist organizations
to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Twelve years
later, that analysis remains valid, while scientific and
technological advances have developed more rapidly
than the response capacity of States. The globalization
of commercial, logistic and economic transactions
makes it harder to control proliferation activities,
and makes it easier for terrorists to take advantage of
transnational criminal networks to access weapons of
mass destruction.

We are not exaggerating when we say that the
main threat is the link between terrorism and weapons
of mass destruction. We must therefore act swiftly,
and the Security Council has a key role to play.
International conventions and the adoption of standards
by the relevant institutions are also important tools.
The statements made today have highlighted some of
the risks we face. I echo the views expressed and will
not repeat them.

Moreover, the specialized reports show a
sustained increase in nuclear and chemical incidents,
whereas biological incidents have been more sporadic.
Nonetheless, the variety of agents used and the rapid
scientific and technological developments in this field
are very worrisome. The biological sector is the area
needing more attention, particularly in the absence of a
relevant organization.

One additional challenge is the lack of a unified
incident database. To prevent, we know that we must
know what it is that we are trying to prevent. To that
end, my delegation proposes that the Security Council
consider the development of such a database.

On the other hand, terrorism has intensified.
Terrorists are more determined than ever to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. Chemical weapons have
been used in Syria and Iraq, and there are reports
warning about the real risk of attacks employing
weapons of mass destruction.

Furthermore, internal instability in countries
and situations of conflict are breeding grounds
for proliferation by terrorist groups, as has been
recognized by the Libyan and the Iraqi authorities,
among others. In that regard, I would highlight the
Council's swift response, through resolution 2298
(2016), to Libya's request to have its chemical weapons
arsenal destroyed, as well as the active role of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting Iraqi authorities
in the implementation that resolution, which is a key
instrument in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of that nature.

The magnitude of the challenges we face is
enormous, but it is not too late. Now is the time to act.
Initiatives such as the Nuclear Security Summits and
the eighth Review Conference of the States Parties to
the Biological Weapons Convention are contributing to
bolstering the international non-proliferation regime.
The Security Council plays a primary role in that
process as the main guarantor of international peace
and security.

I would now like to mention two areas.
First, the conclusions reached by the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) should inform our
thinking on how to reinforce the non-proliferation
system. I believe the work of JIM. has demonstrated
the deterrent power of a system of accountability for
the use of weapons of mass destruction, the need for
States to have reliable inventories and means to protect
their chemical and biological stocks, and the need for
the Security Council to be proactive in crises where
sensitive materials could be improperly used.

We believe it is necessary to reflect on how to
incorporate the capacities to investigate WMD incidents
into current efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation
architecture. We believe we should consider greater
interaction between the preventive role of resolution
1540 (2004), on the one hand, and investigation and
accountability as a both a preventive and deterrent
mechanism, on the other.

Finally, the process of the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) should facilitate an update of the
framework set up by the resolution, with the ultimate
aim of preventing non-State actors from using weapons
of mass destruction, as it is apparent that threats have
not decreased.

Ultimately, this process should allow us, at the very
least, to take five positive steps. First is to reinforce
the capacity of the United Nations to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, while
achieving greater coordination among the components
of the non-proliferation system. Secondly, we should
develop a more focused approach, for example, by
attending more carefully to the biological and chemical
sectors. Thirdly, a more proactive approach to avoid
major crises should be promoted. Fourthly, assistance
to States should be improved. And, finally, we must
achieve greater transparency in the fight against
proliferation, while actively involving civil society.

