Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to express our gratitude for the briefings that
we have just heard from the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
and from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Nicholas Haysom. We
would like to thank them for their very comprehensive
overview of recent events in South Sudan.

Uruguay would like to reiterate its deep-rooted
concern and alarm in light of the political, security,
economic and humanitarian crisis currently ravaging
South Sudan. A month ago (see S/PV.7950), my
delegation recognized the launch of the national
dialogue and the declaration of the cessation of
hostilities by President Salva Kiir. At the time, we
made it clear that there was a need to follow up on both
of those initiatives. Today, we regret to note that there
has been little - practically zero - progress due to the
lack political will of the parties to the conflict, to the
great despair of the population. Despite the unilateral
declaration of the cessation ofhostilities, armed clashes
have continued in the country over the past few months.

Furthermore, the national dialogue process
launched by the Government has been rejected in its
current format by various members of the opposition.
In that connection, it is necessary that the stakeholders
continue to make efforts to ensure that the existing
dialogue process is more inclusive and representative
of all the voices of South Sudan. Only an inclusive
dialogue will achieve the legitimacy necessary to
finding a peaceful resolution to the conflict. It will
be unfeasible, moreover, to launch a credible dialogue
process in a climate of war and fear. The international
community, including the United Nations, the African
Union and regional and subregional bodies, must make
a coordinated contribution to the dialogue process in
South Sudan, in accordance with the relevant conditions
to be legitimate.

We support the observations set out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/505) in terms of
the current structure and mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which
remain relevant and appropriate to the realities on the
ground. On that particular point, Uruguay believes
that UNMISS should continue to have as its highest
priority the protection of civilians and the promotion
of human rights and the submission of reports on
human rights abuses and Violations. In that regard,
we call upon the Government of South Sudan to fully
cooperate with the implementation of resolution 2327
(2016), including with regard to the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force. Any restrictions on
the free functioning of UNMISS should be lifted in
full compliance with the status of forces agreement.
We would like to recall that neither UNMISS nor the
Regional Protection Force are a panacea for resolving
the crisis. Only a genuine, inclusive political process,
complemented by the political will of the parties, will
bring peace to South Sudan.

I wish to conclude by paying tribute to the
courage and dedication of the staff of UNMISS and
to the humanitarian workers who continue to protect
and to provide assistance to millions of victims of
humanitarian disasters, and who do so in a very
dangerous operational environment.

