Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): As a witness to the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia has a special interest in events and
actions which may affect its implementation. The Dayton
arrangement consists of a number of technical provisions
which are undergoing frequent change, but also includes
some basic principles which remain fundamental to the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These principles are:
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single, internationally
recognized State; the decentralization of State apparatus;
and equality among the three constitutive nations. Let me
stress that Croatia cannot support any solution for Bosnia
and Herzegovina that does not fully incorporate these
founding principles. Deviations from these principles can
be both damaging and destabilizing, not only for Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, but also for other States in the
region.

The implementation of the Dayton principles will
ensure that the interests, local customs and way of life of
all three constitutive nations and other national groups in
Bosnia are protected. A disrespect for these principles can
precipitate a polarization and have undesirable
repercussions.

Croatia has taken several steps since January with a
View to strengthening its ties with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. A presidential envoy is working closely
with a Bosnian delegation in respect of special economic,
transit and other bilateral arrangements between the two
countries. Croatia has recently signed an agreement for

 

the construction of a major highway linking Zagreb to
Dubrovnik and passing through Federation territory. This
major infrastructure project will link the whole region to
important transport corridors to the north. The
Government's decision is indicative of the orientation
towards economic cooperation for the mutual benefit of
both countries. I should also mention the recent meeting
held between Foreign Minister Granie and the Prime
Minister of the Bosnian Serb entity, Milorad Dodik. While
welcoming its newfound cooperativeness, Croatia believes
that the Bosnian Serb leadership should be judged by its
deeds and not merely by its words.

Croatia shall continue to place a great deal of
importance upon the organized and dignified return of
displaced persons to their previous places of residence. In
order to help expedite this process the Government has
already adopted Procedures for the Return of Persons Who
Have Left Croatia, which it later supplemented with
Mandatory Instructions. Furthermore, Croatia has signed
bilateral agreements on the voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and both entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In addition,
the movement of persons and goods between Croatia and
both entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina is now open,
thereby encouraging economic and other links between the
two countries and through Croatia to the rest of Europe.

Croatia recognizes the importance the return process
will play in the ongoing stabilization of the region, and it
is for this reason that the Government is currently working
on a comprehensive plan for return, which should be
completed by 25 June. Croatia considers it important to
enunciate the unequivocal right of return of all of its
citizens who wish to exercise it. I should like to recall that
Croatia remains the only State in the region which has
received a significant number of displaced persons from a
group formerly affiliated with the rebel occupying forces.

Regrettably, a consequence of a one-sided approach
with regard to refugee returns has already been reflected in
a loss of confidence in the Dayton Peace Agreement. This
phenomenon is becoming more evident among Bosnia and
Herzegovina Croats. The growing alienation that is being
felt by Bosnian Croats should not be taken lightly by the
international community.

While it has often been pointed out that the key to the
reintegration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a multi-ethnic
state lies in stimulating the return process, little concrete
support has been given to Bosnia and Herzegovina Croats
who have sought to attain this. Principal Deputy High
Representative Klein stated recently that Croats genuinely
feel that they are being treated unequally and
marginalized. The cumulative result of these factors has
led to a situation in which, according to conservative
estimates, Croats, who once constituted 18 per cent of
Bosnia's population, now make up only about 12 per cent.

An additional reason for the disillusionment of
Bosnia and Herzegovina Croats with the international
community is directly related to their perception of the
imbalance in the cases before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Despite recent
positive developments in theatre with the voluntary
surrender or arrest by the Stabilization Force (SFOR) of
some Serb indictees, Bosnia and Herzegovina Croats
continue to make up the vast majority of imprisoned
indictees This continues to be the case even though
Bosnian Croats and Muslims together were
overwhelmingly the victims of war crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This, coupled with the fact that
despite ample evidence no indictments for crimes
committed against Bosnia and Herzegovina Croats are
forthcoming, does not nurture their confidence in the
international community.

Croatia supports the letter and the intent of the draft
resolution before the Council. The continued presence and
active support of the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are essential. Nevertheless, it is the three
constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina that bear
the ultimate responsibility for their mutual relations and
the future of their country. Having this in mind, Croatia
believes that measures to strengthen professionalism
throughout all levels of the public service, as described in
the Secretary-General's report of 10 June 1998, deserve
our unconditional support. The peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - Croats, Muslims and Serbs - should use
the benefit of an international presence for elaborating on
and fully implementing an efficient institutional system in
accordance with the basic principles of Dayton. Such an
eventuality would make redundant the recent practice of
imposing decisions upon the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I should also like to reiterate that, in accordance with
operative paragraph 16 of the draft resolution, members
of the peacekeeping forces in theatre can count on the
continued logistical and other support of Croatia during
the course of their mandate.

 

