The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.

China thanks Secretary-General Guterres and
Mr. Chergui, the Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union (AU), for their briefings. We
greatly appreciate their important efforts to promote
capacity-building in the area of peace and security in
Africa. The peace and security of the world constitute
an indivisible whole. Enhancing African capacities in
the areas of peace and security is in the interests of
the entire international community and represents an
important responsibility of the Security Council.

In recent years, African countries have worked in
unison to address African problems in African ways,
thereby making great contributions to the maintenance
of peace and security in the continent. The twenty-
ninth AU Summit, which just concluded, decided to
preserve the Union's commitment to addressing the
hotspot issues in Africa, to continue to enhance African
capacities in peace and security, to reinforce Africa's
collective security mechanism and to improve the
African peace and security framework. The Summit
also reaffirmed the goal of silencing the guns by 2020.

That important decision demonstrates to the
international community Africa's resolve to strive
for peace and security, and represents an important
contribution to international peace and security, for
which China wishes to express its great appreciation.
Africa is still confronted with multiple challenges in
the areas of peace and security. Some countries of the
region are still plagued by ongoing conflicts or political
instability. Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and Al-Qaida, are infiltrating the
heartland of the continent and are engaging in rampant
terrorist activities in collusion with other terrorist
organizations, such as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab.
Some African countries suffer from sluggish economic
growth and are beset with problems of unemployment,
poverty and refugees.

In the face of those difficulties, Africa is not
fully equipped for the tasks of conflict prevention
and resolution and the maintenance of peace and
security, and AU peace operations are constrained
by inadequacies in financial resources, equipment,
technology and management systems. The international
community must vigorously help Africa solve those
difficulties and support the continent in its capacity-
building in the areas of peace and security.

First, we need to continuously improve the
cooperation partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, as well as other regional and
subregional organizations.

In recent years, the United Nations has carried out
fruitful cooperation with the AU on the questions of
Darfur, the Sudan, Somalia and Mali. In April this year,
the two organizations signed the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security so as to further strengthen
their partnership in this area. We hope that the Joint
Framework will be put into practice at an early date,
and we support the United Nations in continuing, on the
basis of full respect for the leadership of Africa in their
efforts to address the continent's security problems, to
deepen coordination with the AU and other regional
and subregional organizations, and to strengthen
cooperation with Africa in conflict-prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict reconstruction.

The Security Council should increase
communication and coordination with the AU Peace
and Security Council, build mechanisms for joint
planning, decision-making, assessment and briefings,
jointly conduct work in the areas of early warning,
strategic review, mandate design and deployment, and
continuously improve cooperation.

Secondly, we need to effectively support peace
operations conducted by the AU, which represent an
important means for responding to crises in the African
continent and provide a welcome supplement to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The actions taken
by the AU in Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the
Sahel have played an important role in addressing the
crises there. However, AU peace operations are faced
with difficulties in terms of personnel, funds and
resources. Not long ago, the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the AU Commission submitted their
respective reports to the Security Council on support
for AU peace operations, which called on the Council
to consider models of United Nations financing of AU
peace operations.

China supports the United Nations in its efforts to
give positive consideration to the proposals made by
Africa and to provide adequate, stable and sustainable
funds to AU peace operations through assistance
aimed at helping them to establish a sustained, stable
and predictable funding mechanism, so that AU peace
operations can enhance their capacities in mandate
designation, financing, mandate implementation and
management. There is a need to help the AU speed up
the building of a standby force, a rapid reaction force
and an early-warning mechanism. We also need to
deepen cooperation in military technology and expand
the scope of military training.

Thirdly, we need to support Africa in addressing
the root causes of conflicts. Africa's hotspots involve
complex national, ethnic, religious and social tensions.
It is therefore necessary to address both the symptoms
and the root causes. While giving attention to the current
problems of peace and security, we need also to work
to eliminate the source of those problems, particularly
by supporting Africa in its efforts to accelerate
development and reduce poverty, thereby eliminating
the breeding grounds for conflicts and extremism.

The twenty-ninth AU Summit chose youth as its
theme and focused on youth employment and poverty
reduction. The international community should combine
its efforts to help Africa implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development with the Africa Union's
Agenda 2063; start working on infrastructure-building
in the areas of medical care, education, the economy,
trade and interconnectivity; and focus on addressing
the problems facing Africa in such areas as youth,
women and children, refugees and employment with
a View to enhancing socioeconomic development in
African countries.

Fourthly, we need to keep strengthening United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Africa. Africa is the
focus of the Security Council's agenda and of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa must uphold
the basic principles of peacekeeping, respect the
sovereignty of host countries, take into account all
factors, such as the practical needs of host countries,
the security environment and the mandate's goals,
design well-targeted mandates for peacekeeping
missions, and adjust the priorities and the focus of
work for different phases. The Secretariat needs to take
effective measures to improve its command system
for peacekeeping operations in Africa; increase the
efficiency of the missions; take measures to ensure the
safety and security of peacekeepers; enhance early-
warning capacity to deal with security threats; and
provide adequate logistical guarantees.

China has been a firm supporter of the efforts
of African countries to address African issues in
African ways. China has taken an active part in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa, with 2,600
peacekeepers currently serving in Africa. We have
also participated actively in combating piracy and in
escorting commercial ships offthe coast of Somalia. In
2015, the China-Africa Cooperation Forum developed
10 major China-Africa cooperation plans, which cover
economic and social development as well as peace
and security.

In the areas of peace and security, China will
focus on enhancing Africa's peacebuilding capacity,
including supporting the establishment of a standby
force and a rapid reaction force of Africa. Currently,
the relevant work is well under way. The Belt and Road
initiative proposed by China will help Africa realize its
own development and solve the root causes of conflicts.
China will uphold the idea of wide consultations, joint
contribution and benefit-sharing, cooperate closely
with African countries within the framework of the Belt
and Road initiative, continue to help and support Africa
in enhancing its capacity in peace and security, with
a View to realizing an early settlement of the hotspot
issues in Africa and achieving peace, stability and the
development of the African continent.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to conduct its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their written text and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of Peru.

