Mr. Madeira: Let me start by thanking you, Sir,
for inviting me to address the Security Council and
brief it on Somalia. I bring greetings to the Council
from the African Union Chairperson, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.

We are encouraged by the response that the
international community has given to the appeal to
support the drought-stricken population of Somalia.
However, as much as there have been clear shows of
generosity, the chasm is deep and wide and requires
further contributions. We look forward to those
contributions in the very near future.

We are meeting in the aftermath of the London
Conference, which took place last week, barely three
months since President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
emerged victorious from a violence-free and acceptably
fair election, during which power was transferred to
him in an exemplary and peaceful manner. That is
a major feat of unique significance, if we take into
account that Somalia is still a country plagued by
insurgency, violent extremism and terrorism. The
fact that the London Conference was able to come
up with decisions whose implementation will be a
game-changer in Somalia, with a decisive and lasting
impact on the overall outlook of the country in the near
future, was due to the immense preparatory work and
strategic decisions taken by the leadership of Somalia,
in particular President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
and his Government in all important areas of endeavour
in the country.
Indeed, the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs,
in coordination with other line ministries under the
Federal Parliament, have embarked on a consultative
programme in preparation for an aggressive push
forward in the country's political and constitutional
reforms ahead of the 2020 or 2021 one-person-one-vote
universal suffrage.

During the period under review, the Federal
Government of Somalia hosted Galmudug authorities
and Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama'a political dialogue and
negotiations in Mogadishu. That is an important step
forward and a clear indication that sustained efforts
towards reconciliation are and should continue to be
a permanent feature on the road towards building a
peaceful and stable Somalia.

On 16 April, the Federal Government of Somalia
held the first national consultative forum, which was
chaired by the President of the Federal Republic of
Somalia himself. It was attended by the Speaker of
the national Parliament, the Prime Minister and the
regional leaders of Puntland, Jubaland, South West,
HirShabelle and Galmudug states. In that encounter,
these Somali leaders reached a historic political
agreement to integrate regional and federal forces
into a coherent national security architecture capable
of gradually taking on full responsibility for the
security of the country. The leaders agreed upon the
national security policy and the guidelines to follow.
Its implementation was spearheaded by the national
security council, which is chaired by the President of
the Federal Republic of Somalia. They further agreed
on establishing regional security councils, which would
be chaired by the regional State leaders.

This approved national security architecture is
an unheard of milestone in the Somalia of the past
26 years. Much as the road ahead is still bumpy and
tricky, these encouraging developments put Somalia at
another level, and the country is clearly on the verge of
opening a new page in its history. We are galvanized
by the new leadership of Somalia, propelled to power
through a huge popular mandate and committed to
better governance, inclusive politics, the strengthening
of State institutions, the delivery of services to the
people, promoting transparency and respect for
human rights, fighting corruption, creating jobs and
building a strong partnership to degrade and contain
Al-Shabaab terrorists.

The April agreement on the Somalia national
security extension for the building of affordable,
inclusive, effective and professional Somali security
forces, based on a collective vision and political
agreements between the Federal Government of
Somalia and Somalia's regional federal member states,
combined with other security policy instruments
adopted by the previous Administration, are solid
building blocks in the construction of a strong barrier
against insecurity and instability. However, military
actions, law enforcement and intelligence operations,
though important and necessary, cannot succeed alone.
There is a need to continue to build a strong partnership
for peace between the Government of Somalia and
the Somali people through their community leaders,
religious denominations, business communities and
academia, youth organizations and civil society in
general in the pursuit of a shared national agenda
in which everyone wins something and no one
loses everything.

We applaud President Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed Farmajo's decision to extend amnesty
and encourage those Somalis who have fallen into
the hands of Al-Shabaab to renounce violence and
join their brothers and sisters in the rebuilding of
the country and in the creation of a better future for
themselves and for their families. These and other
reconciliation approaches adopted by the Government
are as important as the military operations undertaken
by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and by the Somali national security forces in reducing
the number of recruits to Al-Shabaab. We can only
support President Abdullahi in this, as we, like him,
believe that it is the continued and coherent pursuit of
this multipronged comprehensive approach to security
that will eventually deliver lasting peace and stability
to Somalia and to the East African region in general.
We therefore call on all national and international
partners to help build the infrastructure that President
Abdullahi will need to accommodate those Somalis
who heed his appeal and are ready to renounce violence,
reintegrate into society and be constructive citizens of
their country again.

Securing the main supply routes and transforming
them into violence-free enclaves - where a
concomitant delivery of safety, security, governance,
jobs, trades and economic and social amenities and
other services to the populations living along these
arteries can take place - is an important way to extend
the State presence throughout the country and bring
the Government closer to the people and reduce their
exposure and vulnerability to Al-Shabaab's violent
extremist ideological narrative.

The Somalia national security architecture is a
medium- to long-term project. There is a need to provide
for an approach that also takes charge and addresses
Somalia's current and short-term security concerns. To
this effect, Somalia needs to have well-trained, well-
equipped and readily available forces to perform these
duties and operate alongside AMISOM. to continue to
hold liberated towns and cities, secure the main supply
routes and undertake joint or coordinated offensive
operations to continue to disrupt, degrade and contain
Al-Shabaab militants. The Guulwade plan with regard
to Somali national army troops, in which the United
Nations has invested and is currently supporting to the
tune of 10,900 troops should be factored in and be made
part of the force that should, as of now, continue to take
on and confront Al-Shabaab and degrade it while the
implementation of the national security architecture is
taking place.

The towns of Jamaame, Jilib, Saacow and Bu'ale,
along the Juba corridor, and that Harardhere in the
north-eastern coastline are today AI-Shabaab's holding
grounds, bomb and manufacturing bases, planning
centres, military equipment and reception and holding
sites, transit points and training areas. To enhance
security in Mogadishu and properly protect the major
population of Mogadishu's centres throughout the
country, Juba Corridor II Operation and a north-eastern
coastline offensive must take place. They should be
allowed to take place. We should concur for them to
take place. Partners must come clear on where they
stand on the liberation of these cities.

The conclusion that the risk of grave violations
being committed during the Juba Corridor II Operation
is generally high needs to be revised and be based on
objectively proven and observable assumptions. As
the troops to be committed in this offensive will have
passed through pre-certification on human rights due
diligence policy before the offensive begins, there is no
intention of carrying out this operation with individuals
with proven, recorded criminal records. We intend to
bring decent people to this operation. Therefore, we
need to be clear when we say that the probability of
human rights violations is high. We need to know how
we came to that conclusion, since we have not seen
people in those regions and we have not counted the
people who are going to take this offensive and nobody
knows them yet.

Yesterday, on 16 May, the African Union (AU) and
United Nations joint review process commenced. This
exercise aims at providing details on what needs to be
in place and done between now and the date AMISOM
is scheduled to commence the drawdown to allow
the Somali national security forces to progressively
assume the security responsibilities of the country. We
are happy that we have come to an agreement that this
should no longer be an exercise between the African
Union and the United Nations alone as it used to be in
the past.

The full participation of, and interaction with, the
Somali authorities and stakeholders in the spelling-out
oftasks, functions, resources, role players, coordination
and other requisite activities during the review is of
critical importance. The Somali Government must be
fully involved in the AU, United Nations, AMISOM
review exercise, and they should take the lead. They
should tell us what they want to see happen: how many
resources; what type of resources they would want to
see in place; how much training they want the military
to have, so that we can effectively implement what they
want and not what we want them to want.

Until the drawdown commences and the exit
process is completed, it is important that AMISOM
be provided with regular, predictable and dependable
funding and the requisite logistical support, force
enablers and force multipliers that would allow it to
successfully accomplish its mandate side by side with
the Somali national security forces.

Years of uncoordinated individual partner
involvement in support of the Somali national security
forces and AMISOM. have yielded very limited results.
It is important that the Security Council explore the
possibility of enhancing the output facilitated by this
bilateral assistance by bringing some order, coherence,
coordination and direction in the way partner support
is provided and delivered to both AMISOM. and, in
particular, to the Somali national security sector. That
would ensure that its content and quality is adequate, fit
for purpose and complementary to the efforts to achieve
common, specific Federal Government of Somalia and
AMISOM. stabilization objectives.

