Mr. Stubb: I am very glad to be here today. I
shall be speaking in my capacity as Chairman of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), and if I may, I will deal with three main
points today.

To begin with, ifI were to give a thesis for my
briefing today it would be that, to put it very simply,
the United Nations and the OSCE are partners in
destiny. I would like to highlight two ways in which
2
that the United Nations and the OSCE have cooperated
during the Finnish chairmanship of the OSCE.

First, we want to promote the implementation of
all United Nations principles, conventions and other
instruments established at the global level. So, in may
ways one could perhaps argue that the OSCE is in the
business of trying to help support all of those
principles that have been underlined here in the United
Nations.

The second way in which I see us cooperating is
that the OSCE early warning, crisis management and
post-conflict activities are crucial components of the
United Nations-based international order. So, in many
ways you could say that the United Nations and the
OSCE are both in the business of preventing and
resolving conflicts. Thus, we live in a kind of
symbiosis, and if one was to simplify, and I say that as
a European - the United Nations has a global reach
with its 192 Members, while the European Union has a
very regional reach with its 27 members i the OSCE
fits quite comfortably between those two organizations
with its 56 members, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok.

Today, I shall deal with three challenges that I
believe the OSCE and the United Nations share, and
those three challenges are, of course, regional. The first
is Georgia, the second Kosovo and the third
Afghanistan. Having dealt with those three issues
briefly, I will draw on two lessons that I think we can
learn from the recent crisis. So, I will start off with
Georgia.

In my capacity as the Chairman of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, I
would never have thought that the chairmanship would
have become as exciting at the end of the day as it has.
Of course, that had to do with the events that took
place at the beginning of August in Georgia.

What was our aim as Chair? In many ways it was
to do three things: first of all, to broker a ceasefire, and
I think we succeeded in that fairly fast, within five
days. Here, I would like to pay tribute to the work done
by French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and
French President Nicolas Sarkozy in their capacities as
Chairmen of the European Union. I would also like to
pay tribute to all those parties engaged in trying to
broker that ceasefire, including President Medvedev,
Prime Minister Putin, Foreign Minister Lavrov and
08-5232]
President Saakashvili. It was a joint effort, we did it in
five days and that was the key aim.

The second aim of the OSCE has been to
supervise the withdrawal of the troops. Here, I think
we are, so as to say, getting there with what I would
call the Sarkozy II plan, with an aim of having the
troops withdrawn by 10 October.

The third aim has been to give an international
presence to the conflict and the crisis, and I think the
OSCE had an instrumental role in that, because we
were the only organization that had the infrastructure
to put military monitors on the ground and, after
negotiations, we were able to get 20 monitors in to
areas adjacent to South Ossetia. I think the role has
been crucial in monitoring the ceasefire and we have
done that from the beginning. There are two
negotiations that are still ongoing on that particular
subject of the military monitors. One is on an
additional 80, who would be sent to areas adjacent to
South Ossetia. I am cautiously hopeful that with the
constructive participation of all members of the OSCE,
we can get them in.

The other one is about the eight military monitors
who had an OSCE mandate in Tskhinvali in South
Ossetia. There, things have not gone as planned, but let
me stress that I think that we will be able to start
within the next few days if the security of the monitors
can be guaranteed on missions going from Georgia to
Tskhinvali. I would really like to pay tribute to the
efforts of my colleague, Sergey Lavrov, in trying to
help the eight monitors enter the region, so we can get
what one could call objective information. So, I am
cautiously hopeful on both of those accounts, on the 80
and on the eight for South Ossetia.

I have made two visits to Georgia, to Tbilisi,
together with Foreign Minister Kouchner, first just
when the war began. That was the ceasefire part. Then,
the second visit took place a few days afterwards, when
I went to see and observe how the ceasefire was being
implemented.

Another important step from the European Union
side has also taken place, which is that in the EU we
have decided to put in an additional 200 monitors. So,
to sum up, on Georgia and on what is going on right
now, we will continue our efforts in military
monitoring.
Now, where do I see the United Nations as having
a role in the package of stabilizing Georgia? I think the
role of the United Nations is in long-term stability, and
I am convinced that the Security Council should have a
key role, as in all questions concerning international
peace and stability. What I have proposed is the
formation of an international platform made up of three
key organizations - the United Nations, the EU and
the OSCE - as well as the stakeholders in the conflict.
That platform should be convened as soon as possible.
I believe a good starting point is 15 October, when an
international conference is scheduled to be held in
Geneva. I am also looking forward to cooperating with
the future Chairs of the OSCE - Greece, Kazakhstan
and Lithuania - as well as other OSCE partners.

That concludes what I wanted to say on the crisis
in Georgia. I think we are moving in the right
direction, but all of us need to continue in international
engagement.

The second issue I wanted to raise is Kosovo,
which I shall do very briefly. All the OSCE-
participating States have supported continued OSCE
engagement in Kosovo. We have good cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE in the area.
Under resolution 1244 (1999), the OSCE is an essential
pillar of United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We have our largest operation there, with 800 mission
members on the ground throughout all of Kosovo's
municipalities, and I think that helps build strong local
institutions. We will continue those efforts and hope
that the transition from UNMIK to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) will be less
painful than it has been so far.

The final substantive issue I wanted to deal with
is Afghanistan. I will do that very briefly as well. The
importance of effective international action holds true
in several parts of the OSCE area, especially
Afghanistan. Afghanistan is an OSCE partner for
cooperation and shares common borders with three of
our participating States. Many more are engaged inside
the country in international frameworks such as the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF). So clearly the OSCE has a strategic interest in
the stabilization of the country.

At the last ministerial meeting, in Madrid last
November, OSCE Foreign Ministers pledged to
intensify OSCE engagement with Afghanistan. I hope
that that will continue, not least in the areas related to
policing and the fight against drug trafficking.

We will continue our efforts in Afghanistan. The
United Nations and the OSCE both have important
roles. The United Nations is the main coordinator of
international involvement in Afghanistan, and I am
sure we can count on its support. All OSCE initiatives
will be conducted in full cooperation with UNAMA
and other entities, because it is in all of our interests to
have a more stable situation on the ground in
Afghanistan.

I will conclude with some final thoughts or
lessons that I, in my capacity as Chairman-in-Office of
the OSCE, have drawn from recent events.

First of all, I think that recent events have
highlighted the fragility of the rules-based international
order that the United Nations, with the support of the
OSCE, strives to build. In that sense, the crisis in
Georgia has underlined the critical importance of
cooperation between the two organizations.

I draw two lessons from this. First, there really is
no such thing as a frozen conflict. I think it is time to
banish that term from the political lexicon and act
quickly to settle any outstanding conflicts in our
region. Let us forget all the talk about frozen conflicts
and try instead to resolve them.

The second lesson I draw is that we should
redirect the work of our international security
structures in the spirit of effective multilateralism so
that they provide genuine security and stability to
member countries and their inhabitants. I think that
both the OSCE and the United Nations should be a part
of such long-term efforts. On the part of the OSCE, I
would argue that we need to start those efforts at the
Helsinki ministerial meeting in December.

In summary, we are partners in destiny. I think
there are a few key ways in which we can cooperate.
We should focus a lot on Georgia, Kosovo and
Afghanistan and the lessons that we can draw from all
this. There should be no more frozen conflicts, and let
us focus on multilateral efforts.

