Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all
to thank the Republic of Korea for having convened
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Director for International
Law and Cooperation of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their informative presentations.

The topic of today's debate is a primary concern
of my delegation for reasons easy to imagine. That is
why my delegation welcomes the interest repeatedly
expressed by the Security Council in discussing
the protection of civilians and in making it a central
element of its peacekeeping missions.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, more
than in other conflict zones across the world, thousands
of people fall victim to war every day. With more than
8 million people killed in 15 years of successive wars
inflicted on my country, the massacre of civilians in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo is one of
the grimmest spectacles that humankind has seen
since the Second World War. Furthermore, the war
situation currently prevailing in the eastern part of
my country, more specifically in North Kivu province
and its surrounding areas, has given rise to recurring
violence and new forms of criminal activity, whose
primary victims are women and children. The most
frequent violations, usually perpetrated with complete
impunity by rebel groups and their external backers, are
killings, systematic rape, kidnappings, sexual torture,
unlawful arrests and detentions, forced displacement,
the enlisting of children and extreme forms of torture
and cruelty.

As the Governor of North Kivu province has
underscored, there are approximately 3 million
internally displaced persons and almost 500,000
Congolese have been forced to cross the borders.
Frequently without assistance, those blameless men,
women, children and elderly people die, some on the
road, others in their camps, often with no effective
support.

There is flagrant evidence of grave human rights
violations committed against the children in North Kivu
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23). The Council has
well-documented proof that one of its members, in this
case Rwanda, is providing direct military assistance
to those M23 terrorists. It facilitates the recruitment
of combatants to the movement, incites and assists
the desertion of soldiers of the Congolese Armed
Forces, provides the M23 with weapons, munitions and
intelligence, and gives it political advice.

From the legal standpoint, we would note the
progress made in the area of international law, in
particular international humanitarian law, international
criminal law and human rights legislation. Be they
nationals or foreigners, the responsibility of the
perpetrators of such actions must be clearly established
in accordance with the basic norms of international
humanitarian law.

To that end, the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949, which enshrine respect for the individual
during conflicts and advocate that people not directly
participating in hostilities be spared the suffering of
war. They prohibit in particular inhuman treatment,
hostage-taking, massacres, torture, summary
executions, deportation, illegal detention, looting and
the wanton destruction of private property. Attacks
against civilians and their property have been prohibited
since the adoption in 1977 of the first two additional
Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Protocol
I introduces the basic principle of the distinction
between civilians and combatants and civilian property
and military objectives.

Despite all that progress, civilians throughout
the world have become the primary victims of armed
conflict and are frequently subjected to all kinds of
abuse. It is nevertheless encouraging to learn that
for some time the Council has explicitly pursued a
protection of civilian agenda that includes respect for
international humanitarian law, operational issues
pertaining to peacekeeping operations and access to
humanitarian assistance. The Secretary-General's
call for increased access for humanitarian assistance
and the establishment of a working group entrusted
with examining ways to translate the Council's
commitment to protection into tangible results for
populations in danger remains very relevant. It is also
interesting to note that in December 2009, the Council
recognized in resolution 1894 (2009) that it should set
up comprehensive operational guidelines on the tasks
and responsibilities of peacekeeping troops for the
protection of civilians.

In conclusion, my delegation calls for the full
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in that regard, in particular those
urging the Security Council to systematically include
provisions for the strict respect of international
humanitarian and human rights law in all its resolutions
authorizing peacekeeping missions and other United
Nations missions. We also call for the implementation
of the recommendation ordering the referral of grave
cases of rape and other forms of sexual violence
to the International Criminal Court or for targeted
sanctions against States and non-State armed groups
that commit or support such crimes to be considered.
We urge that the aide-memoire on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/25, annex)
be applied consistently during deliberations on the
mandates of peacekeeping missions and other United
Nations missions, in draft resolutions and presidential
statements and in the Council's work.

