Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): It is
with a sense of disbelief that we find ourselves here
today - disbelief at the situation that developed before
our eyes with the Russian Federation's determination to
annex Crimea.

Nothing is lacking from those things that we hoped
were relegated to the vaults of history: the military
maneuvres at the borders, the henchman who yesterday
was no one and today has suddenly been designated
President of the Crimea, the occupation denied against
all evidence, the torrents of propaganda, and now the
charade of a referendum that is not only illegal, rushed
and without electoral campaigns but is reduced to a
choice between two ways of saying yes. Crimeans will
not even be able to express their will.

The violation of international law is so obvious at
this point that one almost feels pity at seeing Russian
diplomacy - so formalistic, so finicky in its respect for
proprieties and its invocation of texts - struggling to
find a legal basis for the coup. One day, they brandish an
alleged letter from the Head of State who is on the run,
and only an unsigned version of that letter is released,
disappearing as quickly as it appeared. The next day,
they recall the issue of Kosovo. Finally, after what was
probably a feverish search through the archives, they
even exhume a decolonization case from 1976: the
question of Mayotte. They are trying so hard to use all
available means in Moscow that they do not want to
see that in the latter example, Russia having taken the
opposite position from the one it is taking today, that
shaky comparison - even if one accepts it - proves
that Russia was wrong in 1976 or is wrong now, in 2014.
It must choose.
I think, however, that my Russian colleague and I
will find common ground in a key sentence from the
speech of the Soviet Permanent Representative in 1976
on the question of Mayotte, who said:

"Any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and the integrity
territory of a country is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations." (S/PVI888, p. 8).

In reality, nothing will come of those pathetic
efforts - certainly not the basis for any legal
reasoning. The vetoing of a text that is nothing more
than a reminder of the basic principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations is clear proof
of that. The headlines can be simple: Russia has vetoed
the Charter of the United Nations.

In desperation, therefore, Moscow invokes the
pretext of protecting Russians who are supposedly
threatened in Crimea. I am sure that neighbouring
countries that host Russian minorities appreciate this
right to interfere that Russia has suddenly claimed for
itself . But again, they are out of luck. There has been
no violence, as confirmed by journalists and noted
by the High Commissioner on National Minorities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and no trace, as confirmed by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
of the hundreds of thousands of refugees that were
predicted. Where have they gone? Do not worry; they
never existed.

The supposed right does not exist, and there is no
violence taking place. We therefore look to history.
Crimea was Russian from 1783 to 1954. What does that
mean? Will we take out our history books to review our
borders or challenge or defend them? What date will we
go back to? After all, Crimea was Russian for 170 years
but a vassal of Turkey for three centuries. We know
only too well that anything can be justified by history,
particularly the unjustifiable.

Out of all ofthis - their confused flurry of activity,
the speeches that are denied as soon as they are given
and the arguments that are forgotten as soon as they are
made i only force remains. Basically, it is simple: the
Russian veto today is telling us that might is right.

Well, no. Force cannot override the law. That would
be too serious and too dangerous for every Member
State. Our duty is to raise the fragile barrier of law
against the brutal nature of international relations,
which has led us into two world wars and has cost, as of
this very moment, thousands of innocent lives in Syria
and elsewhere. To accept the annexation of Crimea
would be to give up everything that we are trying to
build in this Organization. It would make a mockery of
the Charter of the United Nations. It would once again
make the sword the supreme arbiter of disputes.

The vast majority of Member States will prove, by
their refusal to recognize the annexation of the Crimea,
that they know that the territorial integrity of one of
them is the guarantor of the territorial integrity of all.
There are minorities all over the world. What would
become of us if they became the pretext for any kind
of adventure to be undertaken by an ambitious and
enterprising neighbour? What will be the next Crimea?
The annexation goes beyond Ukraine. It affects us all.

The veto should be a defeat for Russia alone. It
should not take us with it. We must remain steadfast in
our commitment to the principles it embodies, which
are at the heart of the Charter of the United Nations, are
our best defence against the return of a past in which
Russian aggression against Ukraine emerges.

