Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
I would like to commend Lithuania for having
convened this open debate on the important theme
of the protection of civilians, as well as the speakers
who have briefed us on the issues and challenges
encountered in the protection of civilians. I would
also like to acknowledge the outstanding work of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
of the peacekeepers who risk their lives for the cause of
peace and security.

I will confine my comments to Kazakhstan's
experiences of deployment in Iraq and other
interventions, as well as our future deployment in
the coming months to the missions in Liberia, C6te
d'Ivoire, Western Sahara and Haiti.

While it is clear that the maintenance of peace and
the protection of civilians is the joint responsibility and
task of the Security Council, DPKO, the Department
of Field Support, troop- and police-contributing
countries, peacekeepers themselves on the ground and,
most important, the host Government, it is often found
that adequate cooperation and operational clarity on
the implementation of mandates have not always been
possible. That is due to the differing perceptions and
geopolitical standpoints of members of the Security
Council, the parties involved in the conflict and the
players on the ground. There is therefore an imperative
need for a clear understanding, interpretation and
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) through
greater cohesion among mandates, intentions and
expectations, especially if civilian protection requires
the use of force.

Recently, the multifaceted nature of present-day
peacekeeping operations, with political, military, human
rights and humanitarian components and mandates and
operating under the aegis of a single United Nations
mission, is a welcome development and leads to positive
synergies and ease in decision-making on enhancing
the protection of civilians. On the other hand, we run
the risk of blurring roles and responsibilities, especially
between humanitarian work, judicial investigation and
the provision of security through an armed presence,
all of which require our attention as we move forward.

We are pleased to note the efforts of DPKO, which,
together with the International Committee of the Red
Cross, humanitarian aid agencies and the countries
contributing troops and police personnel, in preparing
a conceptual framework to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various components ofa mission.
Moreover, when United Nations forces are drawn into
an armed conflict, it is obvious that international
humanitarian law should govern military operations,
to which all parties to the armed conflict, including
United Nations forces, should adhere.

Civilian protection is complex and requires
multidimensional provisions and different competencies
and skills for each vulnerable group: women and
children subject to horrific atrocities; child soldiers;
survivors displaced by force or, for lack of choice,
taking refuge in camps where they are often defenceless
against armed attacks and harassment; victims maimed
by mines and other indiscriminate munitions; and
those dying of the indirect effects of armed conflict,
such as disease, malnutrition and famine. Each mission
therefore must bring together many different actors over
time, from planning to execution, including the active
participation of women at each stage of the process.

Maintaining relations with host countries is a
critical issue, particularly in situations where the host
Government bans peacekeepers from entering the
country or decides to expel peacekeepers before they
have completed their mandates, thus jeopardizing the
safety of the civilian population.

My delegation recalls with great appreciation the
operational innovations in a number of missions, such as
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite the
limited resources and hazardous security environments.
Those operations have increasingly used and developed
mobile operational bases, quick- response units and
early-warning systems to anticipate, prevent or deter
violence against civilians or to rapidly intervene to stop
it. Such examples are worthy of replication.
The issues ofmission size, troop strength, adequate
resources and equipment, especially for remote areas,
the expertise of personnel and their commitment and
cooperation among the parties are factors that lend
credibility to any mission - the greater their extent,
the greater the effectiveness to protect civilians against
armed attacks by Government forces or rebels. States
Members of the United Nations are therefore urged
to make larger contributions and to provide capacity-
building and technical assistance for peacekeeping
operations and to enable the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office to fully discharge
their functions.

Kazakhstan, in bidding for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2017 to 2018, is
committed to working with the international community
in supporting and strengthening the capacity of DPKO
and the Security Council to fulfil their peace and
security mandates.

