Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the convening of this quarterly debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It also thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing.
Regarding the sensitive issue of the question of
Palestine and its repercussions for regional and global
stability, we wish to share three concerns.

First, with respect to the escalation of violence,
we note with concern the rigidity of the positions, the
lack of dialogue and the intensification of hostilities,
which constitute a highly volatile environment
with unpredictable consequences. The situation is
particularly unsettled in Gaza due to violence, which
we regret. Peru recognizes the Palestinian people's
rights and freedoms of association and expression,
and stresses that they must be exercised in a peaceful
manner. In this regard, we emphasize that Hamas and
the leaders of the demonstrations in Gaza should refrain
from provoking incidents near the Israeli fence.

Peru strongly condemns the firing of rockets and
incendiary devices that endanger the lives of civilians
and cause material damage, levelling thousands of
hectares of crops. At the same time, we emphasize
that, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, the legitimacy of Israel's self-defence depends on
its adherence to the principles of proportionality and
precaution. In this regard, we emphasize that lethal
force must be used only as a last resort, under imminent
threat of death or serious injury. Peru regrets and
strongly condemns that the victims of Israeli military
action include numerous minors, journalists, health-
care personnel and civilians not involved in the conflict.

We reject the generalization according to which the
entire Gaza population belongs to the ranks of Hamas.
The scenario is extremely complex and sensitive,
and requires the leaders of both parties to act with
moderation and commitment to peace, with respect
for international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. This calls for, among other things, a halt to
and reversal of settlement activities, the demolition of
buildings and evictions in the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, which undermine the possibilities
of a two-State solution and contravene the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016).

Secondly, with respect to the humanitarian
situation, Peru regrets the progressive deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Gaza and underlines
the urgency of addressing its root causes. In that light,
we consider the recovery of control of Gaza and its
border crossings by the Palestinian Authority to be a
priority. We also consider necessary the cessation of
measures of retaliation against the civilian population,
such as the reduction of the Palestinian fishing area in
Gaza's waters or restrictions on the flow of fuel and
construction materials through the Kerem Shalom
pass. We welcome the recent Israeli announcement in
this regard.

We highlight the Mr. Mladenov's concrete efforts
to alleviate the suffering of civilians, reduce tensions
and prevent escalation, as well as the decision of the
Egyptian Government to arrange the opening in May
of the Rafah crossing, which is vital to millions of
Palestinians. We also highlight the important work
carried out by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in the
provision of essential services, as well as the need to
provide it with stable financing to overcome its current
deep financial crisis.

Thirdly, on the political solution, Peru believes
that the necessary relief of human suffering must
be complemented by the renewal of the parties'
commitment to the peace process and the urgent
resumption of negotiations leading to a solution based
on two States and the 1967 borders.

I wish to refer briefly to the situation in Yemen, and
specifically to developments in the port ofAl-Hudaydah.
The situation, which constitutes the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today, remains highly volatile and of
great danger to the civilian population. We emphasize
that there is no military solution to the conflict and
that the humanitarian consequences of an attack on
Al-Hudaydah - the main port through which most
of the food, medicine and fuel consumed in Yemen
arrives, and which is home to hundreds of thousands
civilians - are highly unpredictable.

We therefore welcome the ceasefire arranged by the
coalition, and we hope that it will become definitive.
We express our recognition and full support for the
dynamic and outstanding diplomatic action carried out
by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, with all the parties
concerned, to bring positions closer and avoid further
escalation. We believe that these efforts, starting with
the ceasefire arranged in Al-Hudaydah and an eventual
settlement on the management of that important port,
can and should be complemented by an authentic
commitment on the part of all parties, in good faith
and without preconditions, to the inclusive political
solution that Mr. Griffiths has been promoting and, in
short, to sustaining an agreement that puts an end to the
conflict and the humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of Yemenis.

