Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefing given by Ms. Helen La Lime. We
also wish to welcome the presence of Ambassador
Denis Regis, Permanent Representative of Haiti.

Peru has closely followed developments in
Haiti - a friendly country of our Latin American and
Caribbean region - and supports the vital role of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in strengthening national institutions mandated to
guarantee security, the rule of law and human rights
in the country, in line with the targets and indicators
proposed by the Secretary-General to drawdown the
Mission in a sustainable manner.

The earthquake of 6 October reminded us of Haiti's
high vulnerability to natural disasters. We reiterate
our condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti in the wake of that tragedy. While acknowledging
the Government's efforts to prevent the risks that such
disasters entail, including its fight against cholera
and food insecurity, we underscore the need for
the international community to continue providing
humanitarian aid to this country.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the lack of progress in key areas. The climate
of instability and social tensions make the work of the
Mission difficult. We are alarmed by the recurrence of
violent protests which, in recent months, have resulted
in the unfortunate loss of human life.

The strengthening of the operational capacities of
the Haitian National Police should be reflected in more
effective action against the proliferation ofarmed gangs.
It is necessary to prevent protests from degenerating
into episodes of violence. To that end, we highlight the
important programmes aimed at reducing community
violence and in particular the work of mobile teams and
the development of quick-impact projects. We consider
it important to incorporate the gender approach and
include youth in the design and implementation of such
projects, and to ensure their adequate funding.

We believe that the implementation of the
strategic development plan for the police should
serve to strengthen respect for oversight procedures
and capacities and facilitate access to justice, when
appropriate. Reports of abuse and corruption among
bad apples in the police force must be duly investigated.
In that connection, we reiterate our concern about the
persistence of prolonged pre-trial detentions, as well as
prison overcrowding, which has led to an unacceptable
number of deaths in prison. We encourage the full
implementation of the law on legal aid and reiterate the
need to complement it with other essential pieces of
legislation that remain pending, including with respect
to the penal code, the code of criminal procedure
and the law on prisons. We also believe it necessary
to overcome problems within the Ministry of Justice
and appoint more judges in order to facilitate access
to justice.

The fight against corruption is a key element
in strengthening the rule of law and building the
confidence of the population in its institutions. In
this regard, we note the announcement to create an
independent commission to monitor the investigations
of the PetroCaribe case. We hope to have more
information on this in the next report.

Bearing in mind that the Mission's withdrawal is
scheduled for 15 October 2019, coinciding with the
elections scheduled for that same month, we consider
it important to provide the required electoral assistance
and that the Haitian authorities move forward with the
adoption of the electoral law and updating the electoral
rolls. We also consider it important that the transition
take into account the evolution of security conditions
and the overall capacity of Haitian institutions to
guarantee stability. Even if the National Police is able
to maintain internal order without the support of the
Mission, the impact on the other areas of support must
be considered, particularly in the area ofthe rule of law.

We wish to highlight the important role played by
the Mission and the United Nations country team in
all of these pending tasks, as well as the coordination
role of the Secretariat in the framework of the reform
process of the Organization's peace and security pillar.
In this context, we believe it is important to strengthen
cooperation with the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community.

I conclude by reiterating Peru's commitment to
continuing to support the efforts of the Government
and the people of Haiti to forge sustainable peace.
