Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Government of Haiti, I would like to
commend His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President
of the Republic of Poland, for his presence here earlier
today and for the initiative taken by his Government
to convene this debate on upholding international law
within the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security, a goal that is fundamental for us all.

No one can dispute the relevance of this debate
in a world in constant flux, where some question the
effectiveness ofinternational law and its abilitytoprovide
solutions to conflict situations and current challenges
to peace. Born of the desire of international society to
cease to accept war as a means of settling conflicts, the
United Nations established the safeguarding of peace
and protecting and respecting human rights as building
blocks for the binding standards of international law.
Peace and international law are intimately linked.

There is no doubt that progress and innovation have
occurred in the field of international peace law, as the
rise of international criminal jurisdictions in recent
decades has shown. However, despite our shared belief
that the moral force of the law can only promote the
establishment of lasting international peace, we must
admit that the supremacy of law, and particularly that
of the international law on peace, is still a long way
off. Nevertheless, the various United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, have continued to make
sustained efforts to promote, in the words of Pope John
Paul II,

"respect for human dignity, the freedom of

peoples and the requirements of development, thus

preparing the cultural and institutional soil for the
building of peace".

This debate offers us the opportunity to take a critical
look not only at the state of international law and
peace, but also at United Nations action in the context
of peacekeeping operations 4 their shortcomings,
imperfections and failures, as well as the ways most
likely to increase their effectiveness.

International law struggles to offer solutions for the
issues and challenges of the world, for many reasons.
Some stress the intrinsic weaknesses of international
diplomatic instruments, especially those of the United
Nations, which, in the words of a prominent lawyer,
at the very least render the scope of those texts
uncertain and, in reality, limited. Others attribute
the lack of effectiveness of the legal mechanisms for
peacekeeping, dispute resolution and the protection
of rights to institutional inefficiencies. We know how
much the Security Council's paralysis and inertia on
certain sensitive issues has helped to fuel criticisms of
international law for its unequal application in different
States. The central issue in all of this 4 given that
we all accept the fundamental value of peace in the
international order 4 is that of better ensuring respect
for the rules of international law generally and for the
decisions and relevant resolutions of the Council aimed
at preserving international peace in particular.

In that regard, we believe it is important to examine
several points closely, five of which we consider
essential. First, we must strengthen international peace
law and ensure that it can adapt to the challenges
of a changing world; secondly, we must guarantee
compliance with international obligations to punish
acts that could endanger international peace and
security or seriously undermine the rights and dignity
of humankind; thirdly, we must make the provisions
of international peace law, international human rights
law and humanitarian law more effective by promoting
their incorporation into the domestic laws of States;
fourthly, we must enhance the credibility of the United
Nations and its principal organs, including the Security
Council, by putting an end to its often-criticized
asymmetry in its response to crises and conflicts; and
fifthly, there must be a renewed determination on the
part of Member States to ensure that the law is applied
equally to all, large and small.
Restoring normal living conditions after periods of
turbulence is an essential dimension of peacekeeping
operations. Unfortunately, once stabilization is
achieved, the fight to overcome the root causes of
conflict, including the issue of extreme poverty,
tends to fade away and does not receive the attention
it should. It is therefore imperative to pay special
attention to the deeper problems facing post-conflict
countries and to help them to restore the conditions
necessary for relaunching growth and development.
Haiti's experience over the past 14 years has shown that
the factors determining the success of a peacekeeping
operation do not necessarily depend on its duration, but
rather on the momentum it launches for strengthening
the capacity-building essential to the economic and
social modernization of the host country on every front,
without, however, neglecting the consolidation of the
institutions that uphold the rule of law, which goes hand
in hand with development.

The key issue facing the international community
is that of guaranteeing the supremacy of international
law in a society that is sadly too often dominated by
a logic of force and confrontation. The Republic of
Haiti endorses a vision of international law and peace
that attaches great importance to the responsibility
of protecting and ensuring respect for fundamental
human rights, as well as protecting all communities
against abuses and violations of all kinds, including
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

International law is an essential tool in our collective
quest for a more just and peaceful international order.
The Republic of Haiti believes that to be effective,
international action for peace must be rooted in
the universal values on which our Organization is
founded, draw its legitimacy from international
law and support national legislation that enables its
effective application. We hope that today's debate
can open avenues for reflection on the importance of
strengthening the corpus of international legal rules,
which must be upheld by all international actors if they
are to be effective. Let us work to make international
law a more effective tool for building peace that is
based on freedom, justice, solidarity, development and
respect for the equal dignity of all people.

