Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to warmly congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the accession of your brotherly and
friendly country to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. We thank you for
convening and choosing the topic of this debate, which
is presided over by Mr. Amon-Tano, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of your brotherly country.

Indeed, Cote d'Ivoire managed to emerge from a
crisis that required the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation, the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire. It is no coincidence that the Operation, whose
mandate has ended, is considered a success, given
the national ownership that was made possible by the
strong and democratic institutions of your country.

I would like to warmly thank Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
for presiding over the Security Council yesterday (see S/PV.8413) and for his statement, which highlighted
Cote d'Ivoire's experience in building and sustaining
peace, as well as the notable economic and social
progress of the country. That experience and expertise
should serve as models for other countries.

I would also like to commend the Secretary-
General for his briefing, which reaffirmed his resolute
commitment to peacekeeping. We welcome and
fully support that new direction. Moreover, Morocco
commends the presence and briefing ofthe Chairperson
of the African Union (AU) Commission, which
demonstrates the strategic character of the United
Nations-AU partnership. We also welcome the briefing
by the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States, one of the most
integrated and committed subregional organizations in
the prevention, maintenance and consolidation of peace.

I take this opportunity to honour the memory of
former United States President George H. W. Bush, and
reiterate the sincere condolences of the Kingdom of
Morocco to his family and the American people.

Morocco, a country that has been strongly
committed to United Nations peacekeeping since
the 1960s, is well placed to know that the nature
of conflicts, which are ever-more complex, is
significantly evolving, with important consequences
for peacekeeping in terms of efficiency, risks and costs,
among others. Recent developments in United Nations
peacekeeping, particularly the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, respond to that need
for adaptation. In that spirit, Morocco has supported
the Secretary-General's initiative from the beginning.
We welcome the way in which the monitoring of
commitments has been initiated, and we will pursue
our efforts to fulfil our commitments in that regard.
To ensure its development, peacekeeping with
regional and subregional organizations must be
strengthened, as mentioned in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. To that end, we can draw inspiration
from several experiences in the past when the two
organizations have worked closely, where possible.
Peacekeeping also provides leverage for prevention, IN
the understanding that a given crisis will not reoccur.
In several instances, we have seen that this issue could
not be resolved. We hope that the concept of sustainable
peace will enable us to remedy the relapses into
conflict, of which there are still too many, in particular
on our continent.

As I am aware of time allotted to me, I will limit
my statement to the following three points.

First, the performance of peacekeeping operations
is key to their success. Morocco welcomes the
fact that we were able to agree on the issue of
performance during the most recent meeting of the
Special Committee on Peace Operations, given that
we all shoulder the responsibility and that all actors,
whether on the ground, at Headquarters or in regional
offices, have a part to play. Many factors - such as
mandates, training, equipment, rules of engagement,
planning, caveats and others - come into play when
we address the issue of performance. They must all
be fully integrated into the development, renewal and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

Secondly, with regard to the strengthening of the
United Nations-African Union partnership, many
lessons can be learned from recent experiences, such
as re-hatting within the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Africa's sincere desire is to
take its future into its own hands, and the commitment
of the African regional and subregional organizations
prove it. That commitment was underscored by the
signature in April 2017 of the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. As the Secretary-General
mentioned, the Framework seeks to ensure that the two
organizations work closely on the basis of the principle
of mutual respect and comparative advantage during
a conflict cycle in a predictable and strategic manner.
Morocco welcomes that commitment and will use its
membership of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and of the United Nations to support the
implementation of the agreement.

Thirdly and lastly, with respect to funding peace
support operations of the African Union, the African
Union has clearly expressed its commitment to peace
on our continent by financing approximately 25 per
cent of the cost of the African Union Peace Fund.
Moreover, the Fund is currently funded by African
States in the amount of $80 million. That reflects the
firm and tangible commitment of the African Union,
which should be duly appreciated and supported by
the international community. In addition, in his 2017
report on options for authorization and support for
African Union peace support operations (S/2017/454),
the Secretary-General made several proposals in
that regard. Regrettably, to date, none has received
unanimous support.

Committing to funding African peace operations
is an investment in the future and signifies trust.
The African Union has made considerable efforts to
raise standards in the areas of financial transparency,
conduct, discipline and others, in line with several
requests made in Security Council resolutions, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the African Union itself. We are all unanimous in
underscoring the importance of partnerships. It is now
time to provide those partnerships with the means and
efficiency expected of them.

In conclusion, I should like to pay tribute to the
African countries that are members of the Council,
including your own, Mr. President, for their tireless
efforts to achieve peace in Africa and in the area of
funding African Union peace operations. We remain
committed to working with them until a realistic
solution that takes into account African aspirations is
found. Lastly, I would like to pay tribute all the men
and women who conduct their peace operations duties,
often in difficult conditions, and in particular to those
who paid the ultimate price to achieve peace.

