Mr. Akram (Pakistan): My delegation wishes to
welcome the Presidency of this meeting of the Council
on Kosovo by the Foreign Minister of Bulgaria. It is
also a great pleasure to see you again, Mr. Deputy
Minister, in the Council. We would also wish to
welcome Mr. Guehenno to the Council and thank him
for his detailed briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

I would like to restrict my comments today to the
"Standards for Kosovo" document introduced last week
by Special Representative Holkeri in Pristina.

Pakistan's reservations on the standards before
status issue are well known. This policy was devised
only for Kosovo and should not set a precedent for
other situations in similar circumstances, either past,
present or future. Moreover, the standards that have
been set out in the document should be implemented in
a manner that serves the broader interests of the people
of Kosovo. Standards should not become an excuse to
avoid addressing the status question, which is the
underlying problem in Kosovo.

Having said that, we have nevertheless joined in
welcoming the Standards document. We will study the
work plan being devised by the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) to implement its
provisions. We take note of the statement of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo, Bajram Rexhepi, who said

"Each sentence in the Standards document is a
challenge in itself, but we look forward to working
together to overcome all of these challenges".

In devising the work plan, we must ensure that its
objectives are achievable and the benchmarks realistic.
More importantly, we must guard against the
possibility of this process being derailed by the
intransigence of one or the other party.

While we attach high importance to all the eight
standards set out in the document, we wish to
emphasize that among its most crucial issues are those
related to the upholding of the rule of law, freedom of
movement, use of languages, sustainable returns of
refugees and internally displaced persons, and the
protection of the rights of all communities in Kosovo.
Also important is the socio-economic recovery of
Kosovo, which the international community must
continue to support generously.

Last but not least is the important issue of a
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on practical
matters. This process needs to be strengthened and
regularized. We regard this as a useful mechanism for
confidence-building, which could eventually facilitate
addressing the more delicate issue of status.

Pakistan hopes that satisfactory progress will be
made in achieving the objectives of the Standards
document by mid-2005, thus opening the way for
progress on the issue of status. The international
community and the Security Council must begin to
give early consideration to the eventual but inevitable
solution to the status issue. Such a solution would have
to be based on the wishes of the people of Kosovo, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter's principle
of self-determination, and, at the same time, respond to
the interests and welfare of all the people of Kosovo.

In conclusion, I wish to commend Mr. Holkeri
and UNMIK for their achievements thus far and assure
them of Pakistan's continued support for their efforts to
establish peace, stability, good governance and self-
governance in Kosovo.

