Mr. Kalla (Indonesia): I thank the presidency of
Ethiopia for convening this open debate.

Indonesia's commitment to global peace and
security is cemented within our Constitution. As
such, shortly after its independence, Indonesia at once
deployed its first Blue Helmets. Today, we stand as
one of the top contributing countries. We will soon
deploy 1,040 peacekeepers, including those deployed
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

The contribution of the Blue Helmets to global
peace and security is undisputable. However, in the age
of global uncertainty and its ensuing challenges, reform
is needed. Indonesia therefore supports United Nations
peacekeeping reform. I wish to highlight several
pertinent points.

First, successful reform requires collective and
strong political support. Partnership between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the contributing
and host countries must be enhanced. The silo mindset
of the United Nations should therefore be removed.
Secondly, the 2015 report ofthe High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446) provides
important guidelines for essential shifts in peacekeeping
operations. We must translate the guidelines into action.
Thirdly, we must continue to interlink preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacebuilding. They form
essential elements for sustaining peace.

Reform must reflect the actual needs of peacekeepers
on the ground. Capacity-building is one essential
element. it requires standardized knowledge and
innovative training, thereby enhancing peacekeepers'
capability to protect civilians, while ensuring their own
safety. In the end, the world will benefit from more
capable United Nations peacekeepers.

On our part, Indonesia stands ready to contribute, not
only to enhancing the professionalism of peacekeepers,
but also to promoting the role ofwomen in peacekeeping.
Over the past three years, the Indonesia Peacekeeping
Center has trained peacekeepers from 30 countries,
including 7,000 Indonesian peacekeepers.

The important role of regional mechanisms in
maintaining peace and stability is indispensable. In
South-East Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has created a regional ecosystem of peace,
stability and prosperity. This exemplifies the concrete
contribution of regional organizations to global
peace. The United Nations must therefore strengthen
its partnership and engagement with regional
organizations. Its partnership with the African Union,
for instance, has contributed to overcoming capacity
gaps in the region.

Determined to be a true partner for world peace,
Indonesia will run for election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the term 2019-
2020 in order to create a global ecosystem of peace and
stability, to ensure synergy between sustaining peace
and development agenda, and to combat terrorism,
radicalism and violent extremism.

