Mr. Tayel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing today and for his ongoing efforts to achieve
a settlement to the Palestine question. I also thank
Mr. Hagai El-Ad for his participation in today's meeting
and his comprehensive and detailed briefing.
I do not believe that anyone present in the Council
was surprised by the mention of violations against the
Palestinian people under occupation or the injustice
to which they are subjected. Council members and
the international community are well aware of those
violations. While some may feel bored by hearing of
the same old problems, practices and various kinds
of suffering periodically over and over again in the
Council for long years, it is important for us to bear
in mind that what we hear is not mere rhetoric or
meaningless numbers and statistics. It is a reality being
lived by Palestinian families on the ground, whose
homes have been demolished or whose land has been
taken in favour of the settlements. It is a reality being
lived by entire generations of Palestinian refugees
scattered throughout the world -generations born and
live without a homeland, or under siege, or behind bars.

The Palestinian question has existed as long as
the Council itself. Contrary to what some may believe,
that is not due to division or inaction on the part of
the Council. The resolutions adopted by the Council
since 1967 have established a framework agreed by the
international community and in line with international
law and human conscience, beginning with resolution
242 (1967) up to resolution 2334 (2016), which contains
decisive elements for achieving a settlement, including
the 4 June 1967 borders and the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif within the two-State solution, in addition to
clear law provisions with regard to settlements, homes
demolition and the need to restart direct negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides.

In that regard, it is important to reiterate that
those decisive factors have not disappeared or expired
with the passing of time. They constitute inalienable
rights. I note that the issue at hand has nothing to do
with seeking a solution. A solution already exists that
is known and conforms to the legal and humanitarian
principles that we all acknowledge. What is lacking
is the will to implement the solution and sometimes
the political will. I recall the fact that a commitment
to rights has never been the cause of the failure of a
political settlement. On the contrary, forgetting and
attempting to circumvent rights is the cause for the
failure of the international community to achieve peace
in years past.

The humanitarian tragedy endured for years
in the Gaza Strip is a grave situation that is the
consequence of the ongoing occupation and the failure
to uphold international law. Gaza is an integral part
of the Palestinian territories, and the issue of Gaza
cannot be addressed separately from the political
issue as a whole. The crisis in Gaza was not born in
a vacuum. At this point, I wish to warn of significant
pressures being applied on the residents of Gaza and
of a potential explosion of the situation there as a
consequence of the energy crisis, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) crisis, confrontations with the
Israeli security forces that claim the lives of dozens of
Palestinians, or the obstacles to movement in and out
of Gaza Strip.

In that regard, Egypt is addressing the crisis based
on its principled humanitarian commitment to and in
solidarity with our Palestinian brothers. Despite the
security conditions and the lack of legal responsibility,
we have opened the Rafah crossing for individuals
in order to ease the crisis. That is an exceptional
measure, but it is not enough if Israel fails to uphold
its responsibilities under international law and if the
Palestinian Authority fails to establish its authority
throughout the Gaza Strip. Egypt has also made
diligent efforts to prevent further clashes in Gaza. In
that regard, we thank Special Coordinator Mladenov
for supporting such efforts.

We continue to call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories, and on Palestinian
parties to accelerate their response to Egypt's efforts to
promote reconciliation. I also call on the international
community and members of the Council, particularly
those with the greatest influence, to support those
efforts and to gradually build on them, particularly
the steps already taken by the Palestinian National
Authority to control the crossings in the Gaza Strip. It
is important to consider how to build on that and to
benefit from previous experiences regarding movement
to and from the Gaza Strip.

In conclusion, we embrace any meaningful
initiative for a comprehensive political settlement in
the coming period. We stand ready to support any such
initiatives, both politically and practically. We call
on the Israelis and the Palestinians to reciprocate by
making efforts based on upholding the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, in line with the resolutions
previously mentioned. We reiterate that the Palestinian
question remains the pivotal issue in the region. If any
ideas or efforts are to achieve success, it is important
not to overlook that reality or link the issue to other
arrangements in the region.

