Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We are very grateful, indeed,
to Mr. Oshima for his briefing and for the information
material provided. It has been more than five months
since the Council discussed the humanitarian situation
in Angola. Given the important developments, this
update is therefore very timely and very welcome.

The Angolan people now have the best
opportunity in decades to begin a process of
normalization. However, the new developments present
huge new challenges of the sort detailed by
Mr. Oshima. There are immediate needs that must be
addressed now, and others that require a more
deliberate approach over a longer time. The urgent
nutritional and medical requirements of the population
obviously cannot wait and must be dealt with
immediately. We commend Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the other United
Nations agencies for their work in that respect,
alongside the community of non-governmental
organizations.

The resettlement of internally displaced persons
will be an enormous humanitarian operation. It goes
without saying that the process must be completed with
the consent of the internally displaced persons
themselves. It will present an enormous human
challenge and will raise important issues regarding the
status of rights to land.

We share Mr. Oshima's concern about the scale
and the urgency of demining action. In this regard, we
very much welcome decision by the Government of
Angola to ratify the Ottawa Convention.

Angola is the second-largest recipient of Ireland's
emergency and humanitarian funding and will continue
to be a priority for us. The humanitarian operation in
Angola is now one of the largest in the world. The
situation on the ground demands it. Yet the new
circumstances suggest that the limited approach
pursued over past years must now change. The
international community and the Government must
work together to map the best way forward.
Mr. Oshima's stress on the need for burden-sharing will
find support among many donors and - we very much
hope - with the Government of Angola.

There is an enormous humanitarian deficit in
Angola which cannot be bridged without the assistance
of the international community. The donor community
can reasonably be expected to commit to further
humanitarian support and action if it sees evidence of
the systematic diversion of greatly increasing State
revenues from natural resources into programmes to
rebuild Angola for the people of Angola, the natural
owners of those resources. We make the case that this
should be done not only for the welfare of the
people - the clear and absolute first priority - but
also to strengthen the perceived legitimacy of Angola's
institutions and State structures. We commend this
message to the Government of Angola through its
representatives here in the Council Chamber today.

I would like to ask Mr. Oshima two brief
questions. Given the importance of agriculture, which
he has highlighted, does the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have a
sense of the extent to which agricultural land is mined
and therefore of the scale of the problem which we face
in getting people back to the land to begin the urgent
planting to ensure future food stocks? Secondly, I
wonder whether Mr. Oshima can give the Council an
idea of the sort of time frame that a resettlement
programme would require, given the enormous
numbers involved and the infrastructure and resource
deficits that prevail at present.

