Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like to convey greetings to you, Sir,
and to express my delegation's deep gratification at
seeing you guide our work in this month of November,
particularly in the context of such a delicate and serious
issue as the one now before us, which puts to the test key
principles of the peaceful coexistence among nations and
the very provisions of the Charter.

The core of the question is not merely the issue of
sanctions but the Government of Iraq's outright defiance
of the international community and of the very authority
of the Security Council under the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. This is a challenge that
goes beyond the purely juridical; we are facing a political
challenge with unforeseeable implications.

This circumstance explains more clearly than could
mere words the unanimous and undivided reaction of the
Security Council. The Government of Iraq is putting to
the test the jurisdiction and the legal powers of this
primary organ of the United Nations, whose fundamental
responsibility - and it is important to recall this at this
point - is to maintain international peace and security,
as stipulated very precisely and explicitly in Article 24 of
the Charter.

The sanctions regime imposed on Iraq has its
origin - and it is also essential to recall this today - in
an absolutely unjustifiable and reprehensible war of
aggression and territorial conquest against a neighbouring,
bordering country that is a State Member of the United
Nations. It is true that seven years have elapsed, but
neither time nor the unanimous and strongly expressed
censure of the international community, the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council, nor indeed
international public opinion seem to have been enough to
impress on the Iraqi authorities the gravity and far-
reaching implications of its past actions and current
defiance.

The sole purpose of the sanctions is to impress upon
the political and military authorities of Iraq that they must
comply with their international commitments and that the
inspection activities of the Special Commission are
intended to ensure that that country cannot use, develop,
build or acquire armaments having a nuclear, biological
or chemical capacity. This is a fundamental point, and the
one to which resolution 687 (1991) refers. On this last

 

point the opinion of the international community is
unanimous and unswerving.
The purpose of sanctions is not to affect the capacity
for economic, social and political development of the Iraqi
people or of Iraqi society. My country has maintained a
consistent and clear-cut position on this issue. Costa Rica
takes the view that the sanctions must be carefully designed
so as to fulfil a single objective - that of changing the
unlawful policies of the Government of Iraq and securing
its full reintegration into the international community's legal
framework.

The draft resolution that we are about to adopt, on
which Costa Rica will vote in favour, falls within this set
of principles. It is a firm and robust yet well-balanced draft
resolution. Admittedly, it expands the sanctions regime, but
the new provisions are confined solely to those political and
military individuals who are responsible for this latest
challenge by Iraq to the international community and the
Security Council.

My delegation's greatest wish is to see the
Government of Iraq reintegrated into the framework of
international law and state clearly and firmly its resolve to
comply with all the resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 661 (1990) and 687 (1991). We hope
and trust that the Baghdad authorities will act accordingly.

In conclusion, I should like to express to the
Secretary-General the respect and esteem that my
delegation feels for him as a result of his action in sending
a high-level mission to Baghdad last week. This served to
strengthen the authority of the Secretariat and demonstrated
once again Secretary-General Annan's devotion to peace
and his unswerving dedication to the provisions of the
Charter and the powers that he holds under it.

