Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Congolese delegation, I should like to
say, Mr. President, delighted we are to see you in the
presidential seat, and to congratulate you not only as a
seasoned diplomat, but also as the head of a dynamic
team - that of Greece, with which we have always
had the great pleasure of cooperating. Furthermore, as
neighbours, our two missions share the same building,
which is always reassuring in these times of
insecurity - yet another reason, if reason were needed,
to have even more confidence in you, Sir.

Your predecessor, Ambassador Nana Effah-
Apenteng knows how much, both bilaterally and in the
pan-African context, Ghana and Congo have always
worked hand in hand, which was made abundantly
clear last month.

It was just at the end of last month that the
Council adopted resolution 1706 (2006) - not, we
hoped, to get through by force despite the unexpected
obstacles that, it is true, littered the way to the
progressive implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, but hoping to rally to that cause both the
sponsors and the protagonists of the crisis. Today is an
opportunity for all those who had called for the
postponement until today of the consideration of the
situation in the Sudan, starting with the Government of
the Sudan itself, to join with the Council so as to meet
the expectations of the African Union, which reflect
other, very specific expectations - that an end be put
to the daily sufferings endured by the civilian
population in Darfur.

In a little more than two weeks' time, the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) will reach the
deadline of 30 September 2006 - the date set for the
handover to a United Nations operation. While
resolution 1706 (2006) of 31 August confirmed the
commitment of the Security Council in that respect, it
also called upon the Sudanese Government to lend its
support to facilitate such a transition, in keeping with
the modalities set out by the Secretary-General in his
report dated 28 July.

Congo's repeated calls for dialogue and
cooperation on the part of all interested parties have
been motivated solely by the need effectively to meet
the requirements of such a United Nations operation,
given the coordination requirements set out in the 5
May Darfur Peace Agreement.

We welcome the participation in this debate of
important partners such as the League of Arab States
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, whose
views and assistance have always been very much
appreciated by the African Union in the context of the
process of achieving conditions leading to lasting
peace in the Sudan.

The African Union's 7,000 armed troops have
been waiting stalwartly for a decision on deployment
policies, with a view to promoting a process geared
towards practical solutions with respect to the forces
on the ground and to the sorely tested civilian
population.

In a recent statement made on 5 September last,
the African Union's Peace and Security Council
reiterated its position on the reinforcement of AMIS
and its cooperation with the United Nations. It
reaffirmed in particular its decisions of 10 March, 15
May and 27 June; reiterated its support for AMIS; and
called on the parties scrupulously to abide by the
ceasefire, guarantee the protection and security of
AMIS personnel, and refrain from any action that
could undermine the peace process or efforts to
implement the Darfur Peace Agreement. The Peace and
Security Council also recalled the fact that on 18
September, here in New York, a meeting on Darfur will
be held at the ministerial level, in parallel with the
sixty-first session of the General Assembly.

The African Union is well aware of the
importance of the Darfur-Darfur dialogue and
consultations as an internal mechanism aimed at
clarifying the political and institutional stakes. It
therefore accords it a role that the Council, too, would
be well advised to support. This would also represent a
useful tool for the Sudanese Government and the
international community to promote cooperation with a
view to establishing a peaceful and democratic Sudan.

It is with that fundamental objective in mind that
the Sudanese Government is called on to exercise its
influence and authority in a manner commensurate
with its desire to promote the development and
management of Darfur's resources as well as to address
other social issues there.

The plan submitted a few weeks ago by the
Sudan, while it reflects an increased awareness of the
responsibility of the Sudanese leaders to their people,
remains insufficient. We would have merely taken note
of it if the serious concerns flagged by Africa and the
international community had elicited an appropriate
response from the Sudanese Government, which was a
signatory to the Abuja Peace Agreement.

However, the behaviour of the armed factions on
the ground has not been in keeping with the spirit or
the letter of that Agreement. The situation has gotten so
bad that the activities of humanitarian agencies and
organizations have been hampered and even
obstructed, in a manner that appears deliberate. Every
passing day is a lost opportunity for the civilian
population, whose situation is becoming ever more
precarious and whose health, security and even lives
are threatened by the abuses and heinous crimes
committed against them by their own Sudanese
compatriots. The tragic details have been amply
described in the reports of the Secretary-General,
particularly the one dated 28 July, as well as in the
statement that Mr. Annan made this morning, so I need
not reiterate them.

The situation in Darfur should have already,
several months ago, elicited a specific, concrete
response, given the willingness expressed by the
international community, particularly in resolution
1679 (2006) of 16 May and resolution 1706 (2006) of
31 August. It is, to say the least, regrettable that,
despite the contacts made in Khartoum by the Council
and jointly by the African Union and the United
Nations, the decisive agreement expected of the
Sudanese Government has not yet been forthcoming.
Khartoum has in recent times even adopted an attitude
of conspicuous rejection of a United Nations operation.

The Security Council, however, would be ill-
advised to just give up. We urge the Council further to
refine its approach to Darfur and not to fail to make
further efforts at rapprochement with regional
organizations and Governments that may have an
influence on the various protagonists.

We deem of great importance the debate planned
for 20 September to discuss relations with the regional
organizations and the United Nations. The Security
Council will have to explore, advisedly, the
possibilities for action entrusted to it by the Charter, in
particular under Chapter VIII. It should be able to draw
on other resources offered by bilateral or multilateral
diplomacy involving the United Nations and Member
States, or the United Nations and intergovernmental or
non-governmental organizations, so as to use the full
panoply of its capacities for prevention or action.

We believe that by further developing such an
approach, which does not rule out action on the
ground, it would be possible to maximize every
opportunity to resolve misunderstandings. In order to
do so, it is important for the Council to speak on the
basis of consensus, to guarantee the implementation of
its decisions, particularly if they are to be operational,
and to rally the main protagonists of the situation to its
Views.

If the strengthening of AMIS is at this stage the
best way to assess the degree of commitment of the
international community to Darfur, it would be wise to
take this opportunity to strengthen AMIS. The African
Union would welcome such a development.

I cannot conclude without noting that today,
11 September, is a day of commemoration of the
attacks against the United States. I wish to express the
full sympathy of my delegation to the United States
delegation and to assure it of our determination to fight
against indiscriminate terrorism, which brings death
and despair to innocent victims throughout the world.

