We are at a historic juncture. The breakthrough achieved in the Joint Military Commission and the subsequent Libyan Political Dialogue Forum have demonstrated that we are close to a Libyan-owned political solution, which will bring peace and stability to Libya within the framework of the Berlin process and resolution 2510 (2020), under the auspices of the United Nations. We welcome the ceasefire agreement reached as a result of the Joint Military Commission talks. We call for the swift and full implementation of that agreement. As an international community, we must respect the aspirations of Libyans to cease all fighting, which includes full adherence to the arms embargo and - I want to underscore this - the immediate and complete withdrawal of all foreign troops, fighters and mercenaries. To make that clear, withdrawal means leaving Libya, not rebranding fighters as alleged training personnel. The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum was another step in the right direction. Libyans are finally beginning to shape their own future. We commend all of the Forum's participants for their constructive role and commitment. We urge all key players to stay the course and to continue to engage in dialogue with a view to swiftly appointing the new Government. That also means that the Council's message to spoilers must be that spoiling the process has consequences. It also remains essential to continue to pave the way towards elections. We call on all parties to the conflict to support the political dialogue. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has played a decisive role in guiding those negotiations. Under the highly able leadership of Stephanie Williams, the United Nations has demonstrated again why it is absolutely indispensable. The progress we have seen is excellent news for Libya, the United Nations and the Security Council. Full adherence to the arms embargo will remain key to supporting the political process. Violations must not be committed again. The participants of the Berlin Conference are called upon in particular to make sure that the arms embargo is strictly implemented. The Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, will continue to monitor the situation. We thank the Panel of Experts on Libya for its excellent work and its detailed reporting. All States Members of the United Nations must extend their full cooperation to the Panel. As a regional organization acting under resolution 2292 (2016), the European Union will continue its efforts to implement the arms embargo through its Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, as mandated by the Council. Operation IRINI has displayed the utmost transparency in communicating with the Sanctions Committee and is acting in full adherence with the applicable Council resolutions. The civilian population of Libya has endured years of suffering. We hope that the ceasefire, political dialogue and the resumption of oil production will pave the way to rebuilding the country's infrastructure, enable an effective response to the coronavirus disease pandemic and put an end to impunity for violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. The perpetrators of such violations must be brought to justice in order to enable a reconciliation process. We will remain committed to increasing accountability and enforcing the rule of law. I once again commend Acting Special Representative Williams and the dedicated staff of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, who continue to work under exceptional and extremely difficult circumstances. Although Ms. Williams has our full support at the top of UNSMIL, we look forward to a swift leadership appointment. As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya, I regret to inform the Council that the presentation of the Committee's activities that was planned as part of today's meeting had to be cancelled. Owing to the blockade of one member of the Committee, we were not able to agree on a mere factual account of what has happened since September. That is very unfortunate and disappointing given the importance of the 1970 Committee's work in support of a peaceful solution for Libya. It is another lamentable development following the failure to agree on the publication of the interim report of the Panel of Experts in September. Those who are blocking even such small steps in the Sanctions Committee must bear the responsibility for this.
