Mr. Trautwein (Germany): My delegation is
grateful for the comprehensive briefing we have just
heard from Mr. Hedi Annabi. We also commend Mr.
Sukehiro Hasegawa for the work he has carried out as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Timor-Leste during the last three months.

Let me begin by saying that Germany aligns itself
with the statement that the Ambassador of the
Netherlands will make on behalf of the European
Union.

Considerable progress has been achieved in all
the elements of the mandate of Security Council
resolution 1543 (2004) since the last report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/333). We have seen
progress in the fields of public administration and the
justice system, development and law enforcement, and
security and stability. The Government of Timor-Leste
has to be commended for their achievements so far and
the ongoing efforts towards establishing and securing a
stable democracy.
Nevertheless, deficiencies in capacity-building
still remain. Experienced, skilled and qualified
personnel are still lacking, and external support
remains necessary at this stage. In order to terminate
the mandate as envisaged, training and capacity-
building will therefore be the key tasks for the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
in the remaining months.

We welcome the adoption of key pieces of
legislation in the security field and the transfer of
security responsibility from UNMISET to the
authorities, police and national defence forces of
Timor-Leste. We encourage the Government of Timor-
Leste in its efforts to settle outstanding issues with its
neighbours. In this regard, we hope that the ongoing
talks with the Indonesian Government concerning the
delineation of the land border will be concluded in the
near future. We also believe it will be essential for the
development of Timor-Leste's economy that the
negotiations with Australia on the maritime border
between the two countries and on the sharing of oil and
natural gas resources in the region be successful.

Reconciliation is an important part of nation-
building. The rule of law must be reinforced and
confidence in State authority re-established. It is
therefore of utmost importance that all perpetrators of
serious crimes are brought to justice. Impunity is no
option. In this regard, we express our confidence in all
parties involved that the legal proceedings against the
perpetrators of the crimes of 1999 are conducted in due
course and in an appropriate manner.

Timor-Leste has rightly been described as a
success story and a true model for nation-building. It
will be important for the international community to
remain committed to helping the people of Timor-Leste
in building their economy. Economic development will
be crucial. Therefore, continued and increased
international cooperation and support in this regard is
essential.

