Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I would like at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate and for giving us the opportunity to
participate in the discussion on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Mr. Koenigs for
presenting the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/ 145).

We agree with those speakers who stated this
morning that significant progress has been made
towards building a democratic State in Afghanistan and
towards the rehabilitation of the country's basic
infrastructure. The signing of the Afghanistan Compact
at the London Conference, held on 31 January and 1
February, marks an important milestone on the road
towards the reconstruction and the normalcy of
Afghanistan. It reaffirms the commitment of the
Afghan Government and of the international
community to collaborate in meeting the challenges of
security, governance and economic and social
development.

The report of the Secretary-General reminds us,
however, of the challenges remaining in Afghanistan.
Increased activity by insurgents and terrorists, who
have used more sophisticated and lethal tactics, is of
great concern. Understandably, much remains to be
done as regards strengthening the rule of law,
improving respect for human rights and the practice of
good governance. The production and trafficking of
and trade in illegal narcotics continue to be a threat to
the success of State-building in Afghanistan. That is
both a national and international concern, as it provides
fertile ground for criminal networks, illegal armed
groups and extremist elements. We commend the
comprehensive efforts already carried out and new
plans of the Afghan Government, of which my Afghan
colleague spoke a few minutes ago. We also commend
Afghanistan's international partners in the fight against
drug cultivation and the drug trade.

With regard to human rights in Afghanistan, I
would simply like to align myself with what my
colleague from Austria said on behalf of the European
Union on that subject. The interim National Action
Plan for Women in Afghanistan is an especially
encouraging work in progress.

Peacekeeping missions enable a small country
such as Iceland to join in international efforts for peace
and development. We are currently contributing a
mobile observation team to a provincial reconstruction
team in western Afghanistan. Previously, Iceland was
responsible for administrative command and other
tasks at Kabul International Airport, beginning in mid-
2004 and into 2005. It has now been decided that,
beginning this spring, Iceland will again provide
personnel in support of Kabul airport operations. At the
request of the Afghan authorities and NATO, Iceland
has also produced a plan for how to transition, in three
to four years, the operation of the airport from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to
Afghan civilian management. Iceland will assist in
implementing the transition plan by providing expert
advice and support, in close cooperation with other
international organizations. Finally, on a number of
occasions, since late 2001, Iceland has provided airlifts
for the transport of peacekeeping forces, military
equipment and humanitarian aid to Afghanistan.

Iceland continues to be committed to helping
establish conditions in which Afghanistan can enjoy a
representative Government and self-sustaining peace
and security, as well as to the successful reconstruction
of the country. Iceland fully supports the important
work carried out to that end by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and by
other international organizations.

