Mr. Atieh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, we thank you for organizing this
important meeting. We also welcome Lord Ashdown,
the High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
thank him for the detailed and comprehensive briefing
that he gave us regarding the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also wish to thank Judge Meron, the
president of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and we commend him on
his useful briefing on the trial of war criminals in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are completely satisfied
with Lord Ashdown's clarification of his vision of
putting Bosnia and Herzegovina on the right track
towards statehood. We are also gratified by the priority
he has given to enhancing the rule of law, economic
reform and the improvement of the basic institutions of
governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we support
his slogan "justice andjobs."

At this crucial juncture, the reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina depends on enhancing the rule
of law through a fair and responsible judiciary that can
deal with grave issues, such as financial crimes,
organized crime and political corruption. We note with
satisfaction the country's appointment of a governor,
judges and prosecutors who can perform their duties
efficiently. Freezing the assets of suspected war
criminals is very important for stopping their activities
and for enhancing the rule of law in the country in
accordance with the pronouncements of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

On the other hand, we believe that economic
reform should also be a priority to improve the living
conditions of the people and to attain economic
stability. This, in turn, would enhance the political
process by reforming the banking, fiscal and other
economic sectors.

We believe that the November 2002 Bulldozer
Initiative will pave the way for growth, create greater
employment opportunities, help improve bureaucracy
and liberalize the economy, which we all seek. The
contribution of many Member States and financial
institutions to this Initiative will help to bring about
economic growth so that the country may overcome the
challenges that it is confronting in agriculture,
transport, communications, electricity and other areas.

We would also like to emphasize another point:
the return of refugees. Despite the encouraging
numbers of returnees mentioned in the report, we
believe that more efforts should be made to overcome
the difficulties that can arise from the permanent return
of refugees, including providing the necessities of daily
life, so that they can, through social reintegration, help
to rebuild their country.

We are indeed pleased to see the progress made,
as Lord Ashdown has stated. We also took note of the
difficulties that he mentioned, such as the slow pace of
reform and weakness of the new institutions, as well as
the fact that there are still enemies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. However, we believe that cooperation
between Lord Ashdown and Judge Meron, in their
respective fields, will help overcome the difficulties
and challenges and protect the interests, security,
integrity and stability of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

