Portugal thanks the Russian Federation for organizing today's open debate on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and welcomes the opportunity to follow up on the women and peace and security agenda, discuss in particular the achievements made so far and redefine strategies to increase the implementation of all its pillars. We align ourselves with the statements of the European Union (annex 38) and the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (annex 27). Portugal would like to commend the efforts of the United Nations system on this subject and the Secretary-General's recently published report on women and peace and security (S/2020/946), which represents an important assessment of the agenda 20 years after its establishment, and it is ever more relevant considering the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This year we also celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which presents us with an important opportunity to reaffirm our efforts aimed at addressing structural gender inequalities, the role of women in peace processes and the prevention of conflict- related sexual violence. Victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence can be subject to discrimination, sexual assault, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, human trafficking and forced marriages. These crimes represent serious violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, in conflict situations, attacks on schools disproportionally affect girls, thereby jeopardizing gender equality and girls' right to education, as well as increasing the risk of child marriages, early and forced marriages, early pregnancies and sexual and gender- based violence. We must therefore ensure accountability and fight against impunity and maintain a zero-tolerance approach towards aggressors, be they members of terrorist groups, State actors or troops deployed on behalf of the United Nations. It is urgent that specific strategies against acts of violence in conflict situations be implemented, particularly through cooperation with civil society organizations, youth and women's organizations - including those designed to ensure the security of women peacebuilders and women human rights defenders - and access to information and the use of new technologies. This commitment includes protecting and promoting sexual and reproductive health and rights and providing victims and survivors with access to mental-health care and legal services. Portugal's holistic approach to the women and peace and security agenda is based on promoting gender equality, the inclusion of women in conflict prevention, the training of armed forces, and the fight against gender and sexual violence. This approach is part of the policies and strategies Portugal has adopted and is included in our operational planning in defence, foreign policy, development cooperation, security and justice. Portugal has adopted its third National Action Plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the period from 2019 to 2022. The third National Action Plan is also part of the commitments assumed by Portugal in several international forums, including the Council of Europe and the European Union. We comply with the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence, also known as the Istanbul Convention. The third National Action Plan is based on four strategic objectives: reinforcing the integration of the women and peace and security agenda and the perspective of equality between women and men in Portugal's interventions at national, regional and international levels; protecting the human rights of all women and girls and punishing all forms of violence against them, including sexual violence; promoting the participation of all women and young people in conflict prevention and in peacebuilding processes; and integrating the women and peace and security agenda in the work of civil society organizations. Follow-up on the implementation of our national action plans is seen in an increase in the number of training courses given on the women and peace and security agenda, particularly for deployed armed forces in international peacekeeping missions. Some examples of Portugal's good practices in implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) include the approval of the gender-equality strategy for cooperation with partner countries - Angola, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe and Timor Leste - which involves measures aimed at eliminating all forms of violence against women and girls and at promoting their empowerment, particularly in fragile, conflict and post-conflict States; the approval, by the Ministry of National Defence, in March 2019, of the National Defence Sectoral Plan for Equality 2019-2021, structured across three main lines: equality, reconciliation and training; the Ministry of National Defence's creation, in March 2020, of the Equality Office, the first at the ministerial level in Portugal, proving our commitment to the monitoring and institutionalization of an inclusive gender culture; and, within the scope of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, efforts to ensure the approval of a defence action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), for which Portugal has already forwarded a proposal. In addition, Portugal is committed to greater legal and judicial cooperation in this area. It is also committed to expanding the presence and participation of women in military contingents, security forces and international peacekeeping missions, as women soldiers exercise a key role on the ground. Portugal reaffirms its support to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in response to COVID-19, taking into account his important policy brief on the impacts of the pandemic on women as well. COVID-19 is an added challenge to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
