Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste and for
updating us on the progress made by the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I would like to express our high
appreciation to Ambassador Sharma for UNMISET'S
efforts in assisting Timor-Leste's transition to a fully
independent nation-State. I think it would be timely for
all of us to recall the great contribution made in the
initiation and the establishment of this process in
Timor-Leste by the late Sergio Vieira de Mello.

The UNMISET mandate is due to expire in seven
months. While the mission has made considerable
progress thus far, especially in three key

programmes - stability, democracy and justice;
internal security and law enforcement; and external
security and border control - several challenges still

remain. Some of these challenges will outlive
UNMISET. Therefore, it is important that the role and
responsibility of the United Nations should not simply
end with the withdrawal of UNMISET. We agree with
the Secretary-General's recommendation that an
objective assessment of the country's future needs
should be carried out, followed by the submission by
the Secretariat of appropriate suggestions on the future
role of the United Nations in Timor-Leste. We would
look forward to any suggestions and recommendations
from the Secretariat and Ambassador Sharma in that
regard. It is vital that the painstaking achievements of
UNMISET and, before it, of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, should be
sustained and further built upon.
Indeed, with the assistance of UNMISET and the
international community, Timor-Leste has made
remarkable progress since its independence in May
2002. However, a large part of the credit for that
success must go to the people and the leadership of
Timor-Leste. We congratulate the Government of
Timor-Leste on its achievements, despite difficult
circumstances. We appreciate in particular President
Gusmao's bold initiative to encourage reconciliation
among the Timorese people. We hope that the
Government of Timor-Leste will strive to heal the deep
wounds of the past, both internal and external.

Pakistan believes that the development of close
and friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is of the utmost importance and that it will
be in the best interest of both countries. We welcome
the agreement concluded between the Governments of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste this September on the
common border, which is a major step in enhancing the
security of Timor-Leste. We call on both sides to work
together to resolve any outstanding problems and to
strengthen regional cooperation. Such cooperation can
be an example for other parts of the world as well.

In our View, the most imposing long-term
challenge confronting Timor-Leste will be the
promotion of economic prosperity. We agree with the
Secretary-General's report that international assistance
should continue and will be indispensable. However,
this is required not only in support of the UNMISET
mandate, but also in facilitating Timor-Leste's
economic recovery. Our hope is that the international
community will continue to assist the country to stand
on its own feet, even after the departure of UNMISET.

In spite of the many challenges before it, Timor-
Leste is a United Nations success story. Above all, it is
a seminal case demonstrating the successful
implementation of the principle of self-determination
by the United Nations. There are other peoples,
especially the people of Jammu and Kashmir, who
await the opportunity to exercise their right to self-
determination, as promised and prescribed in Security
Council resolutions. We hope that the United Nations
and the international community, building on the
success story of Timor-Leste, will bend their efforts to
bring the principle of self-determination to, and
implement the resolutions of the Security Council in,
the case of Jammu and Kashmir as well.

