Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the delegation of Togo, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on China's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. I would also like to thank the delegation of
Azerbaijan for its excellent work last month.

I should also like to thank Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Campo for his presentation of the report of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005), as well as for the work he has
done in keeping with that resolution.

The report provides an overview of the
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), notably
in terms of the indictments against those suspected
of crimes and serious human rights violations and the
efforts to bring them before international justice or
national tribunals as well as the cooperation of the Court
with the Sudanese Government and the other States
Members of the United Nations.

On all those matters, the Prosecutor's report
indicates that no progress has been made and that
the Sudanese authorities have not expressed their
willingness to work towards the implementation of the
resolution. The establishment of special courts in Darfur
and the appointment of a number of prosecutors were
signs that were positive and welcome, but that came
to nothing, because, as the report makes clear, neither
the courts nor the prosecutors fulfilled their duties. The
Togolese delegation hopes, therefore, that the demands
of the relevant Security Council resolutions as well
as the calls from other bodies, including the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, will spur the
Sudanese authorities to take national steps to administer
justice and cooperate with the Court.

Togo believes that the conflict in Darfur will never
come to a conclusive end unless the fight against impunity
prevails and those who have been indicted answer for
their crimes according to the norms of international
law. Political will on the part of the highest Sudanese
authorities to put an end to impunity remains the key to
a lasting solution to the conflict in Darfur. We reiterate
that no conflict is resolved nor genuine reconciliation
achieved unless impunity ends and perpetrators are tried
in courts of law. Nor can the ICC deliver justice without
receiving cooperation from States, whose discretionary
right to pursue perpetrators on their own initiative
should encourage them to take independent measures,
so as to avoid any foreign intervention.

While it is clear that violence in Darfur has greatly
diminished, the conflict is not over and the humanitarian
situation is still worrying. Barriers to humanitarian
efforts, the expulsion of some non-governmental
organizations and restrictions on the delivery of
medicine and supplies to outlying regions must stop, in
compliance with resolution 1556 (2004). The Sudanese
Government should also fully implement resolution
2035 (2012), of 17 February, on the work of the Panel

of Experts and the need to end all violations of human

rights.

Through the Security Council, the United Nations
has demonstrated its will to create conditions in Darfur
conducive to peace and peaceful development, as
evidenced in the recent renewal of the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. My country welcomes the Operation's critical
contribution to the protection of civilians, humanitarian
assistance, intelligence and implementation of the
ceasefire and security measures. The Council should
remain engaged, so that its resolutions on the conflict in
Darfur can be fully implemented. Non-compliance by
internal or external actors will only perpetuate violence,
violations of human rights and threats to peace and
security.

