The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Crown
for his briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today's meeting. I thank Council members for
their valuable contributions to it. In accordance with
the understanding reached among the members of the
Council, I shall take it that they agree to the statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/6.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.

I would like at the outset to express my gratitude to
everyone here for the assistance and support extended
to the Egyptian presidency of the Security Council this
month, and for their participation in today's important
discussion on combating the messages and ideologies of
terrorist groups. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, must make the issue a top
priority in the context of its counter-terrorism efforts. I
would also like to welcome our speakers today.

The day before I left for New York, a dastardly
assassination took the lives of eight policemen in Cairo.
That serves as a reminder that terrorism is no longer
constrained by borders, since the twisted doctrine that
murdered those Egyptian officers who were defending
their citizens is the very same one that has claimed
Victims among concertgoers in Paris and travellers
at the Brussels airport. Solidarity with every human
soul is an obligation, regardless of whether those souls
come from a European, an Arab or an African country.
Confronting the rising tide of terrorism, which we
believe is one of the major threats to international peace
and security today, is also an obligation. Ifwe do not all
share that obligation, overcoming the challenge will be
very difficult. I would like to ask the Council to stand
for a moment in memory of the souls of the victims of
those dastardly attacks.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

During his address at the April Summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, President Abdel
Fattah Al Sisi said that the international system has
become flawed. In order to address that issue, we must,
of course, examine the factors behind it. Internationally,
there is an imbalance in the international system, as
reflected in the dwindling adherence to the concept of
the State in the Middle East and the Arab region in the
wake of the Iraq war. In our region, which has been
negatively affected by the ambitions of forces in the
Middle East looking to expand their influence at the
expense of Arab States, and in the resulting increase in
regional tensions, as well as the emergence of extremist
and terrorist organizations seeking to fill the vacuum
of authority in large region within States in the region.

We also have to deal with the illusions of
regional and international Powers that aim to classify
such organizations to suit their political goals. The
ramifications of that state of affairs are evident and
clear, with all they entail with regard to the manifold
cruelties inflicted upon the innocent people of the
region. In that regard, I recall the Syrian tragedy, in
which terrorist organizations have proliferated and
prospered. I urgently stress the need to bring an end
to that tragedy as soon as possible through cooperation
between the States members of the International Syrian
Support Group and the Security Council, given the
Council's authority to end the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people.

Africa, which Egypt has the honour of representing
in the Security Council, also suffers from the malaise
of terrorist organizations, such as Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram, that are present in various parts of the
continent, including North Africa, where Da'esh has for
some time controlled the strategic Libyan city of Sirte,
located on the shores of the Mediterranean, opposite
the coast of Europe.

The passage of 70 years since the eruption of the
Arab-Israeli conflict does not make it irrelevant, as
it remains the most crucial issue in our region. The
decades-long failure to take action to resolve this
conflict has deepened and exacerbated the main factors
behind the region's instability and the rise of terrorism.
It would be a mistake to believe that the passing oftime
or the outbreak of other conflicts will overshadow this
one or result in the imposition of an unjust resolution
that does not grant the Palestinians their rights like all
other peoples. Those who claim that the occupation
of Arab lands will not give rise to popular reaction
that would prolong the crisis, to the benefit extremist
organizations in the region, are also sadly mistaken.

Egypt has always stressed that the fight against
international terrorism can succeed only if we adopt a
non-selective approach that seriously and objectively
addresses the roots of that phenomenon and all
its elements by decisively confronting all terrorist
organizations equally and combatting the extremist
ideologies that give rise to terrorism and violence
and those who propagate them. The international
community must also be firm and decisive in dealing
with the military, financial and political support that
some countries and partners provide to those terrorist
organizations. Such support constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions. All of us must increase our
coordination and cooperation in order to dry up those
sources of support.
A thorough reading of the history and activities
of those organizations confirms the absence of core
ideological divergences among them. All of them
adhere to the same extremist ideologies espoused by
the thinkers of terrorism, the takfiri ideology and
violence, including Sayyid Qutb. They adopt such
ideologies as the basis for their activities, narrative
and media messages, which are based on animosity
and the rejection of society - distorted concepts that
contradict the spirit ofIslam, which rejects isolationism
and extremism and embraces a magnanimous message
of acceptance and diversity. The message of Islam, in
fact, solidified the principles of tolerance, peaceful
coexistence and respect for human rights. Furthermore,
I would highlight the fact that the exploitation by
terrorist groups of the technological revolution
represented by online communication platforms and
social media is one ofthe major factors that has enabled
them to disseminate their messages and ideologies in
an unprecedented manner.

I must also stress the importance of confronting the
phenomenon of Islamophobia, which contributes to the
spread of extremist thought and increased recruitment
by terrorist organizations of young people from Muslim
minorities in Western countries. We must review many
integration policies and confront hate speech and insults
aimed at the symbols and sanctities of the Islamic faith
under the guise of free speech. We believe that, to be
successful, the action required of the Council and the
international community in general must incorporate
guidelines aimed, among other things, at the following.

First, we must take advantage of the active efforts
of moderate religious institutions and build upon such
efforts, both by refuting the messages and ideologies
used by terrorist groups and by highlighting and
explaining the interpretations of the true concepts
of religions. In that regard, I wish to underline the
substantial efforts undertaken in several countries
around the world by Al Azhar and the Egyptian Dar
Al-Ifta.

Secondly, it is important for countries and societies,
including in the West, to reaffirm that terrorism is not
linked to any religion, culture or people.

Thirdly, national legislation must be enacted
to criminalize the spread of terrorist messages and
ideologies without infringing on the principle of
freedom of expression. That includes stepping up
efforts to halt the financing that terrorist groups require
to disseminate their terrorist messages and ideologies.
Fourthly, we must promote the role that the media
can play in combating the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism groups.

Fifthly, we need to emphasize the role that civil
society can play in different countries in the context of
national laws in combating the narratives and ideologies
of terrorist groups.

Sixthly, we need to cooperate and harmonize our
ongoing efforts at the national, regional and international
levels to combat the messages and ideologies of
terrorist groups in order to avoid contradictions and
inconsistencies. We must also enhance cooperation
among countries in that regard and provide the
necessary technical assistance, capacity-building and
financial resources, upon request.

Presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6, adopted by
the Council today, and the tireless efforts of the General
Assembly are a crucial comprehensive framework
to implement those proposals and objectives. I thank
the members of the Council for cooperating with the
Egyptian initiative and invite them, along with all
Members of the Untied Nations, to immediately agree
on a specific framework of implementation based on
the provisions of the presidential statement. Our voice
in confronting terrorism must be firm. We must stand
united. The message of the entire world to terrorists
must be clear and resounding. It must affirm that
terrorists are the enemies of humankind, that they do
not represent any religion, that their downfall is at hand
and that their messages and ideologies run counter to
logic, human nature and any and all creeds. Let us
work together to elevate the voice of truth, justice and
tolerance above the voice of terrorism, extremism and
hate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I will now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand.

