The President: Following consultations among
Council members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council reiterates that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in matters relating to the maintenance
of peace and security and consistent with Chapter
VIII of the Charter can improve collective security.

"The Security Council recalls all its previous
resolutions and statements of its President which
underscore the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations in accordance with the
Charter and the relevant statutes of regional and
subregional organizations.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the briefings of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, and
the Secretary General of the League ofArab States,
Nabil Elaraby.

"The Security Council recognizes and
further encourages efforts by the League of Arab
States to contribute to collective endeavours to
settle conflicts in the Middle East peacefully as
well as to promoting international responses to
the transformations experienced in the region,
while reaffirming its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of regional countries and to the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

"The Security Council welcomes the
intensifying cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States in the
wake of these transformations which reflect the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples in the region
for freedom, political participation and economic
and social well-being in a pluralistic society.

"The Security Council reiterates its commitment
to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and to seek a comprehensive resolution
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and reaffirms the
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. The
Security Council also recalls its previous relevant
resolutions.

"The Security Council, recalling its resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), welcomes the
appointment of the Joint Special Representative
for Syria of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States as an important step forward in
the cooperation between both organizations and
expresses its support for his efforts in continuing
the Secretary-General's good offices in that regard.

"The Security Council commends the members
of the League of Arab States for their ongoing
commitment to international peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including through the contribution
of troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

"The Security Council takes note of the general
meeting on cooperation between the secretariats of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States
and their specialized organizations, held in Vienna
from 10 to 12 July 2012.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
intention expressed by representatives of both
organizations to cooperate across a broad agenda
of mutual concern, formulating adequate joint
responses, where appropriate, to humanitarian
crises, promoting human rights, freedom of
expression, food security, environment protection,
and the fight against terrorism and the illicit
trafficking of drugs and arms, while reiterating the
need to ensure that all United Nations efforts to
restore peace and security also respect and promote
the rule of law.

"The Security Council recalls its press
statements of 12 and 14 September regarding recent
attacks on diplomatic personnel and premises and
reaffirms that such acts are unjustifiable regardless
of their motivations, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. The Security Council stresses the
importance of respect and understanding for
religious and cultural diversity throughout the
world. The Security Council underlines the common
commitment of both the United Nations and the
League of Arab States to foster a global dialogue
for the promotion of tolerance and peace, and calls
for enhanced cooperation in light of recent events
to promote better understanding across countries,
cultures and civilizations.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of strengthening cooperation on
capacity building with the League of Arab States
in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

"The Security Council expresses its
determination to take effective steps to further
enhance cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to report, as appropriate, on further
ways of strengthening institutional relations and
cooperation between the two organizations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/20.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Morocco to make a further statement.

