Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the pleasure to
speak on behalf of the European Union. Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland and Ukraine
align themselves with this declaration.

I wish to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
discuss this important issue in the Security Council. I
also want to thank Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his informative briefing. The European
Union would like to extend its appreciation to
Mr. Egeland for his excellent work as the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
complex challenge. Civilians, including women and
children, continue to bear the brunt of armed conflicts.
The European Union welcomes the sustained attention
paid by the Security Council to that important issue.

At the 2005 World Summit, the heads of State
and Government recognized that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a key concern of the
international community. The European Union
reiterates its support for the historic Summit Outcome
conclusion that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its population from genocide,

06-6406]

war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity - a conclusion which was reaffirmed by
resolution 1674 (2006).

The best way to protect civilians in armed
conflicts is to prevent conflicts. The EU is pleased to
note the strengthening of the culture of prevention
across the United Nations and vigorously supports the
continuation of this trend. The Security Council plays
an important role in this regard. Timely and adequate
briefings by the Special Advisor on the Prevention of
Genocide, the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Emergency Relief Coordinator and other relevant
actors will help the Council to act sufficiently early on
in conflict situations to effectively protect civilians at
risk.

Humanitarian access is a crucial part of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. The European
Union is troubled by the denial of full and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in need of
help, especially when this is used as a political tool and
as a weapon of war. Also, attacks on humanitarian
personnel cannot be tolerated. The European Union
fully supports the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. We urge all parties
to conflicts to provide unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance and to take all necessary
measures to guarantee the safety, security and freedom
of movement of humanitarian personnel and of the
United Nations and its associated personnel.

The EU is alarmed by the fact that 63 journalists
and media staff were killed in armed conflicts in 2005
and 75 in 2006. The Security Council should take note
of such a dramatic development. Journalists are
civilians and as such are entitled to full protection.

The European Union believes it is vital to
investigate crimes under international law committed
against civilians and bring their perpetrators to justice.
The restoration of law and order to prevent future
Violence and abuses and the tackling of impunity
should be a priority. It is for States concerned to bring
justice to perpetrators of the most serious crimes and
for the international community to support their efforts.
Where States fail to bring perpetrators of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity to justice, the
international community should be able to act.
The European Union urges States that have not
yet done so to ratify or accede to the Rome Statute and
to the treaties of international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee laws, and to take all appropriate
measures to ensure proper investigation and
prosecution of any violations of the relevant rules.

The EU highlights the effective implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and holds that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict can be properly achieved
only by strengthening the role of women as
constructive actors in developing and implementing
appropriate responses. Protection from physical and
sexual violence remains one of the major challenges of
civilian protection. Peacekeeping operations should be
mandated to employ all feasible measures to prevent
sexual violence and to address their effects where they
take place.

United Nations peacekeeping operations and
associated personnel have a particular responsibility in
their own conduct in this regard. The European Union
reiterates its full support for the policy of zero
tolerance of sexual abuse and exploitation by such
personnel, introduced by the United Nations, and has
adopted the same policy in its own European security
and defence policy operations.

The human rights of millions of children continue
to be violated and millions of children suffer in
situations of armed conflict. Every day children are
killed, maimed, abducted or recruited, in violation of
applicable law, as child soldiers, fall victims of rape or
other grave sexual violence, and suffer from attacks
against schools and hospitals that prevent them from
enjoying their rights to education and health care. The
European Union is fully committed to protecting
children from the grave violations that occur in armed
conflicts. It is mainstreaming the issues of children and
armed conflict into its advocacy, policies and
programmes and has continued to implement its plan of
action for the guidelines on children and armed
conflict. In this context, the EU commends the
sustained activity of the Security Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts, as well as the
dedicated work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, UNICEF and the child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations.

The special protection needs of refugees and
displaced persons must be adequately addressed. The
European Union welcomes the call by the Security
Council for all parties to a conflict to provide for these

needs in peace processes and to create conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of displaced persons. Also,
peacekeeping missions must have mandates and
resources to guarantee this, for example, by providing
security for and around displaced persons camps.

The easy availability and destabilizing
accumulations of small arms and light weapons
continue to pose a grave danger for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Another issue that the
European Union would like to highlight is that of
explosive remnants of war. Progress has been made
since the adoption of the United Nations Programme of
Action against the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in 2001, but small arms and light weapons
continue to be the real weapons of mass destruction
today. They kill thousands every day, are instrumental
in depriving millions of their human rights, undermine
development and fuel conflict, crime and terrorism.
The EU believes that transfer controls, marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons, control of
arms brokering and ammunition and the integration of
such measures into development assistance need to be
tackled in order to better protect civilians.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
multifaceted challenge. The European Union is fully
committed and works actively to protect civilians in
armed conflict. In cooperation with the United Nations,
the EU continues its relentless work for the promotion
of peace and conflict prevention so that in the future no
one, child or adult, is forced to suffer in armed
conflicts.

