Mr. Bolton (United States of America): In recent
days and weeks, we have seen an outbreak of violence
in the Middle East, sparked by attacks and kidnappings
which Hamas and Hizbollah carried out against Israel.
Events continue to develop even as we speak.
Hizbollah's incursions across the Blue line on 12 July
were a deliberate and premeditated provocation
intended to undermine regional stability and are
contrary to the interests of both the Lebanese and
Israeli peoples.

We unequivocally condemn the kidnapping by
Hizbollah, a terrorist organization, of two Israeli
soldiers and call for their immediate and unconditional
release. Provocations across the Blue Line by terrorist
groups highlight the urgent need for full and immediate
compliance by Syria and Hizbollah with relevant
Security Council resolutions, including 1559 (2004),
1583 (2005), 1655 (2006) and 1680 (2006).

The international community has made clear its
desire to see the central authority of the Government of
Lebanon extended throughout the country. In this
context, we underscore the importance of the Security
Council President's statement of 18 June 2000 and the
Secretary-General's conclusion that, as of 16 June
2000, Israel had withdrawn all its forces from
Lebanon, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), and met the requirements
defined in the Secretary-General's 22 May 2000 report.

As President Bush said yesterday, we are very
concerned about the fragile democracy in Lebanon.
While we have been working very hard with partners to
strengthen democracy in Lebanon, we are also making
clear that the democratic aspirations of the Lebanese
people must not be undermined by the irresponsible
and destabilizing actions of Hizbollah.

We have repeatedly made clear to Lebanon and
Syria our serious concern about the presence of
terrorist groups on their soil and the periodic attacks
against Israel from groups and individuals in southern
Lebanon. All militias in Lebanon, including Hizbollah,
must disarm and disband immediately, and the
Lebanese Government must extend and exercise its
sole and exclusive control over all Lebanese territory.
President Bush has made clear that Syria and Iran
must be held to account for supporting regional
terrorism and their role in the current crisis. Syria
provides safe haven to the militant wing of Hamas and
provides material support to Hizbollah, which also

maintains an active presence in Syria. Iran's extensive
sponsorship and financial and other support of
Hizbollah is well known and has been ongoing for
decades. No reckoning with Hizbollah will be adequate
without a reckoning with its principal State sponsors of
terror. We call on Syria and Iran to cease their
sponsorship and support of terrorist groups, in
particular Hizbollah and Hamas. For the third time in
two weeks we call again on Syria to arrest Hamas
leader Khaled Mashal, who currently lives in
Damascus. There is no excuse for a Member State of
the United Nations to continue to knowingly harbour a
recognized terrorist.

The Secretary-General's decision to send a
senior-level team to the region is a development that is
welcomed by my Government. We also are engaged
with the primary parties and other concerned leaders to
help restore calm and achieve a resolution to the crisis.
In fact, senior United States officials have been in the
region and are in Jerusalem today for meetings.

All parties in the region must accept their
responsibilities for maintaining security and stability.
We urge all parties to accept the principle that
Governments must exercise sovereign control over
their territories. The United States remains firmly
committed to working with others not only to resolve
the present situation but toward building longer-term
peace and stability in the region.

