Mr. Westerwelle (Germany): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
Republic of Azerbaijan on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May. Let
me also thank you for having convened today's debate
on threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

Over the past decade, the Security Council has
shown remarkable resolve in countering terrorism.
Significant resolutions have been adopted. Member
States have adopted effective countermeasures. Our
sanctions regimes have weakened terrorists' resources.
As Chair of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Germany remains committed to working with all
Member States to confront the threats posed.

Although we have been successful in disrupting
terrorist structures, we must not relent in our efforts.
12-32940

Recent attacks in Afghanistan, Nigeria and Iraq are
evidence of terrorists' persistence. Terrorism cannot be
associated with a certain ideology, religion or ethnic
affiliation. The threat of international terrorism is
evolving, and we must adapt our responses to the new
patterns.

Consequently, Germany strongly advocates a
further strengthening of international cooperation and
capacity-building. We thus welcome the most recent
report (A/66/762) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Let me make three points.

First, strategies and measures to counter terrorism
must always be based on the respect of human rights
and the principles of the rule of law. These are the core
values of the United Nations. Our measures need to be
effective, but they are self-defeating when they
jeopardize the very principles they aim to protect. We
cannot protect our values by sacrificing them in the
same effort.

Secondly, the sanctions regimes of the United
Nations need to be a leading example of fair and
transparent procedures. The countering of terrorism
and adherence to the rule of law are mutually
reinforcing goals. For several years, Germany has been
advocating improvements in this area. We attach great
importance to the Office of the Ombudsperson which,
in the framework of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, is
mandated to receive de-listing requests from individuals.
We commend the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberley Frost,
and the Council for the work done so far. We
encourage the Council to continue on this route and to
consider options for further enhancing fair and clear
procedures when implementing counter-terrorism
measures.

Thirdly, the face and methods of international
terrorism are changing. The internet is increasingly
abused by terrorist groups for incitement and
recruitment. In Germany, a terrorist group went
unnoticed for many years as it used the Internet to plan
vicious attacks and recruit supporters. In response, we
need to reduce virtual hiding places for terrorists, and
we need to counter incitement. Identifying effective
measures while ensuring full respect for fundamental
freedoms is a challenge for all of us. We support the
pilot projects of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. More needs to be done in
this field. We will succeed only if the whole
international community works together.

Let us take advantage of today's debate to send a
strong message of our determination. We will counter
the threat of international terrorism collectively. We
will adapt our instruments to address the evolving
nature and the root causes of terrorism. Only enhanced
civil liberties, economic prosperity and a chance for
political participation can counter the appeal of
terrorism in the long run. The basis for all our actions
is the rule of law and respect for human rights.

