Mr. AlMunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the French presidency
for drawing the Security Council's attention to this
important topic and to applaud France's efforts as
President of the Council this month. I would also like
to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
Ms. Virgina Gamba, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as Mr. Mubin
Shaikh, for their valuable briefings. We would like to
express our gratitude and appreciation for the efforts of
the United Nations on the issue of children and armed
conflict, which is undoubtedly one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community today.

The world is witnessing turbulence and crises
that are deeply alarming and that are indicators of the
increased suffering of civilians in armed conflict and
particularly of vulnerable groups, including children.
These conflicts, in which they are exploited, deprive
them of their innocence and the right to live in dignity
and to grow and survive. The vicious acts of terrorist
organizations such as Da'esh and Boko Haram do not
distinguish between civilians and non-civilians. Such
groups often target young people, and the international
community cannot remain silent and allow them to
deprive children of a normal life and force them to live
in terror. All children are entitled to receive protection
and feel secure within their families and in their homes.
Kuwait is deeply concerned about the negative impact of
armed conflict on children, including through acts such
as their recruitment and exploitation, group abductions,
sexual violence and maiming. The international
community must respond effectively to all issues in
that regard affecting international peace and security,
while respecting international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

On the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Principles and Commitments,
aimed at protecting children from unlawful recruitment
or from being used by armed forces or groups, Kuwait
would like to once again express its support for them
in their goal of ending inhumane practices against
children. We also affirm the importance of preserving
all the Security Council's tools and mechanisms
established to promote every possible measure to
combat such practices.

When we are discussing the issue of children in
armed conflict, we must address the suffering of the
defenceless Palestinian people, including Palestinian
children. The attacks that have been perpetrated against
them over the decades still continue. Israel continues
to transgress against the Palestinian people and their
children. They have to endure practices that include
the destruction of education and health facilities,
among other things, besides cruelties such as torture
and detention. In addition, the destructive impact
of Israel's control over Palestinian mobility through
checkpoints and the apartheid wall has aggravated the
humanitarian suffering, desperation and deprivation
that affect Children in alarming numbers. In that
regard, we call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility for combating such repeated Violations
in order to ensure justice and protection for Palestine's
vulnerable children and guarantee their right to live
in freedom, free from injustice. Kuwait will soon be
hosting an international conference on Palestinian
children's suffering to highlight the violations that are
being inflicted on Palestinian children at the hands of
the Israel Defense Forces.

In the wake of the horrifying images we have seen
this year of the chemical attacks in Syria that resulted in
dozens of deaths, including of children, we must send a
clear message that the use of such weapons, regardless
of the perpetrators, will not be tolerated. We must end
the bloodshed in Syria. It is the duty of the Security
Council to find a solution to the crisis and to end these
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

With regard to the crisis in Yemen, the State of
Kuwait, as a member of the League of Arab States,
emphasizes that the League plays a pivotal role in
protecting children in that country. It is committed
to international standards, international law and
international humanitarian law and has taken
comprehensive measures to protect civilians. The
League is one of the largest supporters and contributors
to the humanitarian efforts aimed at alleviating
humanitarian suffering in Yemen and rehabilitating the
affected areas.

The international community today, particularly
the Security Council, has a moral and legal obligation
to end the practices affecting the Rohingya Muslims in
Myanmar. The United Nations has received 480 reports
of child recruitment there, in addition to six attacks
on education facilities in Rakhine state. We must
take all necessary measures to guarantee adherence
to international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in order to guarantee people's safety
and free mobility, without oppression based on ethnic
or religious identity.

Expressing our rage repeatedly is not enough.
We must end violence against children and hold the
perpetrators accountable. The world cannot lose a
generation of innocent children to conflict. Indeed,
28 million children have been traumatized and forced
to flee their homes because of these conflicts. We
must effectively protect children and guarantee their
legitimate rights.

In this regard, the State of Kuwait would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate once again its
support for the Security Council mandate on children
and armed conflict and that we will continue to exert
every possible effort to support the United Nations and
the Security Council in addressing violations against
children in all their forms, preventing further Violations
and holding the perpetrators accountable.

