Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2368
(2017) and thanks the United States for introducing
the resolution and for facilitating the important work
carried out during negotiations. Last Friday, my
country commemorated the one-year anniversary of
the tragic attack that occurred in Nice on 14 July 2016,
which claimed the lives of 86 individuals of various
nationalities. That memory, as well as the many other
recent terrorist attacks throughout the world, remind
us of the extent to which we must remain united and
determined in our struggle against terrorists, who seek
to destroy our way of life and freedom.

The work of the international community
against Da'esh is showing results, and that is worth
underscoring. On the ground, Da'esh has continued
to suffer considerable losses in Iraq and Syria. The
victory of Iraqi forces in Mosul is underway. That is a
major turning point in the development of the conflict,
while in Raqqa the battle continues to deprive that
group of a safe haven there. Of late, Da'esh has actually
attracted fewer foreign terrorist fighters, which is also
of key importance.

However, as we know, sometimes all it takes is one
individual to carry out a terrorist attack. Such a threat
remains complex and multifaceted. We must therefore
continue to take measures commensurate with the
threat with which we are faced. That means that we
must continue to take action in several areas. Combating
propaganda and radicalization disseminated over the
Internet, blocking the financial sources used by terrorist
groups and preparing for the return of foreign terrorist
fighters are three top priorities, without exception, in
that context.

Resolution 2368 (2017), which we just adopted
today, allows us to update the sanctions regime against
Da'esh and Al-Qaida, so as to better take into account
the development of the threat and revise our priorities,
taken as whole. The resolution - and I would like to
highlight this point - is a critical step in our shared
struggle against terrorism, which must, more than ever,
unite us.

Rest assured of the full commitment of France in
the struggle against terrorism in general and against
Da'esh, in particular.

