Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a matter of
great honour for me to join colleagues in paying tribute
to President Mandela. A man of peace and a symbol of
wisdom and forbearance, his presence in the Security
Council bears a special significance for all of us. In him,
the world has found the most fitting successor of
Mwalimu Julius Nyerere to facilitate the peace process in
Burundi. We feel this will inspire peace in the whole of
the Great Lakes region.

We subscribe to the points made by the Secretary-
General, clearly, about the situation in Burundi and
responsibilities of the parties concerned. Bangladesh
extends unequivocal support to the Arusha peace process
and to the mandate and mission of the Facilitator. We
endorse fully the outlines for peace in Burundi elaborated
by President Mandela in his statement. We believe that an
agreement providing for a just, peaceful and durable
solution to the conflict in Burundi is both expedient and
possible.
The presence of the Foreign Minister of Burundi at
this meeting of the Council is important; it will afford us
a first-hand briefing on the Government's position on the
situation in Burundi. I believe he will in turn carry the
message from this Council back home.

We urge the parties involved in the process to
persevere in their commitment to negotiate a settlement.
We call upon those still remaining outside to commit
themselves to the peace process. This task should now
commence in full earnest where it stopped last October
with the passing away of Mwalimu Nyerere. We welcome
the spirit of peaceful settlement demonstrated in the 16
January meeting in Arusha, launching the initiative of
President Mandela.

For the negotiations to be successful, the
Government of Burundi will be required to demonstrate
its sincere commitment and win the confidence of all
parties and sections of the people of Burundi. These
would be expressed in terms of respect for international
humanitarian law, as well as fundamental freedoms, civil
liberties and human rights of all citizens. The Government
will in particular have to ensure full and unhindered
access for all humanitarian personnel so that assistance
can reach those in need. The human rights observers
should also receive unhindered and unrestricted access.
The international community will judge the situation on
these parameters as well.

 

At the last meeting of the Council on this subject,
Views were expressed in favour of the need for contingency
preparations by the United Nations in anticipation of the
implementation of the outcome - a Burundi peace
agreement. We support the idea, given the magnitude of the
humanitarian, rehabilitation and reconstruction needs of the
country.

The tragedy of Burundi lies fundamentally in its socio-
economic situation. It is there that the United Nations
should be ready to respond once the situation is ready for
full-scale involvement. To be effective, our response should
be timely and adequate.

It is in the spirit of reiterating our collective
commitment to lasting peace in Burundi that Bangladesh
has collaborated with our colleagues in the Council in
submitting the draft resolution for consensus adoption.

Let me conclude, Mr. President, by thanking you
wholeheartedly for organizing this important meeting.

