Mrs. Borges (Timor-Leste): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank you for giving me the opportunity to address
the Council today. I would like to commend the
Secretary-General for the report before the Council
(S/2010/522) and for the comprehensive briefing just
provided by his Special Representative, Ms. Ameerah
Haq.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the leadership of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and Deputy Special Representatives and
for their contribution to the successes achieved to date.
In that regard, we were greatly saddened in March by
the untimely passing of Deputy Special Representative
Takahisa Kawakami, who worked tirelessly to support
the security sector. We look forward to fruitful
collaboration with his successor, Shigeru Mochida.

When Special Representative Haq addressed the
Security Council in February 2010 (see S/PV.6276),
she stated that Timor-Leste had reached a new stage in
which current leaders were working to consolidate
gains of the past and ensure a smooth transition to the
recovery and development phase. Today, the same
message has been echoed and Timor-Leste continues
on that path of consolidation, as evidenced in the
progress reported in key areas such as the ongoing
handover of policing responsibilities in 10 out of the
13 districts; the promulgation of the national security
legislation package; the finalization of the National
Strategic Plan, in consultation with the wider
community; the drawdown of the international
stabilization force in response to the more stable and
improved security environment; the overall
improvement in the socio-economic outlook and the
very important ongoing national dialogue, which is
forward-looking and premised on the need to find
sustainable solutions to the multiple challenges we
face.

Those are examples of some of the
accomplishments of the past year. However, we
continue to face many challenges. In order to build on
that momentum, Timor-Leste requires the support and
continued engagement of the international community
as we embark on this very important next phase. The
events of 2006 are a stark and unfortunate reminder of
the fragility of peace when the institutions of the State
are nascent and capacities need to be developed and
further strengthened.

Consequently, in his statement to the General
Assembly this past September, President Ramos-Horta
stated:
"In only eight years and in spite of the
overwhelming challenges facing us, we have

navigated out of the storms to a new period of
peace, stability and economic growth.

"Timor-Leste is a least developed country,
affected by pervasive poverty. We are still a
fragile country, partly because we are only eight
years old, and being an infant country, all the
institutions of the State are young and fragile."
(A/65/PV.]D 
Peace and stability, economic growth and poverty
reduction and justice and the promotion of human
rights are therefore the main tenets of this current
phase of Timor-Leste's nation-building agenda. We
need to consolidate gains and further improve
opportunities.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General, the situation in Timor-Leste has remained
calm, including in the 10 districts where the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) has resumed
executive policing responsibilities. This is due to the
increasing capacities of the PNTL, the continued police
presence of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the assistance provided by
the international security forces of Australia and New
Zealand. The Government is committed to continuing
momentum in the resumption process, while adhering
to the mutually agreed criteria and timeline.

In that regard, the Secretary of State for Security
is committed to resolving, in a timely manner, the
remaining cases of uncertified PNTL officers. My
Government is also committed to providing the
necessary planning and budgetary support to ensure
that PNTL logistical and capacity needs are met in
accordance with our means.

We are now looking beyond the resumption
process to a new stage in the strengthening of the
PNTL, with intensified efforts to develop a sustainable
national capacity and institutional development. This
will be greatly facilitated by a continuing UNMIT
police presence in all districts and units in sufficient
numbers to provide further training, mentoring and
advice to the PNTL. We also strongly support the
addition of 19 civilian UNMIT posts to provide further
opportunities for the development of PNTL capacities.
In this regard, it is important that the recruitment
process for these posts be expedited to ensure early
deployment and that, in the selection process, the best
skill sets are identified to suit the situation on the
ground.

As a result of the increased stability and strong
partnerships with the international community, the
Government has been able to deliver on its
commitment to ensuring socio-economic development
and reducing poverty. Moreover, the Government is
committed to achieving the Millennium Development
Goals.

In this connection, we are pleased to note that a
number of socio-economic indicators demonstrate that
our commitment to development is indeed producing
results through the prioritization of expenditure in
public infrastructure projects in an effort to stimulate
the economy while reducing poverty and improving the
lives of the people. For example, poverty throughout
Timor-Leste has been reduced by 9 per cent. Also, a
recent study has concluded that that there has been a
drop in the fertility rate from 7.8 to 5.7, in the infant
mortality rate from 60 to 44 per 1,000, and in the
under-five mortality rate from 83 to 64 per 1,000.

Timor-Leste has one of the youngest populations
in the world, with nearly 60 per cent of the population
under 25 years of age. To comprehensively address this
issue, the Government is developing policies and
programmes to generate jobs. As we are all aware, high
levels of youth unemployment in post-conflict settings
has posed and continues to pose challenges in the
peacebuilding context. My delegation is mindful of this
and acknowledges that our young people are among the
most disaffected and disadvantaged group in our
society. They have yet to reap the dividends of our
hard-won freedom, which they eagerly expected and
fought for. They need to be integrated through stronger
participation in our nation-building efforts. In this
regard, it is critical that the Government be proactive
in the pursuit of appropriate, creative and innovative
solutions to address this.

The Government is also committed to promoting
and protecting human rights. Recent developments that
have led to a strengthening of the justice sector include
Govemment-provided training, workshops and
mentoring for the Office of the Provedor. All these
measures have increased accountability and access to
justice in rural and urban areas alike. Similarly, we
look forward to working closely with UNMIT and the
United Nations agencies in implementing our Justice
Sector Strategic Plan, based on the recommendations
of the independent comprehensive needs assessment of
the justice sector. This includes ensuring adequate legal
protection of women and children. As part of our

commitment to implementing gender responsive
policies, my Government, through the Secretary of
State for the Promotion of Equality, is making
concerted efforts to ensure that such policies are
mainstreamed across all line ministries through the
establishment of gender focal points. The adoption of
the law against domestic violence is also testament to
this commitment to advancing the rights of women.

We are also very proud to have recently had
Ms. Maria Helena Pires elected to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, and
we are confident of the mutual benefits to be gained
both in Timor-Leste and in the work of the Committee
during her tenure there.

I would like to emphasize that the progress that
has been made and the development objectives to
which we have committed ourselves would not have
been possible without the continuing solidarity and
support of the international community. We are
committed to working in close collaboration with all
relevant United Nations agencies and the international
community on efforts to address longer-term
challenges facing Timor-Leste, including the
implementation of the Strategic Development Plan.
The National Strategic Development Plan provides the
blueprint for the next 20 years for the Government and
will enable development partners to align their
programmes with the identified national priorities to
ensure the efficient and effective delivery of resources.

The Government is committed to working closely
with UNMIT through the joint mechanism that has
been established to guide the Mission's transition
planning. We look forward to engaging with all
stakeholders and note the importance of national
ownership in this dialogue process. It is only through a
consultative and coordinated mechanism, taking into
account the identified national priorities, that we can
ensure sustainability of the process and outcomes.

I wish to emphasize the importance we place on
relations with our friends and partners in the region,
where we have taken a pragmatic and proactive
approach of engagement to confront issues of common
interest. The recent visit to Dili by His Excellency
Mr. Marty Natalegawa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Indonesia, to attend a ceremony to inaugurate a new
cross-border card system aimed at facilitating travel
between communities along our common border,
family visits, and access to traditional markets, is

testimony to the strength of and importance both
countries place on our bilateral relations. And our
relations with Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal on issues of security and economic
development, including in the petroleum sector, remain
strong.

Before closing, I would like to take this
opportunity to emphasize that we Timorese remain
optimistic and positive about our future. We cherish the
progress made over the past decade in terms of
institution-building, the provision of at least basic
education and social services to an increasing number
of our citizens, and the creation of economic
opportunities outside the rural areas. At the same time,
we are acutely aware of the many steep challenges
ahead of us and the work that remains. We will be able
to do this only in partnership with our friends in the
region and with the members of the Security Council
and the United Nations. Allow me therefore to express,
on behalf of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, our sincere gratitude for the continued and
steadfast support of the United Nations and our
international partners.

It is with this in mind that we ask the members of
the Council and the international community to
continue their engagement and to provide the necessary
assistance in building a stable and prosperous Timor-
Leste A a predictable partner in international relations,
firmly embedded in the partnerships in its region, and a
beacon of human rights at peace with itself.

