Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the briefers
that we have had today on this very important topic.
My time as United States Ambassador to the United
Nations has coincided by just a matter of weeks with
the Secretary-General's leadership of this institution. It
was a nice coincidence. I share the Secretary-General's
vision of reform for the work of the United Nations,
particularly in peacekeeping.

At the heart of that vision for reform are the
civilians we are meant to serve. Our near-term goal
must be their security and their safety, but our long-
term goal must be their independence. In peacekeeping,
the United Nations must strive to ensure the ability of
people to live in peace and security without a United
Nations presence. The idea of sustaining piece tracks
very closely with the goal of lifting up civilians. It
recognizes that peacekeeping missions alone cannot
produce lasting peace. They can help create space
for peace to take hold, but they must be a part of a
larger strategy of coordinating the resources of the
United Nations to prevent conflict in the first place
and to address its causes. Critically, sustainable peace
recognizes that Governments must also hold up their
end of the deal. There can be no sustained long-term
peace without political solutions on the ground.

I welcome this opportunity to consider our
peacekeeping operations in the larger context of a
sustaining peace. I am a former accountant - alarms
go off when I hear ambiguous terms like synergize or
holistic. We need to see things we can measure; we
need to see accountability. We all need to make it a
priority to find value in what the United Nations does,
not simply financial value but value for the people that
the United Nations serves and value for the people who
pay the bills. That means true reform must be more than
the reshuffling of entities and departments. It must be
more than generating jargon-filled reports. It must be
about solving the problems that prevent the United
Nations from achieving sustainable political solutions.

The United Nations has many tools with which
to maintain peace and security. Are we using these
tools cooperatively and cohesively? Are all of them
necessary to achieve a political solution? Are we
creating independence or dependence? When we fail to
use all the tools in the United Nations toolbox or fail
to use them correctly we risk creating United Nations
missions like the one in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. The Democratic Republic of the Congo Mission
has existed for years with no end in sight - one of the
reasons is that the Mission has lost its way. The Security
Council has piled on new responsibilities over the years,
diverting resources and attention from its core mission
of civilian protection and stabilization. To make matters
worse, the Mission must work with an uncooperative
and, sometimes, hostile Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Further complicating matters is
the fact that it is clear that credible elections will not
be possible in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
without the Mission's logistical and technical support.

To help clarify the Mission's role, earlier this
year the Security Council made some changes to
its mandate. First, we established clear metrics for
mission effectiveness, and secondly, we specifically
outlined support for the political process as a strategic
priority. These were good positive changes that will
bring us closer to the goal of a sustainable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In that same spirit, I welcome Egypt's focus in
today's meeting on making sure that there is a clear
exit strategy for our peacekeeping missions. This is one
of the United States's principles for reform. Security
Council mandates must include plans for a viable
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. The
Security Council did this when it mandated that the
United Nations devise a peacebuilding plan in Liberia
in preparation for the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission there early next year.

The United Nations devised that plan in close
coordination with the Government and with the
participation of civil society. The result was something
that all of the different parties could buy into. The
Liberian Government has committed to working with
the peacekeeping mission, the United Nations country
team, local stakeholders and international partners to
implement the steps laid out in this first-of-its-kind plan
to sustain peace in years to come. This is the model for
plans in similar transition situations in future.

Every situation is different, but just as Liberia
represents a potential peacebuilding success, South
Sudan represents a significant peacebuilding challenge.
When South Sudan started as a country, we sent a
mission to help build peace. But when conflict started
a few years later, the peacekeeping mission justifiably
needed to change its focus. The United Nations has many
necessary components there to get the country back on
its feet: a United Nations special envoy helping mediate

a solution to the conflict, a peacekeeping mission
mandated to protect civilians, a United Nations country
team and various non-governmental organizations all
working on different parts of the puzzle.

One challenge is to put together the pieces of
the puzzle to make sure they all fit. The goal is the
integration of United Nations resources into a plan
focused on supporting a political solution. The second
and bigger challenge is that the United Nations efforts
will only be successful if the South Sudanese parties
have the political will to engage in regional processes
and end the violence.

The Secretary-General's reform agenda gives us a
historic opportunity to institute long-overdue changes
at the United Nations. The United States shares his
commitment to using the considerable resources of the
United Nations to achieve lasting sustainable peace.

