Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

I wish to convey to you, Sir, and to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela the Movement's appreciation for
having convened today's ministerial debate on such a
fundamental topic. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his input into today's debate. We hope that this
debate will contribute to making the United Nations,
and in particular the Council, more transparent,
democratic and consistent in its undertakings.

At a time when the international community
is celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization, there is no better time to engage Member
States in the defence of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations as the only way to
ensure international peace and security. The purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter are the same
pillars upon which the structure of international law is
founded. They encompass the fundamental concepts
of respect for the sovereignty and equality of States,
non-interference, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
refraining from the use or threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
Member State. The purposes and principles must be
thoroughly respected at all times by all Member States.

NAM. has been very strong and consistent in its
calls to the international community to uphold and
defend the principles of the United Nations Charter
and international law, as well as the means envisaged
in the Charter for the pacific settlement of disputes and
non-resort to the threat or use of force. The purposes
and principles of the Charter and the principles of
international law are essential in preserving and
promoting peace and security, the rule of law, economic
development and social progress and human rights for
all.

Global peace and security continue to elude
humankind as a result of, inter alia, the increasing
tendency of certain States to resort to unilateralism
and unilaterally imposed measures, non-fulfilment of
the commitments and obligations assumed under the
the relevant international legally binding instruments,
especially on weapons of mass destruction and
conventional-weapons treaties, terrorism, conflicts,
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, the use of double standards in
international relations and the continuing failure and
unwillingness of the majority of developed countries
to fulfil their commitments in the economic and social
fields. We underscore the need for the international
community to collectively redress those situations
in accordance with the Charter and the principles of
international law.

NAM. member States, guided by the Movement's
principled positions and recognizing the serious danger
and threats posed by the actions and measures that
undermine international law and international legal
instruments, stress the need to undertake a wide range
of measures, among others: first, identifying and
pursuing measures that may contribute to achieving a
peaceful, prosperous, just and equitable world order;
secondly, respecting the right of nations to decide
on their political, economic and social systems, as a
pathway to peaceful coexistence among nations and
thereby to peace and security; thirdly, conducting
external relations based on the ideals and the purposes
and principles of the Movement, the United Nations
Charter and international law, as well as the relevant
declarations adopted by the General Assembly; fourthly,
refraining from recognizing, adopting or implementing
extraterritorial or unilateral coercive measures
or laws, including unilateral economic sanctions,
other intimidating measures and arbitrary travel
restrictions that seek to exert pressure on countries
of the Non-Aligned Movement, thereby threatening
their sovereignty and independence and their freedom
of trade and investment and preventing them from
exercising their right to decide by their own free will
their own political, economic and social systems, where
such measures or laws constitute flagrant violations of
the United Nations Charter and international law, the
multilateral trading system, as well as the norms and
principles governing friendly relations among States;
fifthly, opposing and condemning the categorization
of countries as good or evil based on unilateral and
unjustified criteria, and the adoption of the doctrine
of pre-emptive attack, including attack by nuclear
weapons by certain States, which is inconsistent with
international law, in particular the international legally
binding instruments concerning nuclear disarmament;
finally, the Movement stresses that the United Nations
Charter includes sufficient provisions regarding the
use of force to maintain and preserve international
peace and security, and that achieving that goal
through the Security Council should be done strictly
in full conformity with the relevant Charter provisions.
Resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as an umbrella
for addressing issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security must be avoided. In
that regard, the Council should fully utilize the relevant
Charter provisions, where appropriate, including of
Chapters VI and VIII. In addition, consistent with the
practice of the United Nations and international law,
as pronounced by the International Court of Justice,
Article 51 of the Charter is restrictive and should not be
rewritten or reinterpreted.

