Ms. Bird (Australia): Terrorism is one of the
critical challenges of our time. As terrorist groups
such as Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
have expanded their reach and influence, it is evident
that many find their narratives and tactics appealing.
Countering that appeal and preventing the spread of
violent ideology is essential to their long-term defeat
and is a priority for Australia. Australia recognizes that
the pathways to radicalization are complex and that
there is no single pathway. Each individual experiences
unique drivers to violent extremism. That challenge
means that there is no single solution to combating
violent extremism.

Australia's efforts to counter the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism aim to reduce the reach and
appeal of extremist narratives. We do that by limiting
access to their extremist propaganda online through
content removal and digital advertising, by undermining
the appeal of extremist messages through community-
led counter-narrative activities, and by hardening the
audience by increasing the digital resilience of youth
so that they are less likely to take propaganda at face
value. Governments cannot act alone in meeting this
challenge, and Australia collaborates with civil society,
industry and creative industries to compete with the
pace and scale of the dissemination of violent extremist
content.

Australia is committed to a regional and
international approach to meet the shared challenges of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism.
Regionally, we are working through programmes
aimed at marginalizing the appeal of extremist
thinking and messages and building community
resilience to extremist messages by promoting values
such as democracy, human rights and tolerance. In line
with Australia's national countering violent extremism
strategy, we strongly support the role of civil society
organizations in countering violent extremist ideology.

In 2015, Australia hosted a regional summit on
countering violent extremism. We are pursuing the
implementation of the outcomes from that summit,
which include connecting civil society, improving
regional partnerships between Government and
non-governmental actors, building the technical
capability of grass-roots organizations and developing
counter-messaging resources tailored to the South-East
Asia region. Working closely with partners and allies
in the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum, Australia supports strategies
dedicated to disrupting, degrading and destroying the
toxic narratives of ISIL and other terrorist groups and
to challenging their ideology. And we are seeing results.

As the threat from terrorism and violent extremism
has evolved, so must the response. The global nature
of terrorist narratives and the need to counter them
globally underlines the critical role of the United
Nations. Australia strongly supports the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) as a practical approach to preventing
violent extremism. There is a pressing need for the
international community to come together to combat the
threat of terrorism. The review of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in June presents Member States the
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the strategy
and to continue to support efforts to counter terrorism
and terrorist ideology. Australia is committed to doing
its part.

