Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany voted in favour
of the resolution just adopted by this Council,
resolution 2017 (2011).

We appreciate the initiative of the Russian
Federation for taking up this important issue. The
proliferation of all arms and related material of all
types from Libya to the region is an issue of utmost
concern to all of us. Resolution 2017 (2011) rightly
addresses man-portable air defence systems
(MANPADS) and other small arms and light weapons,
chemical weapons and materiel of all types.
2

It is our understanding that the latter reference
covers nuclear and radiological materiel, and we
believe that the International Atomic Energy Agency,
like the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, should have a crucial role to play in this
regard. In this context, Germany is planning to give
technical support to a mission of inspectors of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to Libya. Germany is also closely cooperating with
partners on how to secure MANPADS and other small
arms and light weapons.

In paragraph 5, resolution 2017 (2011) stipulates
a reporting mechanism on the assessment of the threats
and challenges posed by the proliferation of all arms
and related materiel of all types. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), with
assistance from its Panel of Experts, is requested to
submit a report to the Council in this regard.

As is well known, Germany is of the view that, as
a matter of principle, independent panels of experts
should report directly to the Council. Most of the
panels of experts established by the Council, including
that established under resolution 1973 (2011) and
referred to in paragraph 5 of today's resolution, report
directly to the Council. In order to preserve their
independence, panels of experts should not be
requested to report through committees. The
independent expertise of the panels should be leant
directly to the decision-makers in the Council without
being subject to pre-examination by subsidiary organs.
Germany would have preferred a reporting mechanism
under today's resolution that would have allowed the
Panel of Experts to report directly to the Council.

