Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this briefing. Allow me to
take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Momen and
Ambassador Vilovie for their briefings and for their
respective leadership of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).

This discussion and the interactive dialogue that we
will have tomorrow are very timely as we head towards
the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture.

We all are familiar with the statistics on the relapse
of post-conflict States into violence. The situations
preoccupying the Council provide clear illustrations:
the relapse into violence in the Central African
Republic; last year's coup in Guinea-Bissau, its fourth
since independence; and the recent violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The PBC, together with the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office, were
established to fill gaps in the United Nations capacity
to assist post-conflict States to avoid relapses. At
that time, there was little in the way of peacebuilding
architecture in other forums. The field is now relatively
crowded. While it has been rightly acknowledged
that the PBC has yet to realize its full potential, there
are useful lessons we can draw on to provide it with
guidance on fulfilling its core mandate.

I will focus my remarks on three areas.

First, the PBC's value-add and impact in the
field. The core challenge is how a New York-based
organization can make an impact on the lives of people
on the ground. The PBC works well when it uses its
comparative advantage as a Member States-based
entity to play a strong political accompaniment role.
The organization can deliver coordinated and targeted
messages at key times. We saw this in the lead-up to
Sierra Leone's successful elections last November.

However, further efforts will be needed to
strengthen practical impact in the field. Country-
specific configurations must focus on supporting
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General
and Resident Coordinators. They can add weight to
advocacy, mobilize Member State engagement and
draw attention in New York to threats and challenges.
Their effectiveness depends on their relationships with
host Governments and with Special Representatives and
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General,
and the depth of their understanding of the situation on
the ground.

The second issue is partnerships. As noted in
the annual report (S/2013/63) before us today and
as mentioned by Ambassador Momen, the PBC has
made serious efforts over the past year to strengthen
partnerships and build valuable synergies with financial
institutions, especially the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. We are pleased to see those strands
coming together. Greater coherence between the PBF,
the World Bank's State and Peacebuilding Fund and
the African Development Bank's Fragile States Facility
helps minimize duplication and ensures that we can
leverage economies of scale. The PBC can play a strong
political role to complement the work of the financial
institutions.

Often the PBC is criticized for failure to mobilize
resources, but this is a constant challenge at the moment
in times of fiscal austerity. The PBC must therefore look
to non-traditional donors, including the private sector.

Country configurations can help coordinate donor
efforts to minimize duplication and identify gaps.
We welcome the pilot mapping exercise of Guinea's
peacebuilding priorities, and the Working Group on
Lessons Learned is also doing important thinking on
the organization of donor conferences, building on the
successful conference on Burundi last year.

We welcome the efforts of the PBC to support new
models of partnership between conflict-affected States
and development partners. It absolutely makes sense
for the PBC to align its country-specific commitments
with national peacebuilding priorities. For example,
the Sierra Leone and Liberia configurations have
supported the two pilot countries in implementing the
New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States by aligning
their mutual commitments with those countries'
development strategies, which is logical.

The third issue is the role of women. Engaging
women in peacebuilding settlement and post-conflict
decision-making processes is vital to ensuring
sustainable recovery and long-term peace. More effort is
needed to take forward the Secretary-General's seven-
point action plan on gender-responsive peacebuilding.

As an example of efforts in that area, we are
working closely with Pacific Islands chiefs of police to
support female police officers to undertake the relevant
training, and we are developing police deployment
gender strategies to promote the participation and
protection of women in conflict and post-conflict
settings.

We encourage the Peacebuilding Fund to maintain
its commitment to the Secretary-General's target of
allocating 15 per cent of United Nations-managed
funds to projects addressing women's needs and
empowerment.

Finally, let me say a few words on the interaction
between the Council and the PBC. The key issue is how
both bodies can work in pursuit of the same objectives.
The Council should draw on the PBC's expertise more
readily, and the PBC should draw to the Council's
attention emerging threats in the countries on its
agenda.

We fully agree with Ambassador Vilovie's comment
that the PBC can and should have a role during the
Council's consideration of mandate renewals and in
transitions in United Nations missions. Sierra Leone is
a good example.

Similarly, in Liberia, as the United Nations Mission
in Liberia continues its transition process, the PBC
configuration is well placed to highlight to the Council
any risks to the timeline and provide guidance to it.
In concluding, let me assure the Council of our
commitment to ensuring that the PBC continues to
develop its role and strengthen its partnerships so that
it can make a real difference to the people who suffer
the most from relapses into conflict.

