Mr. Kiyonga (Uganda): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, and the delegation
of South Africa on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. I also thank
you for organizing this important and timely briefing
on Somalia.

On behalf of the Government of Uganda, I would
like to thank the Security Council for its commitment
to the cause of peace and security on the African
continent, and in Somalia in particular.

This briefing is taking place at a time when we
can look back and say that we have made visible
progress in moving forward to stabilize Somalia. We
can say that now there are prospects; there is a new
opportunity to harness efforts in order to deal a final
blow to the terrorist forces of Al-Shabaab. That
opportunity should not be squandered. The members of
the international community should galvanize their
efforts to seize this opportunity to save ourselves from
the scourge of terrorism in the region.

Uganda and Burundi, acting through the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), have been in
Mogadishu supporting the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and battling Al-Shabaab since
2007. We have driven the enemy out of Mogadishu and
enabled the TFG to control the city. We have created an
environment in which international actors can safely
travel into and out of Mogadishu. We have secured the
airport and the seaport. Those achievements have been
made at great sacrifice in terms of lives lost on the
battlefront - those of our sons and daughters, among
the troop-contributing countries and in the TFG. Those
gains have been achieved at the cost of resources
expended by the United Nations, the European Union
and a number of bilateral donors.

The view of Uganda is that we could have made
even greater progress had it not been for a number of
shortcomings. In our analysis, those include the
challenges related to cohesion within the TFG
leadership and the failure to fast-track the development
of Somali security forces. In our view, five years down
the line, those forces would now be in control of
Mogadishu had they been developed at a much faster
rate. Additional shortcomings are related to the
insufficiency of forces within AMISOM, the less-than-
adequate facilitation of AMISOM. and the initial lack
of enthusiasm from the international community.

What is the new situation that gives us optimism
that we can now defeat Al-Shabaab and stabilize
Somalia?

First, I want to commend the Republic of Kenya
for taking two important steps: pursuing Al-Shabaab
terrorists into Somalia in defence of their country and
taking the decision to now be part and parcel of the
AMISOM. force.

Secondly, I want to thank the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the strong support it has given
to the TFG allied forces, which has led to the capture
from Al-Shabaab of important areas along the border
with Somalia.

Thirdly, I want to commend the Republic of
Djibouti, which has started to deploy its promised 850
troops to Somalia as part ofAMISOM.

In the next few weeks, Burundi will deploy an
additional 1,000 troops to Somalia. The delay in that
particular troop deployment was occasioned by the
need to organize the logistics. For its part, Uganda will
complete its final deployment of 1,700 troops to
Somalia by March. Again, the delay is due to the fact
that the Government of the United States has been
organizing the logistics that these troops need in order
to be deployed.

As we have heard, Kenya and Djibouti have
together undertaken to deploy to AMISOM. a total of
over 5,000 troops in order to beef it up to a force of
over 17,000 troops. And so now we not only have more
troops, but also Al-Shabaab is being attacked on a
number of fronts, including in Mogadishu, on the
border with Kenya and from the border with Ethiopia.

The fight against piracy also offers prospects for
beefing up the fight against Al-Shabaab. The pirates
who have disrupted international trade through their
actions on the high seas are incubated on mainland
Somalia. Therefore, it is critical that we take advantage
of the new situation to effectively link the anti-piracy
fight with the overall struggle to stabilize Somalia. The
re-establishment of the Somali State and the restoration
of law and order to that country will be sure ways of
dealing with the root causes of piracy.
As the Council is aware, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union has approved a strategic
concept for future AMISOM. operations in Somalia,
based on a technical analysis and recommendation
made by an AU-United Nations technical assessment
team.

What, then, should our next steps be? We
recommend in the main that, first, the Security Council
approve the expansion of AMISOM. force levels from
12,000 to 17,731, as requested by the AU Peace and
Security Council; secondly, that the Council recognize
that the fight against Al-Shabaab is now beyond
Mogadishu; thirdly, that the Council enhance its
support package to AMISOM. adequately so that the
assessed contributions of the United Nations cover the
payment for force multipliers and enablers, as
recommended in the strategic concept - this package
should include compensation for contingent-owned
equipment as well; and fourthly, that some of the
resources being used to fight piracy be extended and
linked to the effort to stabilize mainland Somalia.
Uganda welcomes the initiative of the United Kingdom
to convene a special summit on Somalia in London in
February, and looks forward to a positive outcome in
terms of mobilizing greater support for political,
security, humanitarian and development efforts.

In order to allay any doubts, I want to make
reference to some concerns I have heard since arriving
in New York to the effect that there is lack of clarity
about the command-and-control structure of the
proposed expanded AMISOM. force. Since Kenya
entered Somalia and Ethiopia renewed support to the
TFG allied forces, intensive consultations have been
taking place at the bilateral, regional and multilateral
levels. President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya, President
Yoweri Museveni and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of
Ethiopia have been in constant contact on this matter.

The summit of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) has held a number of
extraordinary sessions on the matter of Somalia. Even
before the joint AU-United Nations technical
assessment team was formed, the IGAD summit had
tasked the Chiefs of Defence Staff in our region to
clearly articulate how the coordination of our forces in
the field could be achieved. Until Friday last week, the
only difference that existed at the level of the Chiefs of
Defence Staff was the issue of whether the 12,000
troops contributed by Uganda and Burundi should all
be deployed in Mogadishu or if part of the force should
be deployed in the newly liberated zones.

Last week, consensus was reached among the
troop-contributing countries that the additional 2,700
troops to be deployed by Uganda and Burundi should
not go to Mogadishu. Their deployment will take into
account the liberated areas created by actions taken by
Kenya and Ethiopia. Therefore, we, the Ministers of
Defence of the troop-contributing countries, instructed
our Chiefs of Defence Staff to further fine-tune the
command-and-control architecture proposed by the
joint AU-United Nations technical team to take account
of this consensus. This is being done and will be ready
within the next few days.

In conclusion, the consultations taking place at
IGAD and the AU are intended not only to address the
military aspects of our work in Somalia but, even more
critically, to focus attention on the political question.
We know only too well that the crisis in Somalia is
basically of a political rather than of a military nature.

