Mr. Mutaboba: I am honoured to brief the
Security Council on key developments in Guinea-
Bissau. My last briefing was on 3 November 2011 (see S/PV.6648). The reporting period has largely been
marked by a political transition that resulted from the
medical evacuation and subsequent death, on 9 January
2012, of President Malam Bacai Sanha.

My briefing today will focus on the challenging
political and security environment stemming from the
current political transition process aimed at restoring
full constitutional order. Such order has now become a
crucial priority in terms of meeting the emerging
challenges and identifying ways forward on vital
national action plans, particularly through national
dialogue, with respect to the implementation of
security sector reform (SSR) and the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime.

The late President Sanha had consulted and set
the date of the much-awaited national conference for
2

14 to 18 January 2012. However, his medical evacuation
on 22 November 2011 delayed the preparations for the
event, which has now been overtaken by the focus on
the political transition following his death.

On 26 December, the security environment was
unsettled by an armed attack on the General Staff
Armory, with a reported removal of weapons. The
Government denied a coup attempt, although on
30 December, Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior
said that there had been a plot to kill him and the Chief
of Defence Staff, General Indjai. Twenty-four military
officers, including Navy Chief Rear Admiral Bubo Na
Tchuto, and one civilian were detained. Eight of the
detainees were subsequently released. In the wake of
the incident, two people were killed - a member of
the rapid intervention police, and a police commander,
Major Yaya Dabo, who was assassinated while on his
way to surrender to the authorities.

Although the national conference was postponed
indefinitely following the death of President Sanha,
work on technical preparations has continued, including
on enhancing the inclusiveness of the process. The
future of the initiative will depend on consultations
under a new president.

On the political transition, following President
Sanha's funeral on 15 January, interim President
Raimundo Pereira held wide-ranging consultations
with registered political parties, the National Electoral
Commission and some members of civil society, which
led to a consensus to hold early presidential elections
on 18 March. In support of the process, international
partners provided financial and/or in-kind contributions
to cover the budget of $4.9 million, either through the
United Nations Development Programme basket fund
or directly to the National Electoral Commission. The
consensus on the date of 18 March was later
challenged by some of its strongest advocates among
political parties in protest over the inability to update
the voter registry, which was last updated in 2008.

The Supreme Court cleared 10 of 14 candidates
to run in the elections, including former President
Kumba Yala and the ruling candidate of the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
(PAIGC), Carlos Gomes Junior. Some political parties
argued that Mr. Gomes Junior's candidacy was not
constitutional, since the interim President was not
constitutionally allowed to accept his resignation as
Prime Minister. One of the 10 candidates, Braima Dialo,
12-27797
of the African National Congress, dropped out of the
race on 5 March, claiming a lack of conditions for free,
fair and transparent elections.

Preparations for the elections were marred by
violence on 20 February, when youths protesting their
non-registration as voters in front of the offices of the
National Electoral Commission were charged by the
police, who in turn were manhandled and disarmed by
the military. Subsequently, a joint command of the
police and the military, with permanent technical
support from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
within the framework of security sector reform, worked
on security for the electoral process, with structures in
all regions. The United Nations also provided
multifaceted technical support for the entire electoral
process.

The election campaign process from 2 to
16 March was peaceful. On 18 March, the first round
of the presidential election was held in a peaceful and
orderly manner. No major security incidents were
reported. The killing of a former military intelligence
chief, Samba Djalo, outside his home in Bissau by
uniformed individuals marred an otherwise peaceful
election day. Investigations into the killing are ongoing
and linkages with the electoral process were refuted by
many, including the President of the National Electoral
Commission and the spokesperson of the armed forces.
In a similar development, on 21 March, the former
Chief of Defence Staff, Vice-Admiral Zamora Induta,
who had met Sambo Djalo a few hours before the latter
was killed, sought refuge inside the European Union
(EU) premises, claiming fear for his life.

The African Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Nigeria, the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and the West African Economic and Monetary
Union deployed a total of 154 election observers
throughout the country. In addition, there were three
electoral technical experts from South Africa and two
from the EU. The observers were unanimous in their
assessment that the polls had been free, fair and
transparent.

On 20 March, a coalition of five candidates who
had scored less than Carlos Gomes Ji'inior at the polls,
including Kumba Yala, claimed that there had been
fraud at the polls and called for the nullification of the
12-27797
results and for fresh polls following the establishment
of a new voter registry. Sources close to Kumba Yala
also indicated that he would not participate in a run-off
election.

On 21 March, the National Electoral Commission
indicated that since no candidate had obtained 50 per
cent plus one vote in the election, a run-off would be
held on 22 April between Carlos Gomes Junior and the
second placed candidate, Kumba Yala. Voter turnout
was 55 per cent, lower than in the previous elections.

I would like now to turn to developments in the
core areas of concern to the mandate of UNIOGBIS.

First, with regard to security sector reform, the
initial boost to consultations between the CPLP,
ECOWAS and the Government of Guinea-Bissau on a
memorandum of understanding for the implementation
of the SSR road map appears to have dissipated. As an
alternative option, ECOWAS and the Government
undertook to sign a bilateral memorandum of
understanding in furtherance of the implementation of
the road map. However, progress was also interrupted
by the political transition.

UNIOGBIS continued to support the Government
on resource mobilization efforts for the five-year
special pension fund for members of the defence and
security institutions. Cape Verde pledged as much as
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, that is, $4.5 million,
with $1 million to be disbursed in early 2012. On
30 January, on the margins of the African Union
Summit of Heads of State and Government in Addis
Ababa, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo of
Equatorial Guinea, in his capacity as outgoing Chair of
the African Union, convened an African Union
partners' breakfast workshop in support of the Guinea-
Bissau SSR process, where further pledges of
assistance were indicated, including from Equatorial
Guinea. On 10 February, the Government of Guinea-
Bissau and the United Nations signed a Peacebuilding
Fund grant agreement for $2,803,378, making the
United Nations the first international partner to
contribute to the pension fund. However, Government
plans to launch the operation on 23 January were
delayed in the wake of the political transition.
Demobilization is a crucial step to trigger the
rejuvenation of the armed forces in Guinea-Bissau. Its
implementation is equally delayed.

On police reform, UNIOGBIS continued to
provide technical support for enhanced community
3
policing through the establishment of model police
stations, with the assistance of the Peacebuilding Fund,
as well as support in the areas of training, vetting and
certification. Special concern is also being paid to
gender-related matters, including gender-based violence,
including a focus on preventing and combating child-
trafficking. Similar efforts are ongoing with respect to
reform in the justice sector, while the refurbishment of
military barracks and the provision of equipment and
prospective training plans are being undertaken with
the assistance of the Angolan Mission to Support
Security and Defence Sector Reform in Guinea-Bissau.

On the fight against impunity, in February 2012,
three suspects were charged with qualified homicide,
damage and grave physical offences in connection with
the investigation into the assassination of General
Tagme Na Waie, on 1 March 2009. The case is to be
submitted to the Bissau criminal court for trial. Some
suspects were cleared. As to the investigation into the
assassination of President Joao Bernardo Vieira, on
2 March 2009, the Prosecutor General has yet to hear
key witnesses who are outside the country.

Also, the dual assassinations of June 2009 have
been referred to the Supreme Court. Investigations
have reportedly been opened into the assassinations of
Major Yaya Dabo, on 27 December 2011, and Colonel
Samba Djalo, on 18 March 2012.

On the fight against illicit drug trafficking, there
has been progress in the implementation of the West
Africa Coast Initiative, notably in the functioning of
the transnational crime unit, which, since the end of
2011, has been carrying out reporting activities,
produced primary intelligence reports on international
drug trafficking and participated in operational
activities.

The implementation of the 2011 to 2014 national
plan to combat illicit drug trafficking, and its political
declaration, jointly designed by the Government,
UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, has been hampered by financial constraints,
in spite of existing capacity to implement it. The
deficient judiciary system adds to an already long list
of other collateral issues that impedes properly
combating impunity, drug-trafficking and organized
crime.

On benchmarks, I would also like to report on the
progress made on the implementation of the United
Nations joint strategic workplan in Guinea-Bissau.
Approximately 78 per cent of selected indicators are
either on track or likely to be achieved within the time
frame of 2017. On 22 February, the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations system signed the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) for the period 2013-2017 as the integrated
strategic framework. The UNDAF for the period from
2013 to 2017 defines the collective, coherent and
integrated response of the United Nations to the
priorities and needs of the country within the
framework of the Millennium Development Goals and
is aligned with the second generation of the national
poverty reduction strategy paper covering the period
from 2011 to 2015. It will contribute to addressing the
challenges of peacebuilding and development during
the period from 2013 to 2017.

I would like to make several observations. The
death of President Sanha, who was a moderating force
with considerable influence on the country's fractious
political and military actors, has been a blow to
peacebuilding plans and programmes in Guinea-Bissau.
Most of 2012 will be taken up by, first, elections and
issues related to the presidential election process,
which started in January and could be completed by the
end of May 2012, when a new President is likely to be
sworn in; secondly, the PAIGC congress scheduled for
July; and, thirdly, legislative elections towards the end
of the year, probably around November. We had
factored into our planning that the political focus from
the second half of 2012 onwards would be increasingly
on the legislative elections, with a clear impact on the
progress of the activities of the United Nations system
as well as of the State. The early presidential election
has been an unanticipated, severe disruption.

The immediate impact of the early elections
should not be underestimated. The Government has
been severely constrained since January because, first,
the powers of the interim President are constitutionally
circumscribed and, secondly, the candidacy of the
Prime Minister and the involvement of other
officeholders in the campaign have further
significantly affected Government business. That
highlights the extent to which the legal framework in
Guinea-Bissau needs fundamental revision, as the
current Constitution has totally failed to provide clear
guidance on fundamental issues relating to how, in
situations such as this, holders of sovereign organs of
the State should proceed in order to avoid vacuums that
compromise the normal functioning of the State.
1247797

A case in point is the situation relating to the
2012 budget, which cannot be signed until there is an
elected President; that has a number of consequences.
These problems, jointly with other recent challenges,
point to the already expressed need for the Security
Council to address constitutional review in Guinea-
Bissau. That is now imperative.

The national conference is a parliamentary
initiative whose patron is the President of the Republic.
Implementation this year depends on harmonization
between the new President, Government and
Parliament, bearing in mind the fact that the
parliamentary term also expires in a few months' time.
The window of opportunity for a national conference in
this legislature is therefore quite narrow, but the task is
not impossible.

The military events that took place on
26 December are symptomatic of a military leadership
divided and lacking a uniform commitment to
republican values. SSR therefore remains the
cornerstone reform without which democracy and
stability in Guinea-Bissau cannot be consolidated. The
leadership of the new President, who is Commander-in-
Chief of the armed forces, will be crucial.

SSR also requires convergence among the
Government, international partners and the
beneficiaries in the defence and security sectors on
realistic and achievable targets and sequencing. The
remaining obstacles to a finalized memorandum of
understanding need to be resolved early in the new
presidency. It is encouraging that various bilateral and
multilateral international partners remain committed to
assisting Guinea-Bissau in the implementation of its
SSR strategy, but fine-tuning their roles remains a
challenge.

Nevertheless, UNIOGBIS has been providing
continuous technical assistance to the Government on
coordination through working groups in the areas of
defence, security and justice reforms, bringing together
national and international partners. However,
engagement by national and international actors needs
to be further enhanced. National and international
partners must be commended for having organized the
early presidential election within such a short time
frame. The election is an important milestone in the
process of restoring constitutional order. A newly
elected President must strive to be accommodative and
12-27797
not sacrifice the visible, considerable progress
achieved in the last three years.

