Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): 1 have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro, the
European Free Trade Association country Iceland,
member of the European economic area, as well as
Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine align themselves with this statement.

Let me thank the presidency of the Security
Council, Turkey, for organizing this debate and
commend Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his informative briefing
on the issue. The European Union thanks the Secretary-
General for submitting the current report (S/2009/277)
and supports the recommendations therein.

First, the European Union remains of the view
that the protection of civilians is a key aspect of the
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
that has to be comprehensively, systematically and
consistently incorporated in all Security Council
mandates. At least eight of the current operations have
an explicit mandate to protect civilians, and we
welcome that development. We look forward to
considering the results of a study of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on how to
make the activities of the United Nations missions
more effective in that regard.

The European Union expresses its firm support
for the work of the Security Council Expert Group on
the Protection of Civilians. The Expert Group is an
innovative tool for deeper consideration of protection
issues and its potential should be fully used. In turn,
the European Union encourages the Council to give
further practical relevance to its own aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2009/1, annex) on the protection of civilians.
It should be translated into concrete improvements in
the protection of civilians on the ground.

In general, the European Union also emphasizes
the need for close coordination and meaningful
positive synergies of policies on the protection of
civilians within the framework of United Nations
activities in other areas, such as human rights, gender
equality, children in armed conflict, the rule of law,
small arms and light weapons, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform.

The European Union emphasizes the need to
operationalize the concept of the responsibility to
protect. All heads of State and Government endorsed
the principle of responsibility to protect in 2005, and
the European Union continues to call for the full
implementation of that principle by the Security
Council, as well as by the General Assembly.

Regretfully, civilians continue to be gravely
affected by conflicts. The Security Council must react
to the changing nature of threats to international peace
and security. The European Union calls on all parties to
conflicts to ensure the protection of civilians at all
times and to comply with international humanitarian
and human rights law. Thus, we strongly encourage the
Governments concerned to engage in full protection of
internally displaced persons and their return and in the
protection of children affected by the armed conflict.
International humanitarian law should be fully
respected. All violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law should be investigated
and those responsible should be held accountable.

The European Union also supports the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Security Council
Working Group on that subject. We urge the Working
Group to redouble its efforts in transforming the
normative work of relevant Council resolutions into
results at the field level.

Women's participation in the peace processes is
fundamental to the protection and promotion of
women's human rights in conflict-affected situations.
The European Union strongly supports enhancement of
the role of women in protection issues, also in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008), which reconfirm that
guaranteeing the protection of women and girls in
armed conflict through effective institutional
arrangements contributes significantly to promoting
and to maintaining international peace and security.
The European Union is looking forward to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008).

In many conflict situations, impunity prevails due
to the lack of political will. Therefore, the Security
Council, once again, should make clear that any assault
on the civilian population, including genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
is completely unacceptable. In that context, we would
also like to stress the importance of the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1820
(2008). The European Union encourages all States to
provide their full support to the International Criminal
Court by acceding to the Rome Statute and cooperating
with the Court.

The European Union continues to support efforts
by the United Nations and its agencies, as well as by
civil society and non-governmental organizations, to
alleviate the suffering of civilians on the ground and to
work towards achieving durable stability. Safe,
unhindered and timely access to civilian populations in
conflict is a fundamental condition for the fulfilment of
mandates and missions of humanitarian actors. We
encourage humanitarian personnel on the ground to
follow the principles of humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence, and we call on the
recipient countries to ensure their safety and security.

The European Union is dedicated to systematic
consideration of the issues of human rights, gender and
children affected by armed conflict in the planning and
conduct of its European Security and Defence Policy
missions and operations, including their mandates and
staffing. The European Union attaches particular
importance to enhanced European Union-United
Nations cooperation in the area of the protection of
civilians in those theatres of operation where the
United Nations and the European Union have missions
deployed side by side. The most prominent example of
such deployment is in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the European Union has two missions
deployed: the EU security sector reform mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the EU police
mission in that country.

Furthermore, the European Union is determined
to assist in implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) with the aim of achieving more concrete
progress on gender equality issues and thus adding to
the credibility and effectiveness of those missions and
operations on the ground.

The European Union joins the Secretary-General's
call on the international community to seize the
opportunity of this tenth anniversary of the protection
of civilians to reinvigorate its commitment to this
agenda and, above all, to make the protection of
civilians more systematically and consistently a reality
for all those caught in conflicts. Let me reassure the
Council of the European Union's continued commitment
to the issue of the protection of civilians.

