Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and C6te
d'Ivoire - the three African members of the Security
Council - I thank the Republic of Peru for convening
this debate on strengthening cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs). On their
behalf, I also thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations; Mr. Dennis
Gyllensporre, Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali; and Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff, Senior Fellow at
the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations of the
International Peace Institute.

(spoke in English)

United Nations peacekeeping operations are one
of the most recognizable symbols of global solidarity
in pursuit of the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. TCCs and PCCs
play a vital role in contributing the services of women
and men who are dedicated to serving in dangerous
environments to provide security to some of the world's
most vulnerable people.

Our discussion today allows us to reflect on the
coordination, collaboration and cooperation of those
responsible for mandating, planning, managing and
implementing United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Promoting effective triangular cooperation among
the Security Council, as the body responsible for
mandating peace missions, the Secretariat, as the body
responsible for planning and managing those missions,
and, importantly, the TCCs and PCCs, as the countries
implementing those mandates, remains one of the
priorities for United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The General Assembly's Special Committee for
Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) and the Security
Council have been seized with the issue for several
years, as evidenced by numerous decisions and/or
recommendations that have been made in pursuit of
efficient cooperation. Chief among those are resolution
1353 (2001), reports of the substantive sessions of the
C-34, which have dedicated sessions on triangular
cooperation, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and, recently, the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

(spoke in French)

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals also call for the
development of triangular cooperation policies, whereby
it is recognized that global challenges must be addressed
through a regional and comprehensive approach, based
on the concepts of effective partnership, joint initiatives
and collective implementation. However, despite those
positive developments, challenges remain that must be
met in order to make triangular cooperation best suited
and effective.

Interest in strengthening triangular cooperation
has increased in recent years, given the complex nature
of conflicts and the challenges faced by peacekeepers,
including unconventional weapons, asymmetrical
attacks and the transnationalization and transregional
dimension of conflicts.

As our briefers mentioned, in particular the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the situation
in Mali and the Sahel is symptomatic of the complexity
of peacekeeping operations today. That new conflict
dynamic increasingly exposes peacekeepers to
attacks, thereby forcing them to step up aspects
such as command and control, the use of weapons,
the acquisition of appropriate equipment, improved
capabilities and training, the security of peacekeeping
forces and the generation of strategic forces. The nature
of the mandates that we adopt is therefore of paramount
importance to all actors in peacekeeping.

In that regard, it is important that we recognize
the importance of consultation with, and the full
involvement of, troop-contributing countries and peace
coordination committees throughout the duration of
peacekeeping operations, including in the development
of peacekeeping mission mandates. The meaningful
participation of troop-contributing countries will ensure
that the views of those serving in the field are essential
in decision-making on peacekeeping operations

(spoke in English)

Subsequent to what I have mentioned, the three
African members of the Council propose the following

in response to the questions posed in the concept note
(8/2019/538, annex).

First, resolution 1353 (2001) remains relevant,
and all the decisions that were taken therein should be
implemented accordingly.

Secondly, the measures outlined on enhancing
triangular cooperation in the report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on its
2018 substantive session (see A/72/l9) should be
considered favourably.

Thirdly, triangular cooperation requires working
procedures and decision-making processes that are
transparent, predictable and inclusive. That will
enhance trust among the Secretariat, the Security
Council and the TCCs and PCCs in terms ofimproving
mandate implementation and contributing to the more
efficient and effective functioning of peacekeeping
missions in the achievement of our respective goals.

Fourthly, more substantive and regular triangular
meetings among the three players are imperative.
In that regard, the existing TCC and PCC meetings
should be made more meaningful by allowing all
three stakeholders an opportunity to contribute to the
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions. The views of
the TCCs and PCCs should therefore be respected and
taken into account.

Fifthly, the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations could also play a monitoring and evaluation
role in following up on the commitments made by the
Security Council regarding triangular cooperation in
its previous resolutions on peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in French)

We would be remiss if we did not underscore
the importance of partnership and political and
operational cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. Those partnerships can contribute to
strengthening triangular cooperation in situations that
warrant different levels of coordination.

Allow me, on behalf of the three African members
of the Council, to therefore underline the need for
increased predictability, sustainability and flexibility
in the financing of peace support operations led by the
African Union and authorized by the Security Council,
through the assessed contributions of United Nations
Member States, on a case-by-case basis.

Moreover, effective triangular cooperation can help
Africa achieve some of its most important objectives,
as set out in the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by
2020, which aims to make Africa a peaceful and stable
continent, free of conflict, and will ensure inclusive
growth and sustainable development.

In conclusion, the three African members of the
Council fully support the Secretary-General's ongoing
efforts to improve the efficacy of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, in full harmony with the
wider membership.

