Mr. Diarra (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I also
express my respect and gratitude to His Excellency the
Prime Minister of Somalia.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Chairman of the African Union
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, for this

opportunity to inform the Security Council regarding
recent developments in Somalia and, in particular, our
efforts to support the Transitional Federal Institutions
in Somalia in strengthening security with a view to
creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian aid and the implementation of the
political road map to bring the transition to an end.

I also convey the regret and apologies of
Commissioner Lamamra for his inability to participate
in this meeting today. Commissioner Lamamra will
attend the summit to be held on Somalia on
23 September.

I wish to reiterate the African Union's
appreciation to all members of the Security Council for
their support for our efforts to reverse the insecurity
and instability in Somalia. Over the past two years, and
especially since the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) was deployed, we have received crucial
support from the Security Council. That precious
support has contributed to the positive, tangible results
that we are seeing on the ground in Somalia.

I am sure that Council members are well
informed of the recent positive developments in the
political and security situation in Somalia. Before
turning to those developments, let me address the
humanitarian situation, which remains a cause of great
concern for all of us.

Millions of Somalis are suffering from hunger
and malnutrition. For its part, the African Union took
the initiative to organize a donors conference in Addis
Ababa on 25 August in order to mobilize resources for
the victims of the famine in Somalia and the Horn of
Africa. More than $350 million were mobilized. The
African Development Bank alone pledged $300,000.
An additional amount of $28 million was also pledged
in kind, including food, medicine and other forms of
aid. While it recognized the crucial need to respond to
the current humanitarian emergency, the conference
also called on the international community to
demonstrate renewed commitment to and support for
medium- and long-term strategies to ensure food
security and mitigate the negative impact of climate
change on the African continent.

Somalia is at a crossroads. That country, which
has enjoyed no peace or security for 20 years, is
regaining stability little by little. On the political front,
the African Union is particularly encouraged by the
speed and determination with which Somali political

1 1-49644

leaders, through an inclusive and consensual approach,
are working towards the implementation of the
Kampala Accord signed on 9 June under the aegis of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda.

We also welcome the outcome of the consultative
meeting held in Mogadishu from 4 to 6 September
2011. This meeting was very significant as it brought
together the Somali Government, the transitional
Parliament, Puntland, Galmudug and Ahlu Sunnah Wal
Jama'a, and thus allowed for agreement to be reached
on tasks whose completion would allow the Somali
people to strengthen the legitimacy of State institutions
through free and transparent elections and establish the
rule of law needed for lasting peace to take hold.

The African Union calls on all Somali
stakeholders, including the Somali diaspora, to provide
the necessary support to the Transitional Federal
Institutions in this regard. The African Union will
continue to support the efforts of Ambassador Mahiga
to fully implement the road map so that a new political
order can be inaugurated on 20 August 2012, as we
have so long called for and which will meet the
aspirations of the Somali people.

On the military and security fronts, the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and AMISOM
control almost 95 per cent of the capital, Mogadishu.
With the retreat of Al-Shabaab, AMISOM. forces, in
collaboration with Somali Government forces, now
control the city and are deployed in all districts of
Mogadishu, with the exception of Daynile-Hariwaa.
AMISOM. will deploy forces in that area as soon as
additional troops are made available.

These gains represent an important victory. This
is the very first time since the fall of the Siad Barre
regime that a central administration has been able to
take control of Mogadishu. We must build on this
progress and extend the authority of the TFG beyond
Mogadishu, create the space needed for dialogue and
reconciliation, allow the TFG to interact with local and
regional administrations, and create an enabling
climate for political efforts stemming from the road
map.

The humanitarian crisis facing the country has led
to additional obligations for AMISOM. The Mission
must now ensure the security of camps for internally
displaced persons, of which there are many in
Mogadishu; assist in the delivery of humanitarian aid;
and - a new responsibility - ensure the protection of

the many dignitaries visiting Mogadishu since its
liberation. It is therefore crucial for the international
community to transform this moment of hope in the
country by providing to the Somali Government all the
support it needs to meet its commitments. It is also
imperative that the recent security gains made in
Mogadishu following the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab be
strengthened through an appropriate increase in
resources for AMISOM.

This is the thrust of the report submitted by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
includes the recommendations made by the technical
consultative workshop on AMISOM. convened from
17 to 18 August, with the participation of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the permanent members of the Security Council, the
European Union, countries contributing troops to
AMISOM. and many other partners.

The report authorizes support for the following
measures, including first and foremost the acceleration
of the deployment of additional troops in order to
strengthen AMISOM. and swiftly achieve the
authorized strength of 12,000 personnel pursuant to the
United Nations support package. African countries
have made necessary troops available. Djibouti, Sierra
Leone and Guinea have already expressed their
willingness to contribute troops. The main obstacles
for those countries include a lack of military equipment
and predictable measures to ensure that such
equipment is paid for.

Secondly, the United Nations support package
must be strengthened pursuant to resolutions 1863
(2009) and 1964 (2010) in order to fill the gaps
identified in the next few months, in the understanding
that AMISOM. is a multidimensional mission with
military, police and civilian components. Support
priorities should include independent support for
troops; reimbursement for contingent-owned
equipment; the provision of appropriate force enablers,
including among others utility and attack helicopters;
maritime capacities; military engineering equipment,
and support to the Mission's civil component.

Thirdly, a police unit constituted in Mogadishu to
support the rule of law and order and to allow
AMISOM. to concentrate on its military tasks must be
deployed.

Fourthly, a battalion-size protection force must be
created within AMISOM. and under its leadership in
order to assist the deployment of civilian personnel and
guarantee the security of the African Union, the United
Nations and the Transitional Federal Institutions in
Mogadishu. That force should supplement the 12,000
military personnel authorized by the United Nations.

Despite the progress made in Somalia, the
African Union wishes to emphasize that Al-Shabaab
remains capable of destabilizing and undermining our
efforts. Consequently, we must continue to focus on the
big picture and maintain a far-reaching view that goes
beyond Mogadishu. I therefore wish to underscore the
validity of the other requests made to the Security
Council, including those contained in the text of the
African Union Peace and Security Council
communique of 15 October 2010, in particular with
respect to measures necessary to prevent the entry of
foreign elements into Somalia. We must prevent the
theft and transport of cargo containing weapons and
ammunition for the armed groups carrying out attacks
against the TFG, AMISOM. and civilian populations.

Looking to the future, we believe it important
that the Security Council, in its wisdom, reiterate its
commitment to deploying a peacekeeping operation in
Somalia to take over from AMISOM. and immediately
set a timeline for that deployment. In that respect, the
Commission proposes that the United Nations
Secretariat undertake a joint mission to assess the
progress made to date by AMISOM. on the ground and
to identify all additional criteria to be fulfilled and the
relevant resources to be provided by the United
Nations in order to prepare for the transformation of
AMISOM. into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

In conclusion, I reiterate that the African Union
and all peace-loving Somalis and Africans thank the
Security Council for its tireless and courageous efforts
to settle the situation in Somalia. I also wish to express
our gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the various
departments of the Secretariat, in particular the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. (UNSOA), for
the exceptional quality of their partnership with the
African Union and AMISOM. The results achieved on
the ground are due in large part to the unfailing support
of UNSOA.
On the ground, I also welcome the high quality of
relations with Ambassador Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
The political and military progress achieved is the

result of daily close cooperation with the IGAD
facilitator for Somalia.

In that regard, new dynamism is necessary to
maintain the strategic partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations. The African Union
Commission strongly urges the Council to take into
account in its future resolutions the Commission's
contributions and updates on the situation, in particular
the requests set forth above, as well as the conclusions
of the mini-summit on Somalia to be convened in New
York on 23 September, at the initiative of the
Secretary-General.

