Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentine Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his valuable briefing and his latest report (S/2019/843, enclosure) on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We fully
support him in carrying out his mandate and his efforts
to assist the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in overcoming the challenges they face. We also
thank Ms. Selma Korjenie, Head of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Programme at TRIAL International.

We welcome the Council's unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2496 (2019), which sends a strong
message to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina from
the international community that we are committed
to maintaining security and stability in the country.
We are committed to providing the necessary support
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to promote its
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

We commend the efforts made to maintain stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensure its ethnic
and cultural unity. We also appreciate the important
role played by Operation EUFOR Althea under the
leadership of the European Union. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption by both entities of several reform
measures related to the reform agenda of the European
Union, including the entry into force of an agreement
on the reduction of mobile roaming costs among the
States of the Western Balkans in July of this year.

The General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to be the cornerstone
for achieving institutional stability and the point of
reference for bringing about sustainable peace in the
country. We are therefore concerned about the continued
rhetoric towards incitement and divisive statements. We
call upon all political leaders to prioritize the national
interests of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They must go beyond the narrow political and ethnic
interests that undermine progress and stability and try
to engage constructively in implementing the outcome
of the elections held in October 2018, including
establishing the state-level Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the federal Government
and the other 10 cantonal Governments. All parties
must participate in a constructive and open dialogue
to ensure the establishment of the authorities at all
levels without delay. That undoubtedly will benefit the
political process.

Efforts must be redoubled so that the Parliament
adopts new legislation that does not leave the judiciary
without the necessary instruments to combat organized
crime, corruption, terrorism and extremism, which pose
a direct threat to the rule of law and undermine efforts
to achieve socioeconomic development and accession
to the European Union.

With regard to the implementation of the 5+2 agenda
for the closure ofthe Office ofthe High Representative,
we urge the parties to fulfil their commitments and
meet the requirements of that agenda. We stress our
full support for the Office of the High Representative in
line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We call upon the High

Representative to make intensive efforts to implement
the plan fully.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance that
all parties respect the unity, stability and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including its
national Constitution and all judgments handed down
by its judiciary, so as to ensure stability in the country.
We also call upon all parties to make concerted efforts
to implement the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and meet their
commitments towards achieving the goal of accession
to the European Union and NATO.

