Mr. Zannier: I would like to begin with a
thought for the victims of the catastrophic earthquake
that has devastated Haiti and so cruelly struck down so
many, including our colleagues and friends, some of
whom had previously served with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We are sorely diminished by their loss.

The report before the Council today (S/ZOlO/S)
contains details of UNMIK's activities from
16 September to 15 December 2009. During this period,
UNMIK continued to perform its functions under
resolution 1244 (1999). Our overriding objective
remains to ensure lasting security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. We are
pursuing our objective by supporting Kosovo's
communities, encouraging reconciliation, and facilitating
dialogue and regional cooperation.

As was the case during the previous reporting
period, Kosovo has remained largely peaceful and
stable, although tensions and the possibility of flare-
ups remain in northern Kosovo. The past three months
have been politically eventful, with both the Kosovo
authorities and the Government of Serbia conducting
municipal elections. While UNMIK was not involved
in the organization or calling of any of these elections,
their peaceful and mostly orderly conduct was an
encouraging sign.

While Kosovo Serbs living in the northern
municipalities of Zvecan/Zveean, Leposaviq/Leposavie
10-21617
and Zubin Potok did not participate in the elections
conducted by the Kosovo authorities, participation by
Kosovo Serbs living south of the Ibar River, although
relatively low in absolute numbers, was substantially
higher than in recent elections and resulted in the
establishment of three new Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities. In all three, as well as in the existing
Kosovo Serb-majority municipality of Shterpce/Strpce,
the balloting resulted in the election of Kosovo Serb
mayors and Kosovo Serb-majority municipal
administrations. Leaving status considerations aside,
these developments allow communities to play a
meaningful role in their local administration, which
increases confidence levels among the population and
creates a climate more conducive to increased returns
and a more multi-ethnic Kosovo.

Northern Kosovo however, remains a flashpoint.
Relations between the Kosovo Serb and Kosovo
Albanian communities there remain tense, although a
greater understanding now appears to prevail in the
matter of the reconstruction of houses by the
communities. During this reporting period, eight
Kosovo Albanian families moved into their newly
reconstructed houses in the Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani area
without incident.

However, even this peace remains tenuous. For
instance, earlier this month a group of Kosovo Serbs,
suspecting that Kosovo Albanians were engaging in
construction beyond what had been agreed upon in
UNMIK-facilitated negotiations, threw rocks at
construction workers and set a truck ablaze. It is clear
that UNMIK must continue to shepherd the
reconstruction process and monitor the situation
closely to ensure that all communities respect existing
arrangements to preserve stability, and that effective
communication is maintained at all times. The UNMIK
administration in northern Mitrovica has proven to be a
useful tool in this regard.

A recent, particularly worrying development in
northern Kosovo is related to the provision of
electricity. The issue is very complex and involves
technical, commercial, legal and political aspects. At
the end of October, tensions over the supply of
electricity to northern Kosovo arose between the
Kosovo Energy Corporation and the Electric Power
Industry of Serbia, which has taken over the
distribution of electricity in the area. This situation has
the potential to precipitate a crisis. I hope that
agreement between the sides can be reached
10-21617
expeditiously in order to avoid destabilizing the
security situation in northern Kosovo.

Over the years, we have learned that dealing with
the situation in northern Kosovo requires sustained
effort, constant engagement with the communities on
the ground, and continuing consultation and
coordination with all relevant actors.

A stable security situation is, of course, one of the
key elements needed to encourage returns of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. While rising
significantly in comparison to previous quarters,
returns nevertheless continue to be low in absolute
numbers due to a variety of factors, including the
absence of economic prospects and concerns about
freedom of movement, which have been raised by
Serbia following a recent incident involving the
Serbian Minister for Kosovo. UNMIK has been
working closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and stays in contact
with the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina to
encourage returns. Kosovo's leadership states that it is
committed to a multi-ethnic Kosovo and open to
returns. Nevertheless, more needs to be done to make
this objective a reality. In this context, I would also
emphasize the need to reopen the Kosovo Property
Agency offices in Serbia, which are key to the efficient
processing of property claims filed by IDPs and are
therefore important for creating the conditions needed
to encourage returns.

I am pleased, however, to be able report some
positive news relating to a particularly vulnerable
group of Kosovo IDPs. There has been encouraging
progress in the matter of the relocation of the Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian residents of the Osterode and
Cesmin Llug/Cesmin Lug camps in northern Mitrovica
to more suitable residential accommodation. The
European Commission Liaison Office in Pristina has
launched a project to facilitate the sustainable
resettlement and reintegration of 90 families, and the
United States Agency for International Development is
funding the building of housing units for 50 more
families. Both projects are to begin this year.

On the issue of missing persons, I would have
wished for something more positive to report today.
Over the past 12 months, 33 sets of bodily remains
have been identified and returned to the deceased's
families. Clearly, more needs to be done to persuade
those with information on the fates and locations of the
3
missing to come forward and share their knowledge
with the ICRC, the European Union (EU) Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and the Pristina-
Belgrade Working Group on Missing Persons. Once
again, I appeal to all of those who have any pertinent
information to come forward.

The implementation of the Secretary-General's
report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692) has also
seen less progress than we would have hoped for. The
finalization of the terms of reference for the Kosovo
Serb deputy director general of the Kosovo Police,
which include functions related to the coordination and
integration of police personnel from the communities,
is a positive sign and I welcome it.

Regrettably, however, there has been little
progress in setting up multi-ethnic courts in northern
Kosovo. The Government of Serbia's recent
appointment of judges for Kosovo has prompted the
Kosovo authorities to renew their calls for the
dismantling of Serbian judicial structures. In the
meantime, detainees remain in prison, civil cases
remain unresolved, and the population is denied
effective access to justice. I hope that a constructive
approach will be adopted by both sides in the
re-establishment of multi-ethnic courts, which is in the
interest of all, regardless of ethnicity. Equally, an
agreement on re-establishing a fully-functioning
customs regime in northern Kosovo has proven elusive.

In the area of cultural heritage, there has been
progress since my last presentation to the Council. I
expect an early agreement on the long-awaited
appointment of a European Union envoy, who will
provide the parties with a mechanism for cooperation
in matters related to the protection of the cultural
heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo.
UNMIK stands ready to assist and work with the EU
envoy in order to bring about progress in an important
area of common interest.

In another area of common interest, regional
development, UNMIK has continued to facilitate
Kosovo's participation in regional and international
forums. This reporting period has seen a particularly
active schedule of meetings of international and
regional mechanisms, and UNMIK has made possible
the participation of Kosovo's institutions whenever it
would otherwise not have been possible due to the
non-recognition of Kosovo by some Member States
involved in the mechanisms. I firmly believe that
Kosovo's participation in regional and international
coordination mechanisms is in the interests of the
development and stability of Kosovo, as well as of the
entire region, and I therefore hope that Belgrade and
Pristina will find a way to put status considerations
aside in furtherance of this goal.

The longer-term stability and development of
Kosovo lies in a successful process of reconciliation
between the communities. I therefore welcome
President Tadie's message, on the occasion of his visit
to the Visoki Decani monastery to celebrate Orthodox
Christmas, that all people, regardless of their identity,
should reconcile their differences. I have heard similar
statements from the Kosovo authorities. I hope that
Belgrade and Pristina demonstrate by their actions that
the well-being of the population of Kosovo will not be
sacrificed on the altar of political agendas.

In my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6202), I said I detected that the Kosovo
authorities tacitly acknowledge some areas where
UNMIK can complement and supplement their efforts
in the context of Kosovo's economic development and
stability, and I am pleased to report that the Kosovo
authorities now appear to show a greater understanding
of our role.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and EULEX continue to perform
important functions that complement those of UNMIK,
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). The
OSCE continues to effectively monitor community-
related issues through its network of field offices. The
contributions of EULEX in mentoring, monitoring and
advising the Kosovo authorities in the area of the rule
of law, and of EULEX and the Kosovo Force in
providing security and stability in Kosovo, remain of
critical importance.

UNMIK is also working in close coordination
with the United Nations Kosovo team to promote a
shared vision of United Nations strategic objectives for
peace consolidation in Kosovo. In this regard, we are
focusing on enhancing our collaboration for the benefit
of Kosovo and the entire region.

As always, my staff and I are grateful for the
support of the Security Council and hope to be able to
count on its continuation. The Council can count on
our full commitment to the implementation of the tasks
with which it has entrusted us.
10-21617
