Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Mr. President, we join
other members of the Council in expressing our sincere
appreciation and gratitude to Prime Minister Ingvar
Carlsson, whom we welcome in our midst, and his
colleagues on the Rwandese Inquiry commission for
presenting us with an extremely valuable report. The report
is a historic document establishing accountability for the
action of the world body and its different organs, of
individual Member States, of the international community
in general and of the Rwandans involved in the genocide,
and it does so in an objective manner in full transparency.

We commend the Canadian presidency, and your
leadership, for the initiative in having us face the realities
and responsibilities in a formal meeting of the Security
Council. We do agree that emphasis should be put on the
lessons to be learned from the Rwanda tragedy. The
Rwanda experience should be kept in mind in our decision-
making process so that we do not commit such terrible
mistakes in the future.

Mr. Carlsson's report makes an elaborate analysis of
the events. It does not hesitate to assign responsibility. We
all share it; we all have to learn lessons. Our sympathy and
our realization of collective failure should be expressed in
the sincerest and clearest terms.

Last December the Secretary-General acknowledged
the failure in Rwanda and expressed his deep remorse on
behalf of the United Nations. The United Nations was
established to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. The explicit reference was to the two world wars.
Civil wars were possibly considered a matter of the past
and were hence not even envisaged. Yet, the unthinkable
happened. Some 800,000 Rwandans were killed by their
fellow countrymen, and the massacre was along the ethnic
divide.

The evident conclusion is that what happened in
Rwanda in 1994 should not have happened. It should not
have happened in our century, particularly after the creation
of the United Nations. The second conclusion drawn is that
the genocide could have been prevented. The third
conclusion is that it could not be prevented because the
international system failed to do so and this failure was of
colossal proportions, seen in terms of the loss of hundreds
of thousands of lives in Rwanda.

The international community failed to prevent
genocide in Rwanda, but it should not fail to do its part as
regards the socio-economic development of Rwanda.

The best demonstration of our remorse, the best
assurance of our realization of mistakes or failures would
be to be able to act correctly in the future. That will be
our best apology, that will be our best homage to the
hundreds of thousands of fellow human beings massacred
in Rwanda.

