Mr. Delattre (spoke in French): First and foremost,
on behalf of France, I would like to welcome the
adoption of resolution 2449 (2018). This resolution is
vital, in the literal sense of the word, as cross-border
humanitarian assistance is a matter of life or death for
millions of Syrians. We are pleased by the spirit of
responsibility within the Security Council, which has
served to give priority to the humanitarian imperative
over political considerations. On behalf of France as
well, I would like to express our profound thanks to
the Permanent Missions of Sweden and Kuwait and
to my colleagues - the Permanent Representatives
of those two delegations - personally for their truly
outstanding work.

Allow me to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
briefing, which was, as always, meticulous and most
enlightening. We reiterate our admiration for his
work and the work of his teams in responding to the
humanitarian emergency in Syria. I also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, Mr. Stephanus Blok,
among us today.

As Mr. Lowcock has already recalled to us, the
situation in Syria continues to be a source of extreme
concern. In the Idlib region in particular, ceasefire
violations are on the rise and the risk of a humanitarian
disaster still cannot be ruled out. We must therefore
remain fully mobilized around three key priorities:
the need to protect civilians, the need to guarantee
humanitarian access and the need for a lasting political
solution in Syria.

First, on the need to protect civilians, as highlighted
by Mr. Lowcock, the situation in Idlib remains
exceedingly fragile. The cessation of hostilities should
not be a temporary solution, but should provide for the
lasting stabilization of the situation in Idlib in line with
the commitments made at the quadripartite summit
held in Istanbul for a sustainable ceasefire in north-
west Syria. That is the only way to protect civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel. It must
be a top priority for all stakeholders. All parties must
respect their obligations as stipulated by international
humanitarian law. That imperative is non-negotiable.

The second priority is to ensure humanitarian
access. It is imperative that the 13 million people in
need receive humanitarian assistance. It is unacceptable
for the regime to continue to block convoys to hard-
to-reach areas. We reiterate our call to the actors with
influence over the regime to ensure safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access throughout Syrian
territory, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international humanitarian
law. In Rukban camp in particular, it is essential that
the United Nations be able to quickly dispatch a new
convoy to deliver aid to the tens of thousands of people
trapped in the camp and living in dire conditions.

While the Council has just adopted resolution 2449
(2018), which renews the mechanism established by
resolution 2165 (2014), I would like to recall that there
is no alternative to cross-border aid for the effective and
impartial delivery of assistance to millions of people
in need, including in Idlib, while the regime continues
to use humanitarian aid for political purposes. That
mechanism provides several hundred thousand people
with crucial assistance every day.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate that there will be
no lasting humanitarian solution without a credible
political process. It is essential for everyone to assume
their responsibilities and allow the United Nations
to convene the first meeting of the constitutional
committee before the end of the year, in accordance
with the commitments made in Istanbul on 27 October.
Provided that its composition is credible and balanced,
the committee would be a positive first step in a
political process to be conducted under the supervision
of the United Nations, within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015). Such political progress should,
in turn, facilitate the improvement of the humanitarian
situation, with the goal of kick-starting a virtuous circle.

It is all the more urgent to recall this in a
humanitarian briefing: humanitarian aid is an immediate
need, subject to the conditions of strict neutrality,
impartiality and independence. It is to be differentiated
from reconstruction, which will be possible only once
a credible, inclusive and irreversible political transition
has begun.

Let us not be fooled by the regime's fable. The reality
of the statistics clearly shows that it is not the absence
of reconstruction that prevents the voluntary and safe
return ofrefugees; it is the absence ofguarantees against
arbitrary arrests, forced expropriations, dispossession
of identity documents, forced conscription and, more
broadly, the lack of credible progress in the political
process. The conditions for the return of refugees are
freedom and security. We are committed to enabling
such a safe and dignified return of refugees to their
homes and properties. But that collectively implies
creating the conditions for that return to be possible,
within the framework guaranteed by international law.

France will continue to spare no effort to respond
to the humanitarian situation in Syria and promote a
credible political solution.

