Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Four
years ago, on 11 February 2011, demonstrations took
place in all Yemen's provinces. The demonstrations
grew, demanding a change and the creation of a
legitimate modern secular State founded on the basis of
the rule of law, respect for fundamental freedoms and
human rights. Since then, my country has experienced a

great deal of turbulence and a great many crises, which
could have plunged the country into anarchy were it not
for the grace of God, the support of our countrymen and
the limitless support offered to us by friendly countries.
The United Nations was present from the very outset,
through the good offices deployed by the Secretary-
General and his Special Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar.
He was able to organize very complex negotiations with
all political components and factions that led to the
signing, on 23 November 2011 in the brotherly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and Implementation Mechanism.

As the Council knows, the Initiative enabled
Yemen to avoid plunging into chaos. All components of
society have committed themselves to working through
a period of transition that should enable us to recreate
a secular, federal Yemeni State. The inclusive National
Dialogue Conference, one of the main components of
the GCC Initiative, enabled us to unite all political,
cultural and social components around one negotiating
table. The 10-month dialogue resulted in the well-
known outcome containing the recommendations of
the National Dialogue Conference, which represent
all the desired objectives the Yemeni people. After
the National Dialogue Conference ended, varying
interpretations of those elements emerged, giving rise
to differences among the various political components,
although the latter were able, on 21 September 2014, to
forge the Peace and National Partnership Agreement.

But the situation has deteriorated. His Excellency
President Abd Rabbo Mansour Hadi was forced to
resign, which led the various political components to
engage in consultations under the auspices ofthe Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General to reach a consensus
solution that would be acceptable to all parties. On
6 February, developments in the situation encouraged
all parties to act responsibly by granting priority to the
national interests, and to agree that consultations would
resume on 9 February. That was certainly necessary as
dialogue is the only possible way for Yemen to extricate
itself from the potential crisis.

We certainly appreciate the very constructive role
played by the Secretary-General through his Special
Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, working alongside all
political components to achieve a consensus solution
to ensure that the country does not plunge into the
abyss. God preserve us from that. Yemen should not
be turned into a hotbed of tension, threatening the
region and the world. The situation could lead to civil
war, which would not benefit Yemen, the region or the
world. Consultations among Security Council members
should rapidly lead to measures that would enable us
to move forward towards achieving national consensus
and advancing the transition period.
I am compelled to refer to the very serious
humanitarian situation being endured by Yemenis. In
addition to hundreds of thousands of refugees from the
Horn of Africa and regions affected by conflict within
the country, millions of Yemenis live below the poverty
line. Statistics show that nearly 60 per cent live in
poverty, with record levels of unemployment, pushing
Yemen to the very brink of humanitarian catastrophe.
We invite the international community to provide
the necessary humanitarian assistance for Yemen in
2015. Yemen is commited to providing all necessary
protection to diplomatic and consular missions. We
cherish the hope that the friendly countries that have
closed their embassies in Sana'a will resume their
presence there as rapidly as possible.

In conclusion, I call upon the Security Council, all
our brotherly States of the GCC, all States that have
sponsored the Initiative, and all friends and brothers of
our country to continue to back the political process,
in keeping with the GCC Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, the Peace and Partnership Agreement,
and the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference
to guarantee peace, security and stability, which will
contribute to the stability of the region and the world
as a whole.

