Mr. Chulkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, let me join previous speakers
in thanking Mr. Guehenno and Dr. Piot for their
extensive briefings, which will clearly be valuable to
us as we consider this extremely important issue.

HIV/AIDS is one of the most serious non-
military threats to peace and security. This devastating
epidemic depletes the resources and capacities of
countries and negatively impacts the overall socio-
economic situation. Like any equally significant global
problem, it ultimately has a negative impact on
international peace and stability.

Given the exceptional urgency and complex
nature of the problem, which requires overall
coordination of international efforts under the auspices
of the United Nations to deal effectively with the
threats and challenges posed by the epidemic, we agree
with the importance of addressing this issue in the
Security Council in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would like to take note of
the extensive substantive materials available on
relevant specific themes associated with this matter,
including the country-specific breakdown contained in
the report prepared for this meeting by the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). We
believe that this represents a key contribution in
assessing the implementation of resolution 1308
(2000).

Because of the various aspects of duty in "hot
spots", uniformed and civilian personnel of
peacekeeping missions are in a more vulnerable
position. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the importance of, and state our support for, the efforts
made by UNAIDS in implementing resolution 1308
(2000), in particular targeted preventive measures
geared to United Nations peacekeeping personnel,
including the gradual creation of posts for advisers and
focal points for HIV/AIDS in all peacekeeping
operations and the provision of tailored awareness-
training modules to peacekeeping contingents.

Attention should also be focused - and we are
pleased to note that this is already the case - on
efforts to provide voluntary and confidential
counselling and testing to peacekeepers. It is important
also to encourage the practice of training volunteers
from peacekeeping operations and to ensure that, in the
context of the awareness-raising efforts carried out by
missions, careful account is taken of national and
cultural characteristics, with respect both to the
peacekeeping operation contingent and the population
of the country in which the mission is deployed.

All of those important efforts complement the
efforts undertaken at the national level and help to
build the capacities of countries in that area, including
those that contribute contingents to peacekeeping
operations.

The global fight against the scourge of HIV/AIDS
and all of its manifestations calls for firm political
leadership and specific and coordinated action that is
supported by technical and financial resources.

The General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, which, in keeping with their respective
mandates, are charged with undertaking a
comprehensive consideration of all aspects of the
question of HIV/AIDS, have already done a great deal
to craft an effective strategy to deal with the spread of
the pandemic.

We commend the practical actions taken in that
area by the relevant United Nations specialized
agencies, funds and programmes, in particular, as
already noted, UNAIDS, the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the United Nations Population
Fund and the United Nations Development Programme.
A major role is also being played by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan through his sustained attention and
personal commitment to the fight against HIV/AIDS.

We are confident that consistent, coordinated
efforts on the part of the United Nations system,
working with other international organizations,
financial institutions and funds, and civil society, will
ultimately lead to a breakthrough in overcoming the
HIV/AIDS challenge at the global level.

