Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov,
Executive Director Michele Coninsx and Ms. Joana
Cook for their informative briefings. Let me also express
my gratitude to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism for the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/ Da'esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat.

The efforts of those bodies in providing strategic-
level reporting and the increasing cooperation among
them with other stakeholders are most appreciated.
While acknowledging that the authorities of United
Nations Member States bear the primary responsibility
to stand up to the evolving threat posed by terrorists,
we should encourage, support and commend the
engagement of international, religious and civil society
organizations, as well as academia and the private
sector. Moreover, the fight against terrorists must be
carried out in accordance with international human
rights standards. In the long run, it requires also
addressing the root causes of terrorism, including poor
development perspectives and human rights situations.
Let me focus on four issues of the utmost importance in
countering Da'esh.

First, with regard to preventing attacks by Da'esh
and the spread of its network, although ISIL might
have lost control of territories in Iraq and Syria, it
remains a threat in both States and beyond, including
through foreign terrorist fighters, terrorist groups
and the related relocation phenomenon. Efforts must
be continued to stop the creation and expansion of
Da'esh and affiliated cells in South-East Asia, Libya,
Afghanistan, West Africa and other regions and
countries. Their members' cowardly attacks, like the
one in May in Indonesia, must be prevented. Enhancing
border management and law enforcement is crucial in
that regard. While recognizing efforts aimed at raising
standards and strengthening cooperation within those
areas, we call for their further development.

Secondly, concerning stopping the financing of
terrorism, we have to step up efforts in cracking down
on sources and flows of funding for ISIL, including
businesses in which its members have reportedly
invested. We should also identify and address the risk
of abusing new payment modalities for terrorism-
financing purposes, in particular in countries in
which they remain unregulated. Member States should
strengthen their financial intelligence, use of counter-
terrorism financing tools and fulfil their obligation
to freeze the assets of all entities on the Da'esh and
Al-Qaida sanctions list. The assistance of the United
Nations and other relevant actors in that area is
vital. We welcome efforts to that end and encourage
their continuation.

Thirdly, with regard to ensuring accountability and
non-recurrence, given the relocation of foreign fighters
and their families, international judicial cooperation,
as well as terrorist prosecution, rehabilitation and
integration efforts, has to be redoubled. That requires
stepping up the collection, analysis and sharing of
data, including evidence, which should be conducted
in compliance with human rights and the rule of law. It
also requires the development of relevant partnerships
and strategies, including for the post-release context of
those convicted of terrorism within prison systems. The
challenges associated with their return to society must
be properly addressed. We welcome the relevant work
that has been done in that area, including the initiative
mentioned in the report, and support its development.

With regard to countering terrorist narratives
and engaging communities, although I welcome the
whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach
to countering violent extremism adopted by United
Nations entities, I would also like to emphasize the
gender dimension. Women and girls are particularly
vulnerable to exploitation, trafficking and sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by terrorists, and
therefore adequate personnel and facilities need to be in
place to provide tailored responses for female victims
of terrorism, in accordance with resolution 2331 (2016).
I agree with the report's observation that the full
inclusion and empowerment of women are crucial to the
success of programmes to prevent violent extremism
and counter-terrorism. I encourage adopting measures
promoting the systematic involvement of women and
support for women's initiatives in that regard. The
inclusion of religious leaders and young people is also
crucial and should be encouraged.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Poland, a member of the global coalition against
Da'esh, will not stop in its efforts to combat ISIL's
activities. We call on all others to do the same, and we
remain ready to cooperate to that end.

