Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights, Mr. Simonovie, for their
briefings. We also thank the Chadian presidency
for facilitating the inclusion of the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the agenda
of the Council.

As one of the countries that supported the holding
of this meeting, Chile believes that today's discussion
is timely and necessary. At the beginning of the year,
the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council issued its report (S/2014/276, annex),
which confirmed the existence of the systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which in
many cases constitute crimes against humanity. It is
important to underscore the points of agreement of the
reports of the commission of inquiry and the Special
Rapporteur, as well as the resolutions of the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly, which point
to the same conclusion - the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is dire.

How did Pyongyang react to the debate on this
topic? It dismissed it, alleging that it is a political
conspiracy and international smear campaign. The
Government even stated in writing, in a letter to the
Secretary-General dated 24 November, that it may
conduct a further nuclear test. This constitutes a clear
threat to international peace and security. It is of grave
concern that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to develop its nuclear programme and
delivery systems, at a great price in humanitarian terms
for its people, under the sanctions regime established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). This strengthens
our conviction that we need to adopt a broader approach
that allows us to prevent a new conflict on the Korean
peninsula, which would have regional and global
consequences. It becomes clear that the approach we
have taken so far is not adequate and that we should
collectively exert more pressure.

It is essential that appropriate measures be adopted
to put an end to the serious human-rights violations
noted in the reports of the Secretary-General, the
Special Rapporteur and the commission of inquiry.
Those measures must put an end to the climate of
impunity in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and allow for accountability. We urge the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to facilitate access on the
part of the Special Rapporteur to their country in
accordance with the terms of reference of the United
Nations for such special procedures; that is, freedom of
movement and interviews, with security arrangements
made for the Special Rapporteur and for those whom
he interviews.

Given the gravity of the situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, we believe that this first
meeting under a new item on the agenda constitutes
a step that is headed in the right direction. This is
an initiative that we supported at the meeting of the
members of the Security Council under the Arria
Formula in April. Certainly, we hope we can repeat it
regularly.

