Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Since I last
reported to the Security Council, in May (see S/PV.6538), there has been progress showing that
Burundi is carrying forward its peacebuilding efforts
largely as we had hoped. There have also been
developments that could jeopardize that progress and a
long-term socio-economic outlook rife with challenges.

The massacre of 39 people on 18 September at a
bar on the outskirts of Bujumbura reminded many
people of Burundi's painful past. The following
morning, the United Nations and the international
community were invited to join President Nkumnziza
in visiting the site of the devastating attack, where 23
corpses still lay. On 18 October a commission of
inquiry presented its report to the country's Prosecutor.
2
The 21 people arrested after the attack were indicted
last month, and the six accused of planning the attack
have been charged with crimes against humanity.

The defence has challenged several aspects of the
trial's procedure, including alleging that counsel had
no access to their clients or to the report of the
commission of inquiry. The trial will be closely
followed and will be a decisive test of the
independence and impartiality of Burundi's judicial
system. Nevertheless, I want to emphasize that the
attack was fundamentally an isolated incident and that
the security situation in the country remains generally
calm.

The past six months have seemed to point the
way towards normalization of relations between the
Government and the extra-parliamentary political
parties. The Government often expressed its
willingness to engage in dialogue, as realized by the
First Vice-President in the launching of quarterly
meetings with the registered political parties. The
Alliance democratique pour le changement-Ikibiri did
not participate in those meetings. I encourage the
Government and the parties to tirelessly pursue efforts
at dialogue.

The prospects for normalizing relations between
the Government and the extra-parliamentary opposition
were overshadowed by the arrests and, above all, the
assassinations of members of some of those parties, as
well as by reliable information about recruitment,
organization and paramilitary training carried out by
members of certain opposition groups and parties. All
Burundian political stakeholders should be encouraged
to demand an end to assassinations and disassociation
from armed groups.

For a country still emerging from many years of
conflict, Burundi should be commended for the relative
political freedom in the context of its post-transition
Constitution. There is now a need to ensure that there
is no backsliding with regard to the political space,
including as a result of harassing the media and civil
society.

The country's future is reflected in Burundi's
one-year presidency of the East African Community,
which culminated in the holding of a summit in
Bujumbura on 30 November that was marked by
optimism, hope and determination. Burundi was
commended for its contribution to expanding
integration through the implementation of the protocol
11-62586
on a common market and the progress made in the
discussions on a single currency and political
federation. The debate was characterized by that vision
for expanded integration and by Burundi's attachment
to an increasingly dynamic East African Community.
That provides an opportunity to strengthen the
country's stability and democratization.

Nevertheless, for many Burundians the East
African Community remains an elusive concept.
Burundi's capacity to benefit from it still needs to be
strengthened. The United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB) is endeavouring to continue its support to the
Government so as to enable it to move ahead with its
integration process.

Allow me once again to take this opportunity to
commend the important role played by Burundi,
despite its own challenges, to strengthen peace and
security in the region. In the context of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, Burundi has deployed many
troops to Somalia and has experienced tragic losses.

Burundi has made significant progress this year
in the area of transitional justice. A technical
committee was established in June to consider
Burundi's commitments and international practice in
that area, as well as to develop a draft law and budget
on a truth and reconciliation commission. The
committee presented its report to President Nkurunziza
on 18 October. On 18 November, Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, current Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation and former Chair of the
committee, formally transmitted that report to me.

The report's main purpose concerns the draft law.
As a whole, it reaffirms the fundamental principles of
the truth and reconciliation commission. It reiterates
the principles of commission's independence and
impartiality, clearly states that the commission will not
be a judicial mechanism and charges the commission
with identifying all violations and crimes.
Nevertheless, it states that the work of the commission
should not prejudice the competencies of the special
tribunal.

Some provisions do not reflect the
recommendations of the national consultations on
transitional justice concluded in 2010. The report
proposes a truth and reconciliation commission made
up solely of Burundians, while the national
consultations recommended a commission composed of
both Burundians and non-Burundians. Those
11-62586
consultations also recommended that the recruitment
panel be made up of representatives of the
Government, civil society and the United Nations -
something not provided for in the draft law.

I commend the collaboration between the
Government and the United Nations system that
marked the preparatory phase, during which we
provided experts along with material and logistical
support. A positive solution to outstanding issues will
serve to strengthen the confidence of the international
community, which will make it possible for it provide
its full support and the necessary resources for this
long-awaited process to allow Burundi to take
responsibility for its past. We look forward to
continuing our engagement with the Government and
other partners in order to arrive at a process that
closely adheres to international standards.

(spoke in English)

The National Independent Human Rights
Commission, established through a law consistent with
the Paris Principles, is another noteworthy achievement
of 2011. Since its members' swearing-in, in June, the
Commission has gotten straight to work. This comes at
a time of continuing human rights challenges in
Burundi. In recent months, several prominent members
of Burundi's dynamic community of human rights
defenders have been summoned before the Prosecutor's
office in the Bujumbura Mairie for questioning, as
have representatives of civil society and the media.
Lawyers, too, have faced imprisonment. An
independent media, civil society and judiciary have
important roles to play in peace consolidation. I am
concerned that those roles are being constrained.

The consolidation of peace in Burundi also
remains marred by politically motivated killings. Since
the report (8/2011/751) of the Secretary-General was
prepared, BNUB has documented a further 11 cases of
suspected extrajudicial killings, bringing the number of
cases documented by the mission to 57 for the period
1 January to 30 November. It is the firm expectation of
the United Nations that the Government will take quick
and decisive measures to prevent killings linked to its
own agents and to investigate and punish those
responsible.

Many of those concerns have already been raised
in the 31 May report (A/HRC/17/50) by the former
independent expert on the Human Rights situation in
Burundi, Mr. Fatsah Ouguergouz, who recommended
3
that the Government take all necessary steps to bring to
justice the members of the defence and security forces,
as well as any other persons suspected of having
perpetrated gross human rights violations. The
independent expert also urged the Government to
pursue and enhance its efforts towards the
strengthening of the judiciary, including the
recruitment and independence of magistrates. The
United Nations will continue to extend full support to
all such efforts, and to encourage the enhancement of
national investigative efforts through the routine
conduct of autopsies and the use of forensic
investigations.

As the Council is well aware, those developments
are unfolding against a backdrop of extreme poverty.
The report before the Council sets out a snapshot of
those privations, which are exacerbated by high
population density and youth unemployment. The
nexus between land pressure and population growth is
a particular concern. While Burundi has made
significant gains in school education, it has fallen
behind in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals for poverty reduction, gender equality, maternal
and child mortality, access to safe drinking water,
undernourishment and the prevalence of HIV/AIDS.
Burundi's physical, economic, social and legal
pressures must be addressed and managed so as to
reinforce, and not undermine, the consolidation of the
country's hard-won peace.

Burundi is in the final phase of completing its
second poverty reduction strategy, which offers a
systematic basis from which the country, with its
partners, can address its economic and socio-political
challenges. The Government, the United Nations, the
World Bank and the Peacebuilding Commission are
working together to shape a partners' event for 2012
that will be an opportunity to showcase the good
progress made and to attract both aid and investment.

As we anticipate that positive evolution,
continued strong regional engagement will be required,
as well as a common approach among partner
Governments, regional organizations and the United
Nations, in our support of Burundi's peace
consolidation and economic development efforts.

As the report of the Secretary-General indicates,
we have had a smooth and efficient transition from the
former and larger mission, the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi, to our new light footprint
in BNUB. This remains an integrated mission, albeit
with a structure intended to facilitate the eventual
transition to a United Nations country team presence.

BNUB has worked on draft benchmarks to
prepare the way for this transition. Let me mention
briefly the principal benchmarks which are being
developed.

On Burundi's democratic process, we would
expect to see continuing progress in the resolution of
political differences through dialogue and engagement.
On the country's security and stability, we should
expect a security structure and related democratic
oversight enabling Burundi to respond effectively to
domestic and international security concerns while
respecting global norms and rights. We anticipate
continuing progress in transitional justice. We foresee
legitimate, democratic and accountable institutions,
from the national to the local levels. We look for an
increasingly independent, accessible and credible
justice system and a deepening culture of promoting
and protecting human rights.

I look forward to reporting to the Council on
these proposed benchmarks in greater detail.

When this mission phases out, it will be
important for the United Nations and other partners to
continue to give support to strengthening national
institutions. Our priority now is to have a common
vision for this within the mission and the United
Nations country team and to anchor these elements
within the work of the team.

Meanwhile, there is good collaboration among us,
including on a number of projects such as a programme
funded through a $9.2 million contribution from the
Peacebuilding Fund, to support the sustainable socio-
economic reintegration of marginalized populations in
three provinces bordering the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We continue to search for additional
funding for this vital sector to cover other provinces
where the needs are equally pressing.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
Burundi's new Permanent Representative to the United
Nations in New York, Ambassador Hermene'gilde
Niyonzima, and also to thank outgoing Permanent
Representative Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu for the
good cooperation we enjoyed.

The road out of past violence is long and
difficult, as the world knows. In 2012, Burundi is
11-62586
expected to take further strides along that road by
initiating a formal process of truth, reconciliation and
justice. It is understood that this process must be an
inclusive one. Further ahead lie the 2015 elections,
which President Nkurunziza recently called on all
political actors to start preparing for. In addressing the
continuing challenges of peace consolidation and
development, Burundi's Government and people
deserve our continued commitment and strong support.

