Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes Ambassador Grauls' briefing
08-63944
on the activities of the Iran sanctions committee.
Today, I would like to focus on three points.

First, I note that the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on Iran contains troubling findings
that deserve the Council's attention. The report
documents Iran's continued failure to comply with the
Council's demands to suspend all uranium enrichment-
related reprocessing and heavy water activities. The
report also elaborates on the IAEA's concerns about
Iran's past weaponization-related activities, as well as
Iran's refusal to permit the IAEA to have the access
necessary to establish the international community's
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear activities.

Iran's failure to cooperate with the IAEA has,
indeed, gotten worse, in that Iran is once again refusing
to permit the IAEA access to conduct a special kind of
verification inspection at the Arak reactor, which is
essential to monitor the ongoing construction of the
facility, which itself is a violation of the Council's
resolutions.

The report chillingly notes that Iran's stockpile of
low-enriched uranium has reached 630 kilogrammes,
which is over half the amount needed for a nuclear
weapon. I hope that the Council will take serious note
of those findings and support the IAEA secretariat in
continuing its investigation.

Secondly, in the light of this evidence of Iran's
non-compliance, the Iran sanctions committee should
redouble efforts to ensure full and robust
implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008). The Committee's efforts are
essential to our broader two-track approach, which
includes both targeted sanctions and generous
incentives for Iran.

As Ambassador Grauls noted, the Iran sanctions
committee has endeavoured to share best practices
among Member States and encourage greater
transparency in the international community's nuclear
dealings with Iran. We particularly welcome Norway's
decision to brief the Committee on its nuclear training
programme in Iran and the safeguards put in place to
ensure that those activities do not violate existing
Security Council resolutions. We urge the Committee
to continue its efforts and to consider new, more
effective ways to carry out its mandate.
08-63944
Finally, I would like to thank Ambassador Grauls
for his excellent work in leading the 1737 Committee
and his dedication to ensuring that the Committee carry
out its mandate. He has set a high bar for excellence
and professionalism for any successor.

