Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The peace process in Angola
could have been close to a successful ending, yet once
again it is at a crossroads. On 29 April, on the occasion of
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1164 (1998),
Slovenia singled out as the source of its greatest worry the
discrepancy between the positive political atmosphere and
the difficult situation on the ground. We note with regret
that the situation on the ground has since then poisoned the
political atmosphere as well.

This turn of events is all the more regrettable in the
light of the valiant efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative in Angola to maintain the
momentum of the peace process. In the presidential
statement of 22 May (S/PRST/ 1998/ 14) this Council
endorsed a plan drawn up by Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye
and approved by the Joint Commission. The plan aimed at
reducing tensions by requiring the Government to cease its
anti-UNITA activities and by calling on UNITA to hand
over areas still under its control by the end of the month.

Unfortunately, 31 May turned out to be only the latest
in a long series of missed deadlines. In contrast to the
efforts of the Angolan Government, UNITA again failed to
live up to the expectations of the international community.
The central and southern Ovimbundu heartland of Angola
and, in particular, the strongholds of Bailundo and
Andulo, still remain under UNITA control.

Slovenia finds this latest example of UNITA's
delaying tactics disturbing, especially in view of the
increased number of armed incidents in Angolan
provinces in the month of May. The discipline of the
troops involved, the well-planned nature of operations and
the quality of arms used convincingly suggest that
UNITA forces are responsible.

We are also dismayed by the emergence of recent
evidence about UNITA's arms-smuggling operations.
Here we are specifically referring to the purchases of
large consignments of military and logistical equipment,
which were reported in the South African press. We
believe that this evidence shows that UNITA has not
given up completely its military ambitions. Indeed, it
appears that, far from retaining some military personnel
and arms, UNITA is rearming and keeping open the
option to continue as a guerrilla force.

At this crucial juncture, efforts of the international
community to safeguard the achievements of the peace
process are essential. The draft resolution put before the
Security Council for action today represents an attempt to
address the current crisis through political means. It
presents UNITA with an unequivocal demand to modify
its behaviour in accordance with the obligations stemming
from the Lusaka Protocol and all subsequent timetables.

The draft resolution also draws on the experience
from previous months which has shown that targeted
sanctions can have a positive effect. Targeted sanctions
bite, they can modify the behaviour of UNITA and the
option of sanctions must be available to ensure the
implementation by UNITA of the remaining tasks of the
Lusaka Protocol. We therefore support the measures
envisaged in the new draft resolution, namely, freezing of
UNITA's financial assets, prevention of official contacts
and the prohibition of trade in diamonds, mining
equipment and means of transportation.

Slovenia will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

The responsibility for the current impasse in Angola
lies squarely on the shoulders of the leadership of
UNITA. We therefore find it all the more important to
urge the Angolan Government to persevere in its effort to
insist on peaceful actions. We realize that this is a trying
period for the Government and that its patience is being
stretched to the limits of endurance. Nonetheless, it is

 

vital that political means be fully utilized for completion of
the peace process. Only political means can guarantee the
achievement of a durable solution based on national
reconciliation and peace. And only peace can allow the
Angolan people to devote their energies entirely to
rebuilding their war-ravaged country.

