Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): Georgia expresses
its full support for the activities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
shares the view that the Mission will play a fundamental
role in allowing Afghanistan and the international
community to work effectively together to fulfil the
Tokyo commitments and in monitoring the human
rights and humanitarian situation on the ground.

We believe that it is essential that UNAMA
be equipped with an appropriate mandate and be
provided with ample resources needed to fulfill its role,
particularly throughout the transition year of 2014. We
therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/l33) and the Council's unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2096 (2013). Let me say that the
greater the stability and security on the ground, the
more effective the activities of UNAMA will be. A
stable and secure environment is a necessary condition
for the Mission to appropriately fulfil its mandate.

Moreover, we believe that, without a stable and
secure Afghanistan, it is difficult to imagine achieving
sustainable stability and security at the regional level
and beyond. I think we, the international community,
bear our share of responsibility to assist the people of
Afghanistan on the difficult path towards peace and
development. For that particular reason, Georgia has,
for its part, committed itself to stand by its friends
from the neighbouring region. We are firmly convinced
that supporting Afghanistan, especially during this
challenging phase of its history, will benefit the long-
term security of Georgia and of the broader region.

Georgia has proved that it is willing and able to
contribute to international security. For several years, the
Georgian military contingent has performed its mission
in Afghanistan. At the moment, in the framework of
the International Security Assistance Force, 1,600
Georgian military personnel are performing their duty,
including in the most volatile province, Helmand.

Georgia has decided to continue its contribution
beyond 2014. Moreover, fully recognizing the
importance of continued support to the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan throughout the
"Transformation Decade" and the role of the Afghan
National Security Forces in preserving and consolidating
the gains on the ground, the Government of Georgia
has committed to making financial contributions to the
Afghan National Security Forces sustainability fund.

We fully support the firm position of the international
community and of the Security Council that assistance
to Afghanistan should be as comprehensive as possible
and should not be limited to the military component
alone. Aid in the humanitarian field is crucial for
long-term security and further development. We are
convinced that Georgia's commitment to providing
assistance in the field of health care complements our
military contribution.

Undoubtedly, lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan can be achieved primarily through an
all-inclusive reconciliation process, generated by the
people of Afghanistan. Nonetheless, we reaffirm our
readiness to provide support to a peaceful post-2014
transition in the country.

