I thank Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing. France aligns with the written statement of the European Union (EU), which reaffirms the EU's long-standing position on the two-State solution. First and foremost, I want to reiterate France's grave concern over the threat of annexation in the light of the recent developments. France, along with its European partners, has repeatedly warned against the annexation of parts of the West Bank, including the Jordan Valley and settlements. It would constitute a blatant violation of international law, which strictly prohibits the acquisition by force of occupied territories. Such steps, if implemented, would not pass unchallenged and will not be overlooked in our relationship with Israel. We have also condemned the recent announcements by the Israeli Government with regard to advancing settlements in Jerusalem and the West Bank, especially in the El area, as well as Givat Hamatos and Har Homa, which are located in particularly sensitive areas. Such announcements threaten the viability of a future Palestinian State. We call on the Israeli Government to halt the publication of tenders or any measures aimed at promoting construction in Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the El area, as well as not to take any unilateral action that would undermine the two- State solution and the prospect of renewed peace talks. We will not recognize any changes to the June 1967 lines unless agreed to by both parties. It is a matter of principle. Respect for international law, including the resolutions of the Security Council, is without exception. However, it is also about being pragmatic. The two- State solution is the only way to bring a sustainable peace to the region. That is in the interest of the Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as the neighbouring EU. Secondly, let me stress the importance of increased Israeli-Palestinian coordination in the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), with the adequate support of the international community. In echo of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, all actors must refrain from hostile acts, maintain the ceasefire and ensure rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need. There is no alternative to effectively fight the pandemic. I want to echo the Special Coordinator's concerns regarding the vulnerabilities of Gaza and the lack of sufficient medical equipment to respond to COVID-19. The Israeli Government should guarantee the continued delivery of medical equipment and allow humanitarian evacuations. The Palestinian Authority is also responsible for the provision of medical aid and supplies to the Strip. Moreover, France recalls that there will be no sustainable stability in Gaza without the lifting of the blockade, with credible security guarantees for Israel and the restoration of the Palestinian Authority through intra-Palestinian reconciliation. The Israeli and Palestinian authorities must enhance their cooperation to deal with the current health situation. More generally, I urge Israel to implement a full suspension of demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian and international infrastructure in the context of COVID-19, and to allow the delivery of medical equipment and humanitarian emergency evacuations, in accordance with its duties as occupying Power. There is also a need for a comprehensive and lasting agreement to the clearance revenues issue to enable the Palestinian Authority to deal with the response to COVID-19. Last but not least, the international community needs to step up its support to the Palestinian territories. The French Development Agency is mobilizing €3 million to support the Palestinian response to COVID-19. The European Union has mobilized €71 million in support of Palestinian health-care services and to alleviate the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic. In this context, I want to thank the United Nations, and particularly the World Health Organization and UNRWA's humanitarian workers, whose role notably remains crucial in the context of COVID-19. France remains concerned about the growing obstacles facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) on the ground in Palestine and in East Jerusalem in particular, especially at a time when its work is all the more essential. UNRWA's mandate is crucial to allow for a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to be found to the refugee question. In conclusion, I want to reiterate France's readiness to support the resumption of negotiations based on the internationally agreed parameters. COVID-19 shows the necessity to coordinate and the mutual interests of the Israeli and Palestinian people. Like public health, peace is a public good and the Security Council should unite its efforts to promote peace.
