Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate Egypt on its assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
we wish to express our appreciation for the convening
of this important debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. We also thank you,
Mr. President, for providing us with a comprehensive
concept note (S/2016/416, annex) to guide our
discussions.

Indiscriminate attacks - such as the three bomb
attacks in Iraq today on innocent civilians, including
women and children - by increasingly ambitious
terrorist groups persist with alarming frequency across
the world. This is leading to untold human suffering
and is provoking an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis in some regions of the world. Terrorist groups'
adept use of modern communications technologies to
recruit, to incite violence and to spread their distorted
ideologies of hate and intolerance poses a serious and
ever more complex threat to international peace and
security. Through fear and force they sow instability
and continue to deprive those they control of the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The threat of terrorism is universal, transcending
borders, and we have reached a stage where no country
can declare itself free of this scourge. Similarly, no
country can deal with it on its own. For that reason,
it is important that the international community
adopt adequate measures to counter it. The United
Nations, with the broad range of expertise and tools
at its disposal, is best placed to lead the coordination
of international efforts in this regard. South Africa
continues to support the central role of the United
Nations in countering terrorism and strengthening the
multilateral system to take effective measures within
the framework of the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. Initiatives to support improved
coordination and cooperation among United Nations
entities involved in countering terrorism, and improved
coordination between the United Nations and regional
structures, should be encouraged and supported.

We acknowledge the work being done by the General
Assembly and the Security Council in guiding the
international community's response to that challenge.
The General Assembly, with its universal membership,
has a valuable contribution to make, especially with
regard to the upcoming review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Together with the
Secretary-General's Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), it provides a valuable opportunity for all
Member States to assess the progress thus far and to
make recommendations for more effective cooperation
in countering terrorism, particularly with regard to the
creation of new mechanisms.

It is my delegation's view that the creation of
any new mechanism should be measured against its
contribution to facilitating and assisting international
counter-terrorism efforts, rather than duplicating
work that has already been done in other structures.
South Africa continues to support a multifaceted,
comprehensive approach to dealing with terrorism in
all its complexity.

Terrorism cannot be defeated militarily and cannot
be dealt with solely through the use of force or coercive
measures. To counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism in the medium- to long-term, international
cooperation must also address the factors that give rise
to this scourge. There is an urgent need to understand
and address the conditions and contexts that make
terrorism an attractive option for the disaffected.
Engagement, including through education,
eliminating inequalities and working with disadvantaged
groups of society, particularly young people, and
developing appropriate strategies at the national,
regional, and international level remain critical. There
is no one-size-fits-all approach to countering this
threat; it is up to each subregion and country to define
its specific conditions and take appropriate action in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
in observance of international law.

Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with
any religion, nationality or civilization. We therefore
welcome and support initiatives and efforts that promote
dialogue, tolerance, diversity and understanding among
peoples, cultures and religions. Acts of mobilization
directed against individuals, communities or nations
simply because of their faith, language or race cannot
be justified. The international community should seek
political solutions to resolve long-standing conflicts. In
this context, terrorism should not be equated with the
legitimate struggles of peoples under foreign occupation
to achieve their inalienable right to self-determination,
as recognized by the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
delegation's commitment to continuing to work within
the United Nations and other multilateral structures
to seek ways to counter effectively and efficiently the
threat posed to international peace and security by
terrorist acts.

