Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to update the Security Council on
the humanitarian implications of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

As the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
noted, the situation on the ground is of concern. At its
core, the situation remains a protection crisis. Violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
are a key driver of high levels of acute vulnerability
among Palestinians. The international community
is mobilizing to provide assistance, but funding is
diminishing, while needs and constraints continue to
grow. Ultimately, the solution is not humanitarian.

The lives and well-being of people must
be placed beyond political considerations, and
humanitarian aid facilitated and supported. Overall,
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip, deteriorated
in 2018. That included an increase in casualties
associated with the demonstrations at the Gaza fence,
limitations on the movement of people and goods, and
financial restrictions.

The growing casualty figures cited by Special
Coordinator Mladenov are stretching the capacity of
health-care providers. The health system in Gaza is
at risk of collapse as injuries during protests at the
Gaza fence and in related Violent incidents continue.
Since the start of demonstrations in March 2018, over
27,000 Palestinians have been injured, more than 6,000
of them by live ammunition. According to the World
Health Organization, 122 amputations, including 21
paediatric amputations, have taken place since the start
of the mass demonstrations.

Ijoin the numerous calls of the Secretary-General
upon Israel to ensure that its use of force in response
to those public demonstrations is in compliance with
international law as a last resort and in response to an
imminent threat of death or serious injury. I call upon
the organizers of the demonstrations, the demonstrators
themselves and Hamas to ensure non-violent protests.
I condemn the continued launching of rockets and
incendiary devices from Gaza.

Less than two weeks ago, three Palestinian children
were killedin Gaza, bringing the total number ofchildren
killed this year to four. Since March, 40 children have
been killed in the context of demonstrations. Great
effort must be made to spare children from violence.
They should never be put in harm's way.

The World Health Organization also reports
that since the start of the protests, three health-care
providers have been killed and over 620 others have been
wounded. Medical personnel carrying out their duties
must be protected and their work facilitated. Many of
the injuries sustained require complex treatment that
is not available in Gaza. However, obtaining treatment
outside of Gaza remains challenging. In 2018, 61 per
cent of all patient requests to cross the Erez checkpoint
with Israel to access appropriate health care were
approved; since March last year, 17 per cent of the
applications by those injured in demonstrations have
been approved. Patients are also able to exit Gaza via
the crossing with Egypt. That crossing has been open
five days per week since July 2018. In December, 98
patients crossed through Rafah.

Compounding the burden on health services in
Gaza, essential drugs and medical supplies are scarce.
Health-care providers continue to coordinate and
preposition field treatment posts to minimize the loss of
life. The recent boost in the electricity supply, enabled
by Qatar's donation of funding to purchase fuel, has
remained steady, with 9 to 12 hours of electricity per
day. However, emergency fuel for back-up generators to
run emergency and surgery rooms during the outages
is running out. Multiple times in the past year, the
provision of essential services in Gaza have been at risk
of shutdown, with potentially harsh consequences for
the population.

The ongoing internal Palestinian divide has
contributed to that deteriorating situation and the rising
vulnerability of Palestinians in Gaza, who already
struggle to meet basic daily needs. Recent reports of
reductions or the withholding of the salaries of some
public sector employees are of concern. Over 5,000
people have reportedly had their salaries cut, including
in the health and education sectors. Unemployment
exceeds 50 per cent and food insecurity is estimated
to be nearly 70 per cent in Gaza. In order to avoid a
recurring need for humanitarian aid, further sustained
action is needed on longer-term projects, such as those
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians, on which
Special Coordinator Mladenov updated the Council.

As of2 January, for the first time since 2000, Israel
has partially expanded the fishing zone from 6 to 12
nautical miles in the middle area off the Gaza coast.
That expansion may potentially help revive the fishing
sector and provide a sustainable source of income.

While the humanitarian situation in the West
Bank is less acute, many Palestinian families and
communities in Area C, the city of Hebron and East
Jerusalem face growing pressures. Demolitions,
evictions, restrictions on movement and access and
rising settler-related Violence continue to foster an
environment that heightens the risk of forcible transfer
for many Palestinians.

Between 22 January and 19 February, four
Palestinians were killed and 85 were injured by Israeli
forces in the West Bank within the context of search-
and-arrest operations, demonstrations, clashes and
Palestinian attacks and alleged attacks. In addition,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) has recorded 20 incidents in which
Palestinians were injured and their property damaged
by Israeli settlers.

On 26 January, armed Israeli settlers entered
the Village of Al-Mughayyir, where they reportedly
attacked Palestinian residents. Subsequent clashes,
also involving the Israeli Defense Forces, resulted in
the death of a 38-year-old Palestinian man and injury
to other Palestinians. In some 280 incidents during
2018, one Palestinian was killed and 115 others were
injured as a result of settler-related violence. That is the
highest recorded number of incidents in any single year
since 2014.

Israeli authorities have stepped up law enforcement
efforts in response to such events. I call on authorities to
strengthen those efforts so as to ensure accountability
and reverse the trend in growing settler-related violence.

Palestinian attacks against Israelis have also
continued, resulting in one fatality and at least four
injuries. Of note, on 7 February, a 19-year-old Israeli
woman was stabbed to death in Jerusalem.

The protection of the Palestinian population in the
H-2 section of Hebron is of concern. As described by
Special Coordinator Mladenov, the departure of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron leaves
Palestinians with a greater sense of exposure and
vulnerability to settler harassment. A recent survey
coordinated by OCHA in the H-2 settlement area, which
is home to some 7,000 Palestinians, indicates that nearly
70 per cent of families have been exposed to settler-
related violence and harassment in the past three years.
The aid community is examining how it can increase
the provision of assistance and promote protection.

As reflected by Special Coordinator Mladenov,
Palestinians continue to face displacement and loss of
property, which occurs due to demolitions of structures
lacking Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly
impossible to obtain. Many families live under the threat
of eviction orders. As mentioned, approximately 200
Palestinian households in East Jerusalem have eviction
cases filed against them, predominantly by settler
organizations claiming ownership of the buildings.

On 17 February, members of the Abu Asab family
were evicted following such a legal battle. Of similar
concern is the risk of eviction facing 32 members of
the Sabbagh family, who are Palestinian refugees. The
Humanitarian Coordinator, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights have called on
the Israeli authorities to immediately halt the eviction
of this family and those facing similar actions.

Alongside the deterioration of humanitarian
conditions, our ability to provide humanitarian
assistance is increasingly constrained. Funding last year
was at a record low, with the 2018 appeal for the occupied
Palestinian territory only 46 per cent funded- far below
the global average of 60 per cent. The situation reflects
not only cuts to UNRWA, the largest humanitarian
provider in the occupied Palestinian territory, but also
to other United Nations agencies and non- governmental
organizations, thereby reducing their ability to provide
aid. For instance, funding cuts have forced the World
Food Programme to suspend food assistance to about
27,000 people and reduce rations to another 166,000
beneficiaries. In addition, humanitarian organizations
face challenges to their operating space from both the
Israeli and Palestinian authorities. There is mounting
pressure on human rights defenders and attempts to
delegitimize humanitarian action in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The humanitarian response plan for 2019 requests
$350 million to provide basic food, protection, health
care, shelter, water and sanitation to 1.4 million
Palestinians, down from the 1.9 million targeted last
year. The request is based on the maximum number
of vulnerable people whose needs we are able to
address. Recognizing this lack of funding, the occupied
Palestinian territory will receive an allocation of
$8 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund.
About 70 per cent of this funding will help to address
the immediate health crisis in Gaza, as well as water
and sanitation issues; some 30 per cent will enhance
international assistance in Hebron and the rest of the
West Bank. However, the amount is far from enough
to bridge the considerable funding gaps. I therefore
urge Member States to step up and increase their
support to humanitarian operations in the occupied
Palestinian territory.

In order to reduce vulnerability, it is also
critical that all parties uphold their obligations under
international human rights law and humanitarian law.
And, ultimately, the solution is not humanitarian. It is
for stakeholders to continue to work towards a viable
political solution.

