Mr. Eick (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Prosecutor for his briefing and for his
report to the Council. We are grateful for the continued
efforts exerted by both the Prosecutor and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as a whole towards
the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011). We
continue to attach great importance to ensuring that
atrocities committed in Libya do not remain
unpunished. To that end, perpetrators must be
identified and brought to justice.

That this objective is shared throughout the
international community is evidenced by the
impressive rate of cooperation by States with ICC
requests for assistance that the Prosecutor has
highlighted in his report. I would like to reassure the
Prosecutor of Germany's readiness to support the
ongoing investigations and to comply with any request
for assistance.

Please allow me to comment briefly on a number
of developments highlighted by the Prosecutor in his
report.

First, Germany is pleased to note that
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi has finally been apprehended
and can now be held accountable for crimes against
humanity under article 7 of the Rome Statute. While
we note that several requests for his rendition are
pending, we call on all concerned to ensure that
Mr. Al-Senussi faces comprehensive proceedings
covering all crimes allegedly committed by him during
his many years as one of the most notorious strongmen
of the Al-Qadhafi regime.

Secondly, Germany has been closely following
developments regarding the situation of Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, as well as the question of
jurisdiction in his case. We commend the Court's
efforts to shed light on the legal and factual
circumstances of Mr. Al-Qadhafi's detention. At the
same time, we retain our great concerns regarding the
fact that Mr. Al-Qadhafi remains in custody in Zintan
and that his transfer to custody under the full authority
of the Libyan authorities is still outstanding.

The other loose end in this matter concerns the
issue of jurisdiction and the correct steps to be taken
by the Libyan authorities in order to enable the Court
to review the relevant Libyan submissions properly. We
note that the Government of Libya has now filed a
formal admissibility challenge under article 19.2 of the
ICC Statute. Germany is fully confident that the
Pre-Trial Chamber will examine this submission in a
thorough and comprehensive manner, taking into
account all relevant aspects, as well as the overall
objective of ensuring that the principles of justice and
due process are upheld.

Thirdly, I would like to highlight the importance
of ensuring transitional justice and national
reconciliation in Libya. We recognize the enormous
challenges faced by the National Transitional Council
in this regard, and we acknowledge the efforts
undertaken so far. These include, inter alia, the
continuing transfer of detainees to national control, the
establishment of a fact-finding and reconciliation
commission following the adoption of a transitional
justice law, and the preparations for a comprehensive
strategy to address all crimes and end impunity in
Libya.

At the same time, we share the concerns
expressed by the Prosecutor in his report. This applies
specifically to the slow pace of arranging the transfer
of control of detainees from militias and local
authorities to the national authorities, and the screening
of these detainees to determine as quickly as possible
who must be released and who should be the subject of
criminal investigations.

As the Prosecutor has noted in his report, the
United Nations Commission of Inquiry, in March 2012,
recorded the occurrence of enforced disappearances
and torture in centres under the control of local
military councils, and the collective targeting and
punishment of whole communities for their perceived

allegiance to the Al-Qadhafi regime. We thus call on all
those exerting factual power in Libya to adhere to
applicable human rights standards and to refrain from
all acts that reflect the dark sides of Libya's past, rather
than its present and future as a fully accepted member
of the international community.

Finally, I would like to thank the Prosecutor for
the unambiguous findings in his report regarding
NATO actions in Libya. These remarks are fully in line
with what is well known: that NATO did not
deliberately target civilians but rather took extensive
precautions to ensure that no civilians were killed.
Furthermore, NATO fully cooperated with the
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya and
provided a significant amount of information, much of
which had to be declassified, to assist the Commission
in its work.

