I would like to extend our welcome and appreciation to all Ministers for their statements. We thank the German presidency and the Dominican Republic for co-hosting this important open debate. We would also like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2020/487), his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her valuable briefing and other briefers for their insightful presentations. As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is saddening to see that the multiple consequences of sexual violence continue to persist despite increasing commitments and progress achieved. Wars and conflicts affect everyone, but often women and children remain the ones to suffer the most from lasting psychological and physical impacts. Lacking access to education, livelihoods and economic opportunities, these victims are also easily subjected to stigmatization, human trafficking and armed group and terrorist recruitment, which further the cycle of violence and suffering. Our response to conflict-related sexual violence requires a comprehensive approach of preventive and recovery measures, in addition to tackling its root causes arising from gender inequality. In this effort, we share the view expressed by the Secretary-General in his report that a survivor-centred approach is imperative, and remain concerned at existing gaps between commitments and the implementation of commitments by parties to conflict. With that in mind, I would like to make the following points. First, victims of sexual violence must be provided with essential recovery services, including health care, psychological support, vocational training, employment opportunities, legal aid and socioeconomic reintegration. These measures should be taken together with efforts to advance gender equality. We would like to highlight the importance of economic empowerment in enhancing women's recovery and capacity. States have the primary responsibility in this regard, but complementary assistance from the international community - particularly the United Nations agencies, programmes and peacekeeping missions - is equally crucial. This may include but is not limited to development assistance, capacity- building, technical support and training. Secondly, women are not only victims but they are also the backbone of communities. The equal representation and full involvement of women in decision- making processes is a prerequisite to conflict prevention and addressing sexual violence in conflict. This would ensure that initiatives promoted could adequately address the needs and interests of victims, raise greater awareness and overcome stigmatization against those who suffer from sexual violence. Thirdly, the international community should further strengthen cooperation and experience-sharing among countries and regions to allow for the more consistent and effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda, as well as the conflict-related sexual violence aspect. We also call for a united and collective response to effectively implement existing normative frameworks to promote gender equality and women's empowerment in the prevention of and response to sexual violence in conflicts. The path to prevention and response to conflict-related sexual violence requires both immediate actions and a long-term approach. In this pursuit, let us always be mindful of the perpetual suffering of victims, who are at increasing risk of being left behind, and of the indispensable role of women in all stages of peace processes. Moreover, in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the protection and empowerment of women should be paid even more attention. Viet Nam is committed to working closely with Member States and the relevant agencies of the United Nations in this endeavour.
