Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, allow me to take this opportunity to
congratulate you on presiding over the work of the
Council for this month. Given our friendship, we are
fully aware of your wisdom, and we know that you are
a person of vision. Allow me also to express our
gratitude and appreciation to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Congo, for the manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council during the month of
May.

We would like to endorse the statement made by
the representative of Algeria, who spoke on behalf of
the Arab Group, and the statement made by the
representative of Malaysia, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

To those I would like to add the following.

The Security Council is meeting once again to put
an end to the arrogance of Israeli might. The Council
knows full well that this is not the first time that the
forces of the Israeli occupation have practiced State
violence against a defenceless people. Israel has
bombed densely populated cities and refugee camps -
refugees it has displaced from their lands.

What is new here is that the Israeli forces have
taken their acts of aggression to new heights by killing
innocent civilians on the Gaza shore, destroying
Palestinian infrastructure, kidnapping Cabinet
ministers and Palestinian officials, and intensifying the
scale of its aggression by sending its warplanes to
violate the airspace of the Syrian Arab Republic, with a
view to destabilizing the region and pushing it into a
state of war - as if our region was lacking in tragedy.

The Republic of Yemen condemns the acts of
aggression committed against the occupied Palestinian
territories. It condemns also the violation by Israeli
warplanes of Syrian airspace and requests that an end
be put to such acts of aggression, that the Israeli forces
withdraw to their previous positions, and that the
Cabinet ministers and Palestinian officials who were
detained be released, as they were elected in free and
democratic elections. We call once again for respect for
the inviolability of Syrian airspace.

It is strange indeed that these Israeli acts of
aggression follow on the heels of the Palestinian
national reconciliation movement, aimed at allowing
Palestinians to speak with one voice and responding to
the internationally agreed provisions related to the
peace process in the region. It has become clear that
the military actions and threats began prior to the
detention of the Israeli soldier, which has been used by
Israel as a pretext for its acts of aggression. This shows
that Israel does not really seek peace. Perhaps it cannot
live without triggering disputes and conflicts in the
region as a justification for usurping and annexing
additional Palestinian territory so as to establish
settlements there, bringing settlers from all parts of the
world.

Israel persists in this behaviour because it knows
full well that the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, are paralysed. Not only
that, it enjoys protection from punishment. No one
even questions what it does or its actions, which run
counter to international law and to divine codes.

We would like to stress once again that, in order
to achieve peace and stability, pressure must be
brought to bear on Israel to respect international
instruments. Israel should be stopped. It cannot
continue to act as if it were above the law. Israel's
crimes generate hatred and incite violence and tension
in the region.

We are convinced that any defenceless people
subjected to intermittent acts of aggression would
definitely feel frustrated and hopeless. Frustration
generates hatred and terror. Terror feeds on an
environment in which there is no justice or fairness.
The international community must therefore put an end
to Israel's acts of aggression and hold Israel
accountable. It also should work to speedily implement
final status negotiations in accordance with
internationally binding resolutions, the decisions of the
Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.

