Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting of
the Security Council, and the delegations of the United
Kingdom and Jordan for having introduced resolution
2201 (2015), the adoption of which is very good news
for two reasons. The first is that the Security Council's
credibility depends to a large extent on its effectiveness
in response to such threats; the second, we believe, is
that it will help to stop the escalating violence in Yemen.

Spain urges all Yemeni stakeholders to return
to the path of dialogue and to relaunch the transition
process supported by the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. The
Gulf Cooperation Council has played an absolutely
fundamental role. An inclusive dialogue is the only
possible solution to make progress and achieve the
goals of unity and prosperity in Yemen.

I would like to express Spain's gratitude for the
work done by the Secretary-General's Special Adviser
Jamal Benomar, as well as to assure the members of
the Council that the situation of insecurity and the lack
of appropriate conditions have led Spain temporarily to
suspend its presence in Yemen. We have departed for
the time being, but we will return as soon as conditions
allow our mission to do so.

However, as well as we might have done it, our
work does not end today. For, among the many issues,
there are three matters of particular concern to Spain.
First, all experts agree that Ansarallah is a group made
up mostly ofpeople with little or no training in politics,
and we cannot be entirely certain that they can start
along the path towards a return to democracy. Secondly,
the very interesting report Small Arms Survey 2014 sets
out the current situation in Yemen. This is no less than
the third country in the world with the most weapons
per inhabitant. And, thirdly, as some delegations have
pointed out, in this type of conflict terrorist movements
such as Al-Qaida always take advantage of the situation.

I would like to conclude by mentioning a phrase that
is usually found in all resolutions but which sometimes
goes unnoticed. As found in paragraph 15 of resolution
2201 (2015), that phrase is "decides to remain actively
seized of the matter". I believe that the Council should
remain seized of the matter of Yemen.

