Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): On behalf of the
African Group, I wish to start by commending you, Sir,
for convening this important meeting dedicated to a
3
topic that constitutes one of the most challenging tasks
of our time: the preservation of the life and dignity of
millions of civilians affected by armed conflicts.

Eight years after the issuance of the first report of
the Secretary-General on the issue, our Organization
has developed a deep understanding of the question,
ranging from the identification of different features of
temporary conflicts and the relevant international legal
instruments to the necessary measures for the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.

In fact, the humanitarian architecture of the
United Nations has sufficiently improved through, inter
alia, the role played by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and through the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, a
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
Mass Atrocities, and a Special Adviser on matters
relating to the prevention and resolution of conflict.
The Secretary-General has also issued specific reports
on children in armed conflicts containing concrete
proposals.

The 2005 World Summit dedicated special
importance to the protection of civilians, while the
Security Council has adopted several presidential
statements and resolutions, in particular resolutions
1674 (2006), 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000) and 1631
(2005). The process of United Nations reform has also
produced bodies - the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Human Rights Council - whose activities will also
impact the lives of civilians in armed conflicts and
post-conflict situations.

The African Group also takes note of the concrete
actions proposed by the Secretary-General, while
awaiting the reaction of the Security Council to those
concrete proposals. It is our hope that the views of the
Governments of the countries concerned will be taken
into account in the search for feasible solutions, since
the protection of their citizens is a prerogative of
national Governments.

Such traditional actors as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other non-
governmental organizations, humanitarian agencies,
and organizations such as the International Migration
Organization have also made a valuable contribution to
relief field activities. Important steps have thus been
taken in the identification of the problems and the
instruments to address them. The challenge remains the
strengthening and coordination necessary to facilitate
the implementation of the decisions taken in order to
effectively protect civilians in accordance with the
principle of the neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian assistance.

We therefore welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at reinforcing the normative
and operational framework for the protection of
civilians. In that connection, we reiterate the
importance of strengthening the role of the General
Assembly as the organ which has the primary
responsibility for providing policy guidance for United
Nations humanitarian operations. We welcome the
recent report of the Secretary-General of 28 October,
contained in document S/2007/643, which is more than
eloquent on the current situation, including the nature
of contemporary armed conflicts and the diversity of
the actors involved. The report clarifies the increasing
role played by peacekeeping operations and regional
organizations in the protection of civilians, as well as
the progress made in the fields of a normative
framework and the fight against impunity through
international justice.

It is also our View that the Security Council
should continue to consider the humanitarian impact of
sanctions. In that regard, the recent report of the
Secretary-General is unfortunately rather silent.
Concerning refugees, the African Group is of the
opinion that more concrete proposals are needed
regarding actions aimed at enhancing assistance to host
countries and communities.

The deaths of millions of civilians, whenever
they occur, attacks against peacekeepers, sexual
violence and other harmful conflict-related practices
should be condemned. The African Group is fully
supportive of ending impunity for those involved in
atrocities against civilians.

Regarding sexual violence, Africa long ago took
the lead in the condemnation of that dreadful practice
by adopting, in Maputo in July 2003, a Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights on the
Rights of Women in Africa, in which African States
committed themselves to

"undertake to protect asylum seeking women,
refugees, returnees and internally displaced
persons, against all forms of violence, rape and
other forms of sexual exploitation, and to ensure
07-60635
that such acts are considered war crimes,
genocide and/or crimes against humanity and that
their perpetrators are brought to justice before a
competent criminal jurisdiction".

We therefore welcome the important step taken
by our Organization by the recent adoption of draft
resolution A/C.3/62/L.16/Rev.2 on the elimination of
rape and other forms of sexual violence. The interest of
the African continent in the issue vindicates the active
role played by the African Group during the
consultations on the issue with interested delegations.

The Constitutive Act establishing the African
Union stresses the responsibility of Member States to
protect their citizens, while reserving to the African
Union the right to intervene, including through
multilateral military force, in respect of such grave
circumstances as war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity, or situations that pose a serious
threat to legitimate order to restore peace and security
in a member State. Furthermore, the African Union
recognizes military intervention as the last resort,
stressing non-military measures such as dialogue for
the peaceful resolution of conflicts as a means to the
best solution of conflicts.

We are clearly interested in seeing more progress
in ensuring the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This open debate today seriously represents an
important contribution towards this objective.

