Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I have the honour of
addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
informal group of like-minded countries, which have
taken a specific interest in strengthening fair and clear
procedures for targeted sanctions and in making United
Nations sanctions regimes more effective. This group
is comprised of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Switzerland.

Let me join others in thanking the Chairs of the
three Committees for their informative briefings. As
the focus of our group lies in targeted sanctions and
fair and clear procedures, my remarks will concentrate
on the sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. In
this regard, I should underline that our group supports
and fully recognizes that targeted sanctions are a useful
and necessary tool for effectively combating
international terrorism. Our position on the issue of
sanctions reform is guided by the aim of strengthening
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.

Let me begin by welcoming the adoption of
resolution 1989 (2011) in June. The resolution
enhances due process for listing and de-listing
procedures alike. The like-minded group can only
stress the significance of these latest reforms towards
granting an independent and effective remedy to
anyone who believes himself or herself to be wrongly
labelled as being associated with Al-Qaida.

Read against the background of past
improvements to the 1267 regime - notably the
establishment of the focal point, the introduction of
narrative summaries, the comprehensive review
undertaken and, of course, the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson itself - the new
amendments have contributed considerably to the
overall fairness and effectiveness of the Al-Qaida
sanctions system.

Likewise, the like-minded group takes this
opportunity to commend the Ombudsperson, Judge
Kimberly Prost, for the excellent quality of her work
since she took office in the summer of 2010. There is
now a strong built-in presumption, which is widely
shared, that the Ombudsperson's presentations are
based on in-depth analysis, well founded and well
received by the Committee when deciding de-listing
requests presented by her Office. The result is an
Ombudsperson who is more likely to gain access to
case-relevant information, and a designating State that
is more likely to be able to implement what its own
national or regional courts require it to do.

Now that these reforms have been put into place,
there is a strong need for all actors involved to
cooperate and ensure that they deliver the envisaged
results. The Ombudsperson cannot be successful
without the support of Member States. Cooperation
with the Office of the Ombudsperson, including the
provision of confidential information in individual
cases, will therefore be key. Legal and practical ways
of allowing the Ombudsperson's access to all relevant
information regarding a particular listing should be
actively explored, such as through the conclusion of
confidentiality agreements or arrangements. Among the
like-minded countries, Switzerland, Belgium and Costa
Rica already have arrangements in place with the
Office of the Ombudsperson. They stand ready to
answer - on a bilateral basis - any question the
wider membership might have in that respect.

Of equal importance is the provision of adequate
resources to the Ombudsperson. We therefore call upon
all Member States to look favourably upon the
budgetary requests of the Office of the Ombudsperson
for additional staff and additional resources so as to
enable her to continue to process the increasing
number of petitions fully, effectively and in a timely
manner. Adequate resources are essential if the
Ombudsperson is to be able to fulfil her reinforced
mandate in full accordance with fundamental
requirements of the rule of law, such as the translation
of relevant documents into a language familiar to the
petitioner.

Finally, we note that the effectiveness of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime will also be judged by the
number of appeals to the Security Council. The
Council retains the authority to oppose a de-listing
recommendation under its ordinary decision-making
rules. We appeal to the members of the Sanctions
Committee that such appeals, if any, will not be made
unless there are exceptionally compelling and
comprehensible reasons. The perception of fairer and
clearer procedures, as obtained through resolution 1989
(2011), could be compromised if appeals were to
become a common and successful routine.

Despite all of the improvements, the 1267
sanctions regime continues to be perceived as failing to
conform to due process standards. National
parliaments, as well as national and regional courts,
tend to scrutinize the regime critically. Examples of
recent challenges to the implementation of United
Nations sanctions decisions in Europe include the Kadi
decision of the General Court of the European Union
of September 2010, which is still under appeal, and the
case of Nada v. Switzerland, which is pending before
the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human
Rights.

On the basis of the aforementioned, the group of
like-minded States encourages the Security Council to
proactively continue its efforts to improve fair and
clear procedures. We recall our recommendations in
our letter of April this year, including the idea of
introducing a sunset clause for all listings.

In that context, the group takes note of the
decision of the Security Council to establish a separate,
country-specific sanctions regime for those constituting
a threat to peace, security and stability in Afghanistan,
in particular the Taliban and associates. We note further
that some of the institutional features designed to
increase the fairness of procedures in the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, including the authority of the
Ombudsperson, do not apply to the new regime
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).

We take note of the different procedures in
different sanction regimes. The like-minded countries
reaffirm their strong view that the question of fair and
clear procedures is relevant to all Sanctions
Committees, and that any improvement in the fairness
of procedures will contribute not only to the
observance of human rights but also to the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the Security Council's action.

