Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I want first to thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs for
her briefing.
During the conflict in Syria, we have witnessed
numerous systematic and flagrant violations of
international law, including violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, by all parties
to the conflict andparticularly by Syrian forces.
Chemical weapons have been used repeatedly. We
condemn such use in the strongest terms. It is a serious
violation of international law and constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. Such use in armed
conflict amounts to a war crime. The proliferation and
use of chemical weapons by State and non-State actors
alike must end and those responsible for such crimes
must be held accountable. Impunity is not and will not
be an option.

We therefore supported the decision of the
Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention at its special session to put in
place arrangements to identify the perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. While a mechanism
established by the Council would have been preferable,
the issue was too important to be allowed to be blocked
indefinitely. That does not, however, as has been
stated in the Council previously, relieve the Council of
its responsibility.

I want to make a few remarks with regard to the latest
progress report (see S/2018/804) on the elimination of
chemical weapons in Syria from the Director General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) .

First, we note that the Declaration Assessment
Team is analysing the response of the Syrian authorities
to the questions regarding the outstanding issues. Let
me emphasize that all open issues must be closed
without further delay. All remaining chemical weapons
must be declared and destroyed, in line with resolution
2118 (2013). We urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate
fully and actively with the OPCW so that the accuracy
and completeness of its declaration can ultimately
be verified.

Secondly, we would like to reiterate our full
support for the OPCW and our complete confidence
in the independent, impartial and professional work of
its Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
We look forward to the upcoming reports regarding a
number of pending investigations, including the final
report on the alleged attack in Douma.

Finally, we note the intention of the Director
General to issue a second progress report, ahead of the
October session of the OPCW Executive Council, on
the implementation of the decision of the special session
regarding attribution for chemical weapons attacks in
Syria. We look forward to the Security Council being
kept informed on that important matter.

We are alarmed by the signs of a possible military
offensive in north-western Syria. Idlib is a de-escalation
area, established by the Astana guarantors. However,
one after the other of the de-escalation areas has turned
into escalation areas. A full-scale military offensive
would lead to a humanitarian catastrophe. Idlib is
different from other areas. There is nowhere to flee.
There are 3 million civilians living there, including
1 million children and internally displaced persons.

All parties, including Syrian allies, need to be
reminded of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian
objects, and to comply with the principles ofdistinction,
proportionality and avoidance of unnecessary
suffering. We therefore urge all parties to abide by
the de-escalation agreement in Idlib and the Astana
guarantors to uphold their commitments regarding
de-escalation and humanitarian access. We must ensure
that Idlib will not become the next Aleppo or eastern
Ghouta. It is vital that Russia, Turkey and Iran find a
way during their meeting tomorrow to avoid further
escalation. This Council also has a preventive role to
avoid a disaster, and together with Kuwait and all other
members of the Council, we stand ready to explore all
meaningful options in that regard.

I express our alarm about allegations that chemical
weapons may be used again and remind all parties
of the clear and absolute prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons under any circumstances. It is more
critical than ever than we avoid escalation and revert
to the track of diplomacy for a political solution, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our total
support for the United Nations-led political process
and the indefatigable efforts of Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura. A sustainable political solution is the only
way to end the suffering of the Syrian people after more
than seven years of conflict.

