Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salame for his comprehensive briefing today. We
continue to support his tireless diplomatic endeavours
to facilitate a Libyan-led political solution to end the
protracted crisis. We also appreciate the visit made
by Ambassador Olof Skoog to Libya as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, and we look forward to his
detailed briefing in due course.

The continued violence by armed groups and
terrorists shows how the security situation in Libya
remains highly fragile. That, together with the
widespread sense of impunity, is seriously threatening
the stability and security of the country. What Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame told us
today clearly attests to that. We believe that improving
the security situation should be one of the top priorities
in addressing the multifaceted Libyan crisis. We
commend the work of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in supporting Libyan
actors to underpin the ceasefire agreed in September
and fully implement the new security arrangement
in the capital, which aims to strengthen the power of
legitimate State institutions.

While the continued assistance of UNSMIL, and
the whole international community in general, remains
important, it is of course the primary responsibility
of all Libyan actors to set aside their differences and
genuinely cooperate to bring stability and security to
their country. In that connection, unifying State security
institutions throughout the country is absolutely vital.

We also underline the importance of addressing the
economic difficulties Libyans continue to face every
day - Special Representative Salame explained to
us the serious situation in that regard. An economic
reform that would ensure a more equitable distribution
of resources, to the benefit of all citizens, is essential
not only to address the economic challenges but also to
pave the way for a meaningful political process. The
implementation of the economic reform package by all
Libyan authorities will be key to delivering long-term
gains to the benefit of the Libyan people. Once again,
we appreciate the comprehensive support that UNSMIL
provides to Libyan actors. It is indeed vital that the
international community continue its partnership in
support of national efforts.

We all agree that the multifaceted crisis in Libya
cannot be resolved without a comprehensive Libyan-
led and Libyan-owned political process facilitated by
the United Nations. We reiterate our full support for
Special Representative Salame, who has been making
every possible effort to implement the United Nations
action plan, taking due cognizance of the realities on
the ground.

The successful national conference process that
UNSMIL has been convening throughout the country
has demonstrated how the Libyan people are committed
to actively participate and raise their concerns and hopes
for the future of their country. We understand that the
final report of that process will be used as an important
input to hold the upcoming national conference. We hope
that will offer another opportunity for an inclusive and
transparent process that amplifies the true aspirations
of Libyans, both living in and outside the country.

During the national conference process, the Libyan
people have unequivocally expressed their support for
peaceful and inclusive elections to end the protracted
transition. In that regard, we are grateful to Special
Representative Salame for his continuous engagement
with all Libyan actors to put the proper conditions in
place. All the required legislative, political and security
conditions should be put in place to facilitate the
holding of successful elections that would be considered
credible and acceptable to all Libyans. In that regard,
we understand that the discussions are not advancing
as expected. It is absolutely imperative that all Libyan
actors engage meaningfully and constructively with the
Special Representative Salame so that all the required
political and legislative instruments can be in place. We
also underscore the importance of national dialogue
and reconciliation to bring about a lasting solution for
the protracted crisis.

Finally, it is important that the political process be
supported by coordinated regional and international
efforts. In that regard, we hope that the conference on
Libya to be held in Palermo will be another opportunity
to provide coherent support for the Libyan-led political
process. As many have already said, the Security
Council should be united in sending a strong message
to all Libyan actors in support of the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Salame.

