Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): It gives me great pleasure to
see you, Sir, presiding over the present discussion. We
deeply appreciate your efforts to improve the working
methods of the Security Council, and we consider it most
fitting that the present discussion takes place under your
presidency. We are convinced that under your presidency
the work of the Security Council will be successful.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for the
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace", and we commend
him for the valuable ideas expressed therein. We
particularly welcome the point made towards the end of
the document that the changing circumstances require,
inter alia, perceptive, adaptive and creative responses.
The Supplement prepared by the Secretary-General will
certainly facilitate the search for such responses, and we
wish to offer some of our thoughts pertaining to the same
search.

An important part of the "Supplement to an Agenda
for Peace" is devoted to the Secretary-General's
reflections on the specific features of political and
military conflicts after the end of the cold war. Indeed,
the new international political environment is often
characterized by conflicts which are in some respects
different from those of the past. The number of political
actors involved in conflicts has increased and become
more diverse. The current wars by proxy are sometimes
fought on behalf of smaller States and for diverse political
agendas. In several conflicts the inter-State aspect is less
apparent or deliberately obscured. All this calls for
additional efforts in the analysis of the causes of conflicts.

It is sometimes suggested that ethnic or religious
factors are crucial in many conflicts, which are therefore
described as ethnic or religious. We would like to caution
against the hasty use of these terms to qualify conflicts.
A look to the past would help reveal the presence of
ethnic or religious elements in many conflicts of the past
and other, non-ethnic and non-religious elements in
present military conflicts, including those which are
described as ethnic. As a matter of fact, it is possible to
speak of the ethnic coefficient in most military conflicts
in human history. What is really necessary is a careful
identification of actors in each conflict and of their actual
agendas. Only if this is possible and done can one hope
that the response by the United Nations and by other

 

international mechanisms will correspond to the actual
needs.

A related problem stems from the fact that, as a rule,
the qualification of a conflict as ethnic does not explain its
causes or nature. Such qualification is too often a result of
political convenience, intellectual laziness or, worst of all,
willingness to accept a situation as insoluble. Such
approaches ought to be avoided.

Our final remark on the issue of the nature of present-
day conflicts is this: a number of recent conflicts have been
fought under the slogan of preservation of the territorial
integrity of States. Here, again, we wish to emphasize the
need for careful analysis of the real nature of the conflict
and of the actual agendas involved. The use of powerful
and generally supported values and principles for the
purpose of justifying very prosaic goals, such as the pursuit
of power and control over others, are as old as military
conflicts themselves. Moreover, in some recent military
conflicts such prosaic goals have motivated the use of force
against the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination and have made political negotiation on
the most appropriate and peaceful form of
self-determination more difficult and sometimes impossible.
It is indeed paradoxical that in our era the use of military
force under the slogan of territorial integrity has more often
than not led to the social and political disintegration of
societies and in some cases to the disintegration of States.

The purpose of these admittedly somewhat lengthy
opening remarks was to contribute to the ongoing
discussion on the challenges put before the United Nations
and the international community at present. Moreover, we
believe that careful clarification of military conflicts is
necessary in any effort intended to devise the United
Nations response to a given situation. That response, of
course, need not always be a military one. Very often
political means, such as good offices, advice or economic
cooperation, can be more useful, in particular in the period
before the full outbreak of a military conflict.

In the situation of conflict itself, it is necessary to
agree on the nature of the conflict prior to defining the
nature of the United Nations military operation. Here we
suggest that careful thought be given to the exact nature of
the United Nations operation. We agree with the
Secretary-General when he emphasizes in the "Supplement
to an Agenda for Peace" that

"Peace-keeping and the use of force (other than in self-defence) should be seen as alternative techniques
and not as adjacent points on a continuum,
permitting easy transition from one to the other."
(S/1995/1, para. 36)

We would like to add in this connection that it is
necessary to re-evaluate the so-called complex
peace-keeping operations and consider the possibility of
limiting peace-keeping operations to what they actually
should be: operations intended to support and stabilize a
cease-fire or a truce already agreed to by the parties in
conflict. In our opinion, adding other elements should be
avoided, both as a matter of principle and as a matter of
expediency.

This approach does not exclude the possibility that
the United Nations can authorize or resort to the use of
force in forms other than peace-keeping, in accordance
with the Charter. But in such cases the specific type of
use of force should be characterized as what it actually is.

Perhaps an improved practice would also require
clearer terminology; the term "peace-keeping" should be
reserved for genuine peace-keeping operations, while
other military operations should be termed in appropriate
words. While this might be politically difficult in some
situations, the advantage of preservation of intellectual
and moral accuracy would be to the benefit of all
Members of the United Nations.
We studied carefully the comments by the
Secretary-General on sanctions, and we generally agree
with his analysis. In particular, we would like to support
the idea, expressed in paragraph 75 (a), that there should
be a mechanism to assess, before sanctions are imposed,
their potential impact on the target country and on third
countries.

Any sophisticated system of decision-making
requires impact assessment prior to the final taking of a
decision. Recent experience with sanctions has shown that
their effects are sometimes slightly different from what
was generally expected, and that sometimes a
disproportionate burden is placed upon neighbouring
States or on major economic partners of the targeted
State. We would therefore urge that the question of
mechanisms for the assessment of effects of sanctions and
the methodology of preparation of statements of impact
assessment be given a high priority.

Before concluding, I wish to make a few remarks on
the Secretary-General's analysis of preventive diplomacy
and peacemaking. It is a matter of common sense that

 

prevention is better than cure. It is also clear that successful
preventive diplomacy is considerably less costly than
peace-keeping and other types of military operations that
become necessary in situations where preventive diplomacy
failed or was not attempted. We therefore support the
recommendations in paragraphs 31 and 32 concerning the
practical measures necessary for the successful
implementation of the mandate of the Secretary-General in
the domain of preventive diplomacy.

But more needs to be done, and - hypothetically, at
least - can be done. The Secretary-General recognizes, in
paragraphs 27 and 28, the problems of political will and the
reluctance of certain States to accept United Nations
assistance. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
solution can only be long term, and that it depends on the
necessary climate of opinion, or ethos, within the
international community which would encourage Member
States to accept an offer of United Nations good offices.

The real question here, in our opinion, is whether such
a climate or such an ethos might be expected without an
effort on the part of various United Nations organs and, in
particular, the General Assembly. In matters of preventive
diplomacy the Secretary-General is not alone and should
not be alone. In our View the entire United Nations system
should be seen as a whole, and different tasks in the
domain of preventive diplomacy pertain to all United
Nations organs within their respective powers defined in the
Charter.

The Permanent Representative of New Zealand has
just spoken at some length on the powers and possibilities
for the Security Council in this domain. I largely share his
analysis. What we would like to recall in this context is that
the General Assembly, in its resolution 47/ 120 B, entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" expressed its resolve to make full
and effective use of powers set out in Articles 10 and 14 of
the Charter, in conformity with other relevant provisions of
the Charter. The General Assembly then went on to decide,
in paragraph 2 of part I:

"to consider the use of existing or new machinery,
including subsidiary organs under Article 22 of the
Charter, to facilitate consideration of any situation
coming within the scope of Article 14 of the Charter,
with a View to recommending measures for the
peaceful adjustment of such a situation".

The resolution was adopted by consensus by the General
Assembly on 20 September 1993. An appropriate
machinery established by the General Assembly could help
the Secretary-General address any situation which it, as
Article 14 says,

"regardless of origin deems likely to impair the
general welfare or friendly relations among nations."

This may help reduce the problems of political will to
tackle a situation at an early stage.

The long-term processes to which the Secretary-
General refers in paragraph 28 of the Supplement could
thus be accelerated. In this context, I should like to make
a specific proposal. Perhaps the Secretary-General could
suggest consultations with the General Assembly, initially
through its President, with a view to establishing the
machinery called for in General Assembly resolution
47/120 B. It seems necessary to take advantage of the
General Assembly and its potential and competences in
this context.

We have commented upon several aspects of the
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace". We are hopeful
that the Supplement and the discussions it has generated
will contribute to the improvement of the work of the
United Nations and to the adjustment of its mechanisms
to current and evolving needs.

