Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
The plight of women in Afghanistan deserves our full
attention. We welcome the recent visit to Afghanistan
of the Deputy Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo to address the subject, as well as this
opportunity today to share ideas and recommendations
with Ms. Afghani. It is important that the Council, as
our briefers have just done, send a clear sign of support
to women in Afghanistan, in particular in the light of
the crucial months ahead.

Today I will address four points: the role of women
in the peace process, their role in the elections, the
protection of civilians and, lastly, support for the
National Action Plan on Resolution 1325 (2000):
Women, peace and security.

The recent intra-Afghan dialogue facilitated by
Qatar and Germany is an important step, but the road
ahead remains long. We welcome the presence of 10
women around the table and encourage increased
participation in the future. We reiterate the importance
of promoting the meaningful and equal participation
of women at all stages of the peace process. We fully
support national and international efforts towards
a peace that is Afghan-owned and Afghan-led. As
the Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Afghani
underscored, no future peace agreement can allow the
situation faced by women to deteriorate. We recall the
universality of human rights in that respect. After 19
years of armed conflict, it would be deeply unfair for
women to pay the price of peace. Just and lasting peace
is not possible if half the population is excluded.

The presidential elections in October will be another
step towards building a democratic Afghanistan. They
must be safe, fair and free. All political parties and
electoral institutions must contribute to a peaceful
process and avoid polarization. It is essential that
women throughout Afghanistan be able to stand as
candidates in the elections, be represented in electoral
institutions and vote in complete security. It would be
a good idea for all candidates to address the issue of
women's rights during the campaign. We acknowledge
the important role of including civil society and, in
particular, women's organizations in that regard.

The conflict in Afghanistan is one of the
deadliest in the world and requires special efforts to
protect civilians. The protection of civilians is an
important priority. All parties must respect the rules
of international humanitarian law. Women are all too
often the victims of attacks against civilians, as we
saw recently in the attacks in Ghazni and Kabul. We
condemn the attack in Kabul on 25 July against State
employees, which killed seven, including five women.
We expect all parties to make every effort to prevent
civilian casualties and ensure accountability in the
event of non-compliance. Our message to the Taliban is
clear - condemn terrorism, abandon the military path,
choose the political path and invest in the negotiation
process. There is no other alternative.

Belgium is fully committed to the plight of
women and girls in Afghanistan. In December, we
made a voluntary contribution of €2 million to UN
Women, which supports Afghan authorities in rolling
out the National Action Plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) in the country. We now await the launch
of the second phase of the Action Plan, based on
lessons learned, in particular with regard to the role of
civil society.

We acknowledge the important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support the country in the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, as
demonstrated during the recently held meeting of
the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security on Afghanistan. Belgium supports and agrees
with the recommendations made by the Group. The
next UNAMA mandate-renewal must highlight those
efforts. Belgium will pay special attention to that issue
during the negotiations.

