Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
To date, this new round of violent conflict between
Palestine and Israel has lasted for more than half a
year. It has caused casualties among civilians,
especially among a large number of Palestinian
civilians. It has complicated the Palestinian question. It
poses a direct threat to the Middle East peace process.
If this violent confrontation is not checked in time, it
will surely exacerbate the hatred and animosity
between Palestine and Israel and will cause and
perpetuate more serious confrontation and conflict.
That would be most inauspicious for the security of
Palestine, Israel and the region as a whole.

As soon as possible, Palestine and Israel should
put an end to violent conflict and resume peace talks,
so that the Middle East peace process can return to its
proper course.

As the principal organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council can and should continue to play an
important role in resolving the question of Palestine, in
promoting the Middle East peace process and in
safeguarding the peace and security of that region. That
is in the interest of both Palestine and Israel, and it is
also the wish of the vast majority of States Members of
the United Nations.

We are of the View that sending a needed
international presence to the region would help both
sides to put an end to violence, to establish mutual trust
and to ensure the safety of civilians on both sides. It
would also help create favourable conditions for the
two sides to resume peace talks.
The draft resolution submitted by the Non-
Aligned Movement caucus reflects the concern of the
international community with respect to the question of
Palestine. Demands and proposals set out in the draft
resolution are reasonable and constructive. We
therefore support the draft resolution proposed by the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Chinese delegation
encourages the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to
continue his contacts with Palestine and with Israel and
to seek solutions that will be acceptable to both sides.

We appeal to the parties concerned to implement
the relevant United Nations resolutions on the question
of the Middle East - in particular resolution 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), adopted unanimously by the
Security Council - as well as the principle of land for
peace, which has been accepted by the international
community, in order to move forward towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the question
of the Middle East.

