Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to state Syria's position on
the issue under consideration by the Security Council.

Allow me to welcome the Secretary-General Kofi
Annan. I am also happy to see some friends and
colleagues around the table. Friends both within and
outside the Security Council advised us not to go into
the second report of the International Independent
Investigation Commission at length today.

However, there is no such need, because the
resolution just adopted by the Council contains a
number of paragraphs that repeat verbatim parts of the
report that make accusations against Syria, accusing it
of committing the crime of assassinating the late Rafik
Hariri and of not fully cooperating with the
Commission. Syria's fundamental criticism of the
Commission's report is that it proceeds from the
presumption that Syria is guilty of committing that
crime, rather than presuming its innocence, and that the
report does not, instead, seek the facts and evidence
that would lead to the real perpetrator.

The sixteenth preambular paragraph of the
amended resolution states:

"Taking note of the Commission's
conclusions that, given the infiltration of
Lebanese institutions and society by the Syrian
and Lebanese intelligence services working in
tandem, it would be difficult to envisage a
scenario whereby such a complex assassination
plot could have been carried out without their
knowledge, and that there is probable cause to
believe that the decision to assassinate former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri could not have been
taken without the approval of top-ranked Syrian
security officials".

Operative paragraph 2 states that the Security
Council

"Takes note with extreme concern of the
Commission's conclusion that there is converging
evidence pointing at the involvement of both
Lebanese and Syrian officials in this terrorist act,
and that it is difficult to envisage a scenario
whereby such a complex assassination could have
been carried out without their knowledge".

The use of phrases such as "envisage a scenario",
"probable cause to believe" and other unclear
terminology casts doubt on the seriousness of the work
of the Investigation Commission and leads one to
believe that the Commission proceeded on the basis of
preconceived notions, leading it to accuse Syria
because of a fact on the ground that is not in itself
evidence of the commission of a crime.

It is rather strange that the Council has supported
that line of thinking by the Investigation Commission.
The presence of military forces and a security
apparatus in a country where a criminal or terrorist act
takes place does not mean that it must have taken place
with the knowledge of, or concurrence by, such forces
and apparatus. If that were the case, we would have
had to accuse the United States security forces of
knowing about the terrorist acts perpetrated on 11
September 2001; Spanish security forces would have
been accused of knowing about the train bombings in
Madrid on 11 March 2004; and, indeed, British
security forces would have been accused of knowing
about the London Underground bombings of 7 July
2005.
Thus, for instance, as we know that the British
security forces were expecting terrorist bombings to
occur in the Underground and had previously trained to
deal with them, can we now accuse them of having had
prior knowledge of such attacks?

It is illogical to level accusations that are based
on presumptions of the kind endorsed by this
resolution. That means that all security forces in all
countries of the world that have recently experienced
terrorist attacks may be implicated in such crimes. I
think that the first to be delighted at such conclusions
will be the terrorists themselves.

The Council's resolution took on board the
presumption of Syria's involvement and, for reasons
we are not aware of, ignored another presumption: the
possibility of involvement by a third party, a term I
quote verbatim from the Mehlis report. Paragraph 123
of the report states that

"there is little probability that a third party would
undertake surveillance and monitoring measures
against Mr. Hariri for more than a month prior to
the blast and maintain the resources, logistics and
capacity needed to initiate, plan and commit a
crime of this magnitude without the knowledge of
the competent Lebanese authorities."

More grave than the accusations levelled at Syria
in the resolution adopted today is the claim by the
Commission that Syria cooperated with it in form but
not in substance. It is regrettable that the resolution
takes on verbatim the conclusions of the Commission's
report. The seventeenth preambular paragraph of the
resolution states:

"Mindful of the Commission's conclusion
that while the Syrian authorities, after initial
hesitation, have cooperated to a limited degree
with the Commission, several Syrian officials
have tried to mislead the investigation by giving
false or inaccurate statements".

Of course, Mr. Mehlis did not specify what these
false or inaccurate statements were, either in the report
or in statements to the media.

Furthermore, it is stated that the Syrian
authorities have cooperated in form but not in
substance with the Commission. Operative paragraph 5
states that "several Syrian officials tried to mislead the
Commission by giving false or inaccurate
information". This repetition is bizarre.

Syria also finds it strange to see this accusation of
non-cooperation from the Commission - the same
accusation endorsed by the Security Council in the
resolution it adopted this morning.

Following Mr. Mehlis's Visit, the Foreign
Ministry of the Syrian Arab Republic did its utmost to
provide the best possible conditions for the
Commission's work, both in form and in substance. We
acted in complete good faith in that regard. However, it
seems that some people in the Commission were not
acting in good faith. As the Council is aware, the
Commission could very well have laid down the
conditions for the interviews it wished to undertake
with Syrian persons freely, and it could have refused
any request from the Syrian authorities. It seems that
there was an intention to point a finger of accusation at
Syria - an accusation of non-cooperation paving the
way for this very resolution, adopted this morning
under Chapter VII of the Charter.

It is clear to anyone who has followed this issue
that Syria has fully cooperated throughout - I repeat,
fully.

As to form, the Commission could have
undertaken all its activities without any Syrian
objection to anything that Mr. Mehlis wished. All the
measures taken in Syria were undertaken to the
satisfaction of Mr. Mehlis and on the basis of an
agreement between the Legal Adviser to the Foreign
Ministry of the Syrian Arab Republic and Mr. Mehlis.

As for substance, the Commission must provide
evidence of the credibility of the statements made to it.
Mr. Mehlis could have listened for hours and posed
hundreds of questions. Who would have prevented him
from doing so? No one. The investigation continues; it
is not yet finished, as stated in the report of the
Commission. We are prepared, in a closed meeting if
the Council so wishes, to provide details clearly
showing Syria's full cooperation with the Commission
to date.

There are things that are rather difficult to state in
public. Although we cannot say them today, we are
fully prepared to say them in a closed meeting to prove
the large extent of our cooperation with the
International Independent Investigation Commission.

One can only wonder at the Council's adoption of
resolution 1636 (2005) under Chapter VII of the
Charter, whereas it did not deal accordingly with other
similarly painful events, such as the Qana massacre of
April 1996, where more than 100 Lebanese civilians
were killed. The Council did not set up an international
investigation committee into the Qana massacre,
because in that case Israel was the accused party. The
Council also found it sufficient to issue a presidential
statement on the explosion that led to the killing of
Sergio Vieira de Mello, the United Nations special
representative in Iraq. Perhaps members should recall
that attack, which killed Mr. Vieira de Mello and more
than 20 of his colleagues in 2003 in Baghdad. When, in
April of 2002, Israel attacked the Jenin refugee camp
in the occupied West Bank - an attack that led to the
deaths of more than 400 Palestinians, including dozens
of women and children - Israel simply refused to
receive the commission that was set up by the Security
Council under the stewardship of former Finnish
President, Martti Ahtisaari, and the page was quietly
turned on that affair.

Despite all of the above and proceeding from its
desire to uncover the truth, Syria's decision was and is
to fully cooperate with the International Commission
until conclusive evidence is found as to who
perpetrated that heinous crime. In that regard, the
President of the Syrian Arab Republic, Bashar Al-
Assad, issued legislative decree No. 96 of 29 October
2005, creating a special judicial commission - to be
chaired by the Attorney-General of the Republic and
with the membership of the military Attorney-General
and a judge to be named by the Minister of Justice -
tasked with directly investigating Syrians, both
civilians and military personnel, on all aspects of the
mission of the International Independent Investigation
Commission created by resolution 1595 (2005). That
decree calls for that special judicial commission to
cooperate with the International Independent
Investigation Commission, as well as with Lebanese
judicial authorities, in all matters pertaining to the
investigation and that the Investigation Commission
may call on all civilian and military judges or members
of the Attorney-General's office, both military and
civilian. We are convinced that the cooperation
between those three parties and close coordination of
their activities will uncover the truth without any
politicization of the matter.

In that regard, I must recall that the creation of
the special judicial commission requires the
cooperation with the Investigative Commission and the
Lebanese judicial authorities. It is no secret that that
cooperation was not available in the immediate
aftermath of the crime because of the unprecedented
tension on the streets of Beirut, which escalated very
rapidly and which was accompanied by emotional
accusations against Syria that made it difficult, if not
impossible, to participate in any investigation that
involved Syria.
Let me express Syria's appreciation for all the
efforts of some Security Council member States to
ensure that the maintenance of peace and security and
adherence to basic principles was foremost in debating
the draft resolution. Syria also expresses appreciation
to those States for not giving into pressures or policies
that rely on distorting the facts and on attacking the
independence and freedom of States.

The inclusion in the Security Council resolution,
adopted a few moments ago, of two paragraphs that
have no relation to the work of the Investigation
Commission, but instead deal with regional issues, is a
clear indication that the objective of the resolution was
not to uncover the truth behind the assassination of the
late Rafik Hariri, but rather to target Syria and its
positions vis-a-Vis issues that affect the present and
future of the region.

Finally, allow me to express the aspirations of
Syria and its people for a day when peace, security and
stability will prevail in the Middle East, in particular in
Syria and Lebanon.

Actually, I also have a very brief observation I
would like to add, pertaining to the statement by His
Excellency Jack Straw. He was right when he said that
the assassination of the late Rafik Hariri was similar to
what took place in medieval times. I would go further
than what Jack Straw said: the investigation of the
crime has also taken place in near-medieval
circumstances in which the accused is presumed guilty
before his guilt was proven.

