Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the statements delivered by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia Ambassador Diarra. I also welcome
Ambassador Mahiga, who is with us from Mogadishu.
My delegation welcomes this timely debate on a
comprehensive strategy for peace and security in
Somalia, especially given the worrying security
environment, which is intensifying in several regions
of the country. We are grateful for this initiative by the
Chinese presidency of the Council.

The recent fighting in Mogadishu has resulted in
many dead, wounded and displaced people. The
intensification of the conflict has contributed to

11-2583]
deepening the alarming humanitarian situation, which
has further deteriorated owing to the prevailing drought.
Somalia remains one of the most complex
environments in which to carry out humanitarian work.
It is therefore necessary to ensure that all parties to the
conflict respect humanitarian principles and facilitate
access to assistance, in particular for the most
vulnerable populations.

Moreover, the increase and geographical
expansion of pirate attacks and the recently heightened
use of violence, including protracted periods of
detention and the murdering of hostages, are all highly
disturbing. This crime has become one of the most
lucrative activities in Somalia, with those responsible
in part utilizing ransoms to improve their arsenals and
make their operations more efficient and effective. The
latest estimates indicate that pirates remain in
possession of 819 individuals and 51 boats.

Piracy is one of the disastrous consequences of
institutional weakness and poor economic conditions.
There are also some reports indicating that armed
groups such as Al-Shabaab are increasingly benefiting
from the profits of piracy. This criminal activity is
penetrating local economies and establishing a
progressive dependence on the criminal industry
developed around it.

Although international cooperation to provide
security for navigation, prevent attacks and arrest
pirates has yielded some positive results, the solution
to this problem must comprehensively involve both the
main source and primary victim of this problem,
namely, Somalia.

The seriousness of the situation urgently requires
a comprehensive approach that includes strengthening
the rule of law and the creation of institutions to ensure
good governance and allow social and economic
development in Somalia.

With regard to security as a precondition for
strengthening the rule of law, it is essential to provide
more resources and to train security forces so as to
enable them to patrol and provide security on land as
well as the waters off the coast. In that regard, we are
concerned that the flow of weapons remains constant,
which, according to the Monitoring Group on Somalia,
has devastating effects in the context of chronic armed
conflict, the absence of effective central authority and
a serious humanitarian crisis.
With regard to the justice sector, it is necessary to
adopt reforms to facilitate the prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates in the context of applicable
international law. We agree with what was set out in
the report of Special Adviser Jack Lang (see S/2011/30, annex) on the need for Somalia to assume ownership of
judicial and imprisonment processes so as to end the
impunity that pirates enjoy. The assistance provided by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
coordination with the Contact Group on Piracy, to
reform criminal and procedural legislation and to
include provisions for the investigation and
prosecution of piracy is of paramount importance.

Community-based investments and the need to
create opportunities for young people are vital. In that
regard, flshing has been mentioned as an economic
option suited to the characteristics of the country.
However, Somalia must also resolve a very serious
pending issue, namely, the delimitation of its maritime
borders with neighbouring States.

Adopting a sustainable and comprehensive
strategy aimed at the capacity-building of national
institutions and the provision of basic services requires
consistency in the efforts of the various United Nations
entities and the effective use of existing mechanisms,
including the regime envisaged in resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) to impose sanctions on
individuals who threaten the reconciliation process.

In recent months, the Council has had the
opportunity to consider various proposals that offer
options for Viable and comprehensive actions with
regard to the general crisis faced by Somalia. In view
of the end of the transition period and given the gravity
of the situation, the United Nations must lead an early
and decisive international response that has
stabilization and strengthening of the Somali State as
the primary goal.

