I would like to thank Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, for his interesting and thought-provoking briefing. Since the establishment of the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague in 1899, which provided for dispute settlement by arbitration, the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, rather than by resorting to the use of force, has been one of the cornerstones of international law and diplomacy. While disputes are an inevitable part of international relations, international law knows no system of compulsory jurisdiction. The peaceful settlement of disputes, by whatever means, remains voluntary, but its importance can never be overestimated. Therefore, as we celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the establishment of the first permanent international institution for the judicial settlement of disputes - the International Court of Justice's predecessor, the Permanent Court of International Justice - and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations, South Africa once again reflects on the significance of the International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Living the legacy of Nelson Mandela, it is no coincidence that throughout South Africa's two-year term on the Security Council it has focused, inter alia, on the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes. We maintain that, while the Security Council plays a significant role in ensuring international peace and security, the role of the International Court of Justice in settling disputes before they escalate into threats to international peace and security remains one of the most important cornerstones of the international system. It is therefore very timely to reaffirm our commitment to upholding and strengthening the rule of law in the conduct of international relations. With regard to the potential of the Court, if utilized fully and in a timely manner, to contribute to international peace and security, we submit that those ideals could be served by strengthening cooperation between the Court and the Security Council. Over the years, the Security Council and Member States have, unfortunately, not often enough made use of the potential of the Court to settle disputes peacefully and thereby contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security. Member States could gain innumerable benefits by utilizing such an important tool at their disposal. Peace and silencing the guns can be sustainable only if they go hand in hand with justice. Therefore, when appropriate, the Security Council should encourage Member States involved in a situation that threatens international peace and security to resolve their disputes by referral to the Court. Furthermore, the Security Council could also utilize its authority to request advisory opinions from the Court on legal questions that may arise in the fulfilment of its mandate. The members of the Security Council, in their consideration of thematic agenda items and country-specific situations alike, should bear in mind the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the interaction of the Security Council with the International Court of Justice and the possible role the Court could play in assisting the Security Council in the execution of its mandate. The Security Council could also invite the President of the International Court of Justice to brief it when instances of non-compliance might threaten international peace and security. It is therefore clear that those two organs - the Council and the Court - have an important complementary role to play in the settlement of disputes, the resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of international peace and security. Turning to capacity-building in developing countries: as a developing African country, for South Africa it is also important to highlight the role of capacity- building in the legal field with respect to the settlement of disputes and to express appreciation for the Court's efforts to expose young women and men to training and thereby assist developing countries, in particular to develop their capacities to resolve conflict. We once again draw attention to the extremely worthy Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court, which was established in 1999, formerly known as the University Traineeship Programme, which allows law graduates to gain experience by working at the International Court of Justice and helps to enhance their understanding of international law and the Court's procedures. That is done by practically involving them in the work of the Court under the supervision of a judge. Admirable as that Programme is, it is unfortunately not accessible to most law graduates from developing countries and deprives those worthy young law practitioners of an opportunity to benefit from the wealth of knowledge and practice that resides in the Court. The main reason for this is, as in most cases, the lack of resources available to universities in developing countries that would like to sponsor their law graduates. In that regard, we would again like to express our support for President Yusuf's enthusiasm for giving more law graduates from developing countries an opportunity to access and participate in the Judicial Fellows Programme. We have done so by adding our support to General Assembly resolution 75/129, which aims to address this shortcoming by creating a voluntary trust fund to allow more young law graduates from developing countries to gain experience by working at the International Court of Justice. In 2012, South Africa, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, initiated a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/1) that was agreed by the Council. Our views then and now were informed by the need to resolve conflicts peacefully, as reflected in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, the seventy-fifth anniversary of which we are celebrating. Today Africa accounts for most of the conflicts in the world. Millions have lost their lives, millions are internally displaced and millions are refugees in foreign lands. Those destructive conflicts and wars have torn some of our countries apart and denied children an education and the right to grow up in an environment of peace. It has also delayed African development, and some countries may not even be able to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That has made reconciliation difficult and nation-building even more so. We therefore welcome and thank Judge Yusuf for the three recommendations that he made. That is also why South Africa has drafted and placed before the Council for its kind consideration a draft presidential statement addressing the aforementioned issues and what all members have just restated in their national statements. We are hopeful and look forward to reaching agreement on this text, which will help us to advance the peaceful resolution of conflicts and to put an end to violent conflicts.
