Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): As a member of the
group of five small nations (S-5), we align ourselves
with the statement delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland. I will focus my
comments on two specific parts of the revised draft
General Assembly resolution that we circulated earlier
this year.

First, the S-5 advocates a more systematic use of
the mechanisms available to the Council to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. Clearly, the Council has a certain
track record in this respect, ranging from the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals in the 19905 to two
referrals of situations to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). At the same time, the engagement of the
Council has been ad hoc and not driven primarily by
the gravity of the situations. We believe that the
effectiveness and legitimacy of the Council's important
work in this area would benefit from a number of
considerations.

Decision-making needs to be based on a thorough
assessment. Ideally and time permitting, the Council
should act on the basis of extensive information
documenting the seriousness of the situation and the
nature of the crimes involved, produced for example by
a commission of inquiry. At the same time, swift action
must of course be possible, as the example of Libya
illustrates.

National proceedings should be promoted. Given
the primacy of national jurisdictions, the Council
should also consider asking more frequently for
effective national proceedings to be put in place,
supported where necessary by capacity-building
measures or by an international component.

There also needs to be sustained political support.
Where the Council establishes accountability
mechanisms, it should be willing to take the action
required to make such mechanisms effective. There has
consistently been a problem with the execution of
arrest warrants, and Council action in that respect has
been consistently lacking. When the ICC is involved,
the Council should insist on the cooperation of those
States that have a legal obligation in that respect.

As to financial support, lack of financing can be a
significant obstacle to the effectiveness of international
criminal justice and lead to significant delays in
proceedings. While financial aspects have played a
significant role with respect to almost all of the
accountability mechanisms used by the Council in the
past, a discussion is needed in particular with respect
to ICC investigations mandated by the Council.

Secondly, the 8-5 suggests three measures on the
use of the veto. The Permanent Representative of
Jordan has just spoken very eloquently on the use of
the veto in situations that involve the most serious
crimes under international law. In addition, we believe
that, given the Council's practice of considering that an
26

abstention does not constitute a non-concurring vote,
meaning a veto, a new practice could be established
that would allow a permanent member to cast a
negative vote without giving it the effect of a veto.
That additional tool would enable any permanent
member to take a clear position on the substance of a
text, while making it clear that it does not intend to
block the adoption of a proposal.

As is well known, the 8-5 is pursuing its goals on
different tracks, including in direct engagement with
Council members. We thus highly appreciate today's
opportunity. At the same time, we are continuing our
efforts to advance our draft resolution in the General
Assembly. We remain open to all possible tracks to
improve the workings of the Council through a
pragmatic and constructive approach. We note,
however, that the response from the Council so far has
largely been silence.

