Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I wish to thank the Australian
presidency for organizing today's debate.
Turkey is convinced that effective international
cooperation, with the United Nations playing a central
role, is key to addressing the threat posed by terrorism.
In that regard, the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy - which was reviewed for the fourth
time in June - presents, with its four pillars, a solid base
and valuable tools for building cooperation. Turkey has
actively participated in and contributed to the projects
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre since
its inception, and we have stated our will to participate
in its new project on foreign terrorist fighters.

We also welcomed resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). Resolution 2178 (2014), which Turkey
co-sponsored, stresses the importance of international
cooperation in countering the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters.

Turkey is taking all possible necessary national,
regional and international steps to counter that threat.
In fact, in order to prevent foreign terrorist fighters
from reaching the conflict areas, we reinforced security
measures long before the adoption of those Council
resolutions. Those measures include enhanced passenger
screening and security checks in regions adjacent to the
Syrian border. As a result, 7,420 individuals from more
than 80 countries have been added to the no-entry list
and 1,050 individuals have been deported. Since 2012
measures at the border have been tightened because of
increased smuggling attempts from the Syrian side,
and during the first eight months of 2014, seizures of
smuggled oil in our country's seven border provinces
amounted to 20 million litres.

Turkey is fully determined to fight this threat.
However, we cannot do it alone. The flow of foreign
terrorist fighters can be stopped only if partners
act in a spirit of cooperation. The battle should start
in the source countries. Al-Qaida and other violent
movements with similar ideology, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra
Front, are a serious threat to Turkey. Turkey designated
ISIL a terrorist organization under its previous name
in 2005 and revised that designation to reflect its new
name in October 2013.

When we confront the risks and threats currently
presented by extremist groups, it is important not
to lose our focus on the root causes of the problem.
Unresolved conflicts have become fields of operation
for terrorist organizations, and they are a magnet for
foreign terrorist fighters. Moreover, the process of
ISIL's evolution from a terrorist group born out of the
ashes of Al-Qaida in Iraq into an insurgent terrorist
army controlling territory and sources in Syria and
Iraq became possible because, as we have long warned,
it benefitted from the political, social and economic
alienation of the masses.

Our long and painful struggle against terrorism has
taught us that this scourge cannot be defeated by hard
security measures alone. For sustainable solutions,
there is an absolute requirement to counter the spread of
the radical ideologies that lead individuals to embrace
violence and terrorism. In particular, any attempt to
affiliate terrorism with any religion or ethnic group is
utterly wrong and would in fact play into the terrorists'
hands. In Turkey, for example, Friday sermons are
harmonized by our religious affairs authority to stress
the message of peace in Islam. Our Head of Religious
Affairs has also denounced ISIL's actions, emphasizing
that they cannot be explained by Islam. I should also
mention that the Turkish police, beyond their national
efforts, also run extensive training programmes on
counter-radicalization for countries in the Balkans, the
Caucasus and Central Asia.

In conclusion, I wish to underline once again that
coordinated international efforts underlining solidarity
and the leading role of the United Nations are of
paramount importance for effectively combating the
threat posed by terrorists. The international community
should work vigorously to create an atmosphere of
common understanding, based on shared values among
nations of different faiths.

