Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Ambassador Andrey Denisov, for his
comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Committee and on the work programme for the coming
months. As a member of the bureau, I wish to associate
myself with his words. May I also express
my appreciation for the presence among us of
Ambassador Ruperez, Executive Director of the CTC's
Executive Directorate (CTED), as well as for his
contribution to the work of the United Nations. In
addition, I wish to stress the valuable work being
carried out by the Secretariat in support of the
Committee and its subcommittees.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
Brazil's firm commitment to counter-terrorism and our
repudiation of terrorism, in all its forms and
manifestations, as a most serious threat to peace and
security. As the use of indiscriminate violence against
non-combatants violates the most fundamental values
of the Charter of the United Nations, terrorism fully
deserves the strongest collective repudiation.
Unfortunately, as seen in the case of other forms of
violence such as organized crime, it seems unlikely
that terrorism will be completely eliminated. At the
United Nations the question now mainly has to do with
the establishment of clear, legitimate and acceptable
limits to the use of violence. If effective international
cooperation mechanisms are properly established,
terrorism may be kept at very low levels.

In order to reach such a desirable outcome, the
United Nations should have the primary responsibility
for fostering a coordinated, comprehensive and
integrated response on the part of the international
community against terrorism, as was recently noted by
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change. Such a strategy should not be restricted to
punitive measures, but, rather, also properly tackle the
root causes of terrorism. It is well known that the dire
situations usually linked to social, political and cultural
oppression, as well as severe economic inequalities,
often create an environment favourable to the
development of extremism. Any acceptable strategy
should fully take into account the need to observe the
relevant provisions of international law and due
process.

We trust that the CTED will become fully
operational in the near future, as the Chairman of the
CTC has mentioned. We also hope that it will be able
to help with the broadening and enhancement of the
dialogue of the Committee and its subcommittees with
the Member States and other United Nations bodies
and international, regional and subregional
organizations - and in particular with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We welcome the
convening of the special meeting of the CTC with such
organizations to be held in Almaty next week. We also
hope that the CTED will be in a position not only to
facilitate the actual offering of technical assistance, but
also to make sure that the cooperation provided to
countries by third parties is fully satisfactory. We
believe that the first joint visits by the CTC and other
relevant organizations, which are scheduled to start in
March 2005, will provide an opportunity to identify
countries' needs, thereby allowing for the provision of
more focused cooperation.

Brazil recalls that the future composition of
CTED personnel needs to observe the requirement of
technical competence, as well as to reflect the values
and legal systems of United Nations regional groups.
We believe that consensus can be built on the basis of
those principles. In our View, the CTC and CTED are
structures designed mainly to shelter States that are
willing to cooperate but that, for various reasons, find
themselves unable to do so. The CTC and, by
extension, the CTED are not to be likened to sanctions
committees.

We believe that resolution 1566 (2004) reflects
compromise language that contains a clear and
important political message. Properly speaking,
however, it should not be construed as a conceptual
definition of terrorism. Furthermore, as foreseen in the
Charter, we believe that reaching an agreed definition
of terrorism falls under the functions and powers of the
General Assembly. We are not convinced that the
Security Council should assume such treaty-making
prerogatives. In the absence of such a definition, there
may be a risk of issues before the Committee becoming
unnecessarily politicized.

Finally, I wish to stress that Brazil welcomes
current efforts to update and strengthen the efforts of
the United Nations in the area of counter-terrorism and
remains open to participating in the deliberations
concerning this very serious issue. In that regard,
Brazil expects that the global strategy to combat
terrorism to be presented by the Secretary-General, as
well as his recommendation on that issue, will help us
to overcome existing difficulties.

