Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
for her statement and wish to express to her, on behalf
of France, our full support in carrying out her new
mandate.

The crisis in Mali, which has marshalled a large
part of our energy for more than a year, symbolizes to
the extreme the fragility of the Sahel. What is the added
value of the United Nations to help the Sahel countries
to face those challenges? The United Nations strategy
should respond by striving to attain three objectives.

First, the strategy must define a common
transnational approach to all agencies. The approach
should be transnational because the United Nations
response to the problems of the Sahel with regard to
humanitarian, security and development issues has long
been segmented according to States. That does not make
sense to respond to problems that are transnational in
nature, be they issues of security or climate or related
to the situation of nomadic peoples of the Sahel. Next, a
common approach by all United Nations agencies is also
essential in all areas. Terrorism feeds on governance
and development problems. Conversely, security issues
have a negative impact on economic growth of the States
of the Sahel. Without security there is no development
and without development there is also no security.

I commend the United Nations on those two aspects
for the work it has accomplished in the last two years
under the coordination of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa. His work has
provided a good foundation for a regional and integrated
approach by the United Nations.

Secondly, the United Nations should help all
stakeholders to coordinate their efforts for the Sahel.
A good example in that regard is the Malian crisis.
The coordination among all international actors is not
obvious. Yet it is essential if the parameters ofa lasting
peace in Mali are to be defined. The United Nations
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have a key
role to play in that process, as the Security Council has
pointed out.

Across the Sahel, many initiatives and forums
bring together the countries of the region in different
configurations - the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union,
"countries of the field" and the Group of Five for the
Sahel, among others. In addition, international partners
have developed their own approach to the Sahel; for
example, the European Union has its own strategy for
the Sahel, as do the African Union, ECOWAS, and the
World Bank, with its Sahel initiative. We must ensure
that those multiple initiatives are coordinated in an
efficient manner. In that context, the United Nations
and the Special Envoy can play a role of good offices
to bring together the regional and international efforts
in the Sahel.

In that context, the coordination platform for the
integrated strategy in the Sahel, implemented on the
occasion of the visit of the Secretary-General to the
Sahel in November 2013, is a unique framework. It is
being chaired by Mali for two years, and the United
Nations and the African Union provide the secretariat.
The platform is the only forum that brings together all
the countries ofWest Africa and the Maghreb, as well as
the international and regional organizations concerned.

Thirdly and most important, the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel must lead to concrete
projects in all areas. In the area of governance, the next
year will be marked by a large number of elections
in the Sahel and West Africa, which are all tests for
the robustness of these States. The task of the United
Nations is to assist States wanting such assistance in
organizing the deadlines in a transparent and credible
manner.

In the area of security, the Secretary-General
recalls that the terrorist attacks in the Maghreb and
Sahel grew by 60 per cent in 2013 compared to 2012,
which includes 230 incidents throughout the region. As
members of the Council know, France is very involved
in helping the countries of the region. We intervened
directly at the request of the Malian authorities and in
support of our African partners. The Elysee Summit
for Peace and Security in Africa in December 2013
provided an opportunity for African countries to
intensify their cooperation in order to strengthen their
security capabilities and their ability to respond to
crises. For its part, the United Nations can contribute
to that effort.

In the humanitarian and development areas, extreme
poverty is a root cause of problems in the Sahel. That
is compounded by a fast-growing population, which
weighs on the development of those countries. In 2014,
the number of people suffering from food insecurity
in the region is estimated to be over 20 million. Five
million children are threatened by a risk of serious
malnutrition. The development of desert areas should
be a major focus of our efforts, in support ofpastoralism
and the development of infrastructure to open up those
spaces. We welcome the commitment of international
partners in that area.

The decision of Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in February in Rome to launch
a consolidated appeal for the Sahel for $2 billion
over three years is innovative. It is the first time that
a multiannual approach has been adopted. It adds to
the major commitments of the World Bank and the
European Union. France, the largest bilateral donor in
the region, has also decided to increase its commitment
to €900 million for the period 2014 to 2015.

In conclusion, I would like to call for the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel not to be
just another theoretical document, disconnected from
reality. The problems plaguing the Sahel are too
serious for us to let that happen. The United Nations
strategy must be genuinely at the service of the States
and peoples of the Sahel and should lead to practical
solutions.

