Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin
by the thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Tanin, for his
comprehensive briefing today. I would also like to
thank the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic of Serbia, Mr. Daeic', and
Ambassador Citaku for their statements to the Council.

Clear and undeniable progress has been achieved
in Kosovo since the end of the conflict, now almost
two decades ago. However, building peaceful and
prosperous societies requires constant vigilance and
unwavering commitment from all political leaders, as
well as from the international community that stands
with them. We welcome the fact that the early elections
in June were genuinely competitive and peaceful
in most parts of Kosovo, although we regret the
incidents that took place in certain Serbian-majority
municipalities. We now look forward to the completion
of the constitutive session of the Assembly and the
formation of a Government. A new Government needs
to swiftly start implementing necessary reforms for the
benefit of the people living in Kosovo.

Sweden looks forward to continuing its bilateral
development cooperation with Kosovo, as well as its
provision of political support for Kosovo's progress in
the areas of democracy, human rights, rule of law and
sustainable and socioeconomic development for both
women and men.
The peoples of Serbia and Kosovo are looking
towards a future, together, within the European Union
(EU). To that end, the normalization of relations is key.
Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly relations
are crucial for a stable, peaceful and prosperous Western
Balkans. Pristina and Belgrade need to re-engage and
revitalize the EU-facilitated dialogue. Both parties
must implement their respective parts of the agreement,
most notably with respect to the dismantling of parallel
structures in Serb-majority areas and the establishment
of the association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities. It is essential that the status issue does
not hinder Kosovo on its European path or prevent its
membership in international organizations.

Within the framework of the normalization process,
women's participation is key to foster sustainable and
inclusive peace and stability. We note that the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) describes that
UN-Women, together with the Specialist Prosecutor's
Office, organized an expert meeting on conflict-related
sexual violence. Sweden would welcome the inclusion,
in the next report of the Secretary-General, of reporting
on these matters, as well as gender-aggregated data.

The United Nations and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo have made
invaluable contributions to bring us where we are today.
Present challenges, however, must be dealt with within
the framework of the EU integration process, including
together with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo.

In conclusion, we reiterate our interest in receiving
Mr. Tanin's view on the possibility of downsizing
further the mission's structure, size and tasks, as well
as on the possibility of adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.

