Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO): Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation and Tajikistan.

We would like to express our gratitude to
Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan.

We are pleased to note that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan continues to play an
important role in advancing the process of a settlement
in Afghanistan. We hope that the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations Mission will make
every effort for successful parliamentary and provincial
elections in September of this year. It is important that
the established timetable be adhered to, so that viable
State bodies that reflect the multi-ethnic and politically
diverse nature of Afghan society can be established as
soon as possible.

We attach great importance to the activities of the
Security-Council-sanctioned and NATO-led International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). We will continue to
assist the alliance in carrying out that mission. We
hope that, as was the case during the presidential
election campaign, ISAF and coalition troops will
provide effective assistance to Afghan authorities in
the establishment of a safe atmosphere before and
during the upcoming elections. We assume that NATO
will continue to scrupulously carry out the mandate
given to it by the Security Council, including regular
reporting to the Security Council.

For us, the most serious concern is the significant
increase in recent months in terrorist activities by the
Taliban and other extremists, who have re-established
part of their infrastructure and launched a campaign
that seeks to disrupt parliamentary elections. At the
same time, representatives of the Taliban movement
and Al-Qaida, many of whom have committed war
crimes and outright criminal offences, are making
persistent attempts to infiltrate power structures. A
number of top officials of the former Taliban regime
have registered as candidates for parliament.
Politically, at the very least, those activities run counter
to the Security Council's anti-terrorist decisions
regarding Afghanistan, including the recent resolution
1617 (2005), on strengthening the sanctions regime
against the Taliban and Al-Qaida.

The national reconciliation process is a crucial
step in the achievement of a long-term comprehensive
settlement of the Afghan conflict. However, that
process must take place on the basis of a cautions and
responsible approach, without creeping erosion of the
sanctions regime, the scope of which goes beyond
Afghanistan itself. Persons included on the sanctions
list of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) pose a real threat to
peace and security. Their involvement in active
political life could lead to the direst of consequences
and undermine the stability of Afghanistan and the
region. Specific action must be taken to counter that
dangerous trend, particularly in the context of the
upcoming elections. Both the Afghan leadership and
the international community - and primarily the
United Nations Mission - should play a role in that
regard.

Countering the production and proliferation of
drugs remains one of the key elements in stabilizing
the situation in Afghanistan. Recent expert evaluations
by the United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime
corroborate the conclusion that international efforts to
halt the threat posed by narcotics in Afghanistan are
still not effective enough. Afghanistan is virtually on
the brink of becoming a drug State. We believe that in
the near future the most effective strategy - and the
one most in keeping with realities in Afghanistan in
this regard - should be one that provides tight control
of Afghanistan's borders with neighbouring countries
by strengthening and establishing new anti-drug
"security belts", which the States members of the
CSTO have consistently called for.

The CSTO has developed a plan of action to
counter the terrorist and narcotics threats emanating
from Afghanistan. A working group on Afghanistan
under the Council of Foreign Ministers of the CSTO
has been established to coordinate the implementation
of those measures, in cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan. We call upon interested States and
international and regional organizations to closely
coordinate their actions regarding a post-conflict
settlement in Afghanistan, with a central role played by
the United Nations, so that that country may be able to
resolve the political and economic problems it faces
and become a democratic State.

We believe that a role for the United Nations in
Afghan affairs following the completion of the Bonn
process should include in particular the coordination of
the international community's peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts. The specific structure of a future
United Nations presence remains to be determined, but
it must involve Afghans themselves and take into
account the country's real needs. States members of the
CSTO intend to play a very constructive role in that
work.

