Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Before starting, I would like to
extend our heartfelt condolences to brotherly Pakistan,
which lost over 140 people in a heinous terrorist attack
today in Peshawar. We reiterate our strong solidarity
with the people of Pakistan. Turkey has declared
tomorrow a day of national mourning. We strongly
condemn terror in all its forms and manifestations.
Today it has taken the form of the murder of innocent
schoolchildren. The attack once again manifests the
complexity and brutality of the terrorism threat that
the world faces today. We all know that the African
continent is no stranger to those threats.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union today.

I would like to thank the Chadian presidency for
organizing this timely and useful meeting. In our view,
cooperation with and between regional and subregional
organizations is one of the most important and relevant
issues on the peace and security agenda of the United
Nations today.

The international system and the United Nations
face increasing challenges. A simple look will show
that the Security Council's agenda for this month
speaks for itself, as it indicates the rising number and
intensity of conflicts, most of which are in Africa. A
great portion of the new threats are asymmetrical in
nature, involving non-State armed actors and organized
crime groups, some of which have connections to global
terror networks.

The evolving nature of the dynamics concerning
international peace and security requires a recalibration
in the international response to it. That, coupled with
the administrative and budgetary challenges facing
the United Nations system, makes partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peace operations all the more important.

We are glad to observe the positive developments
in recent years in the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the search
for solutions to several conflicts in Africa. Turkey
actively supports various United Nations and AU peace
operations in Africa by supplying funds and personnel
to the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in Liberia, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We also contribute to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We encourage expansion
of the United Nations-AU partnership to encompass
such areas as institutional capacity-building, security-
sector reform, the protection of civilians, human rights
and gender mainstreaming, and combating organized
crime.

Turkey also contributes bilaterally to peace and
security in Africa. At the second Africa-Turkey Summit,
held in Malabo from 19 to 21 November, we reiterated
our desire to continue collaborating in all fields of
peace and security, including the prevention, resolution
and management of conflicts through exchanging
expertise and information, training programmes
and strengthening a culture of peace. The joint
implementation plan for the Africa-Turkey partnership
adopted at the Summit outlines the way ahead to further
strengthen our comprehensive collaboration.

In discussing ways to achieve sustainable peace and
stability in Africa, we must particularly emphasize the
nexus between security and development. Despite the
significant progress made in development in the past
decade, it is still evident that Africa will continue to
require further support from its international partners.
Most of the affected countries in Africa lack adequate
resources, capacity and expertise for a timely and
effective response to complex challenges. The latest
outbreak of Ebola serves as a reminder of this fact. We
believe the partnership between the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER)
and the African Union Support to the Ebola Outbreak
in West Africa (ASEOWA) could become an example
for responses to similar crises. Turkey has announced
a pledge of $5 million to the Ebola response, with
$1 million going to ASEOWA and $1.5 million to be
used for UNMEER's activities.

Humanitarian diplomacy is a key objective
of Turkish foreign policy. As an emerging donor
country, Turkey is keen to share its humanitarian and
development experience with countries in need of
assistance. Our approach is based on drawing on local
expertise and utilizing genuine partnerships. Somalia
is a case in point. The combination of humanitarian and
development assistance offered by Turkey is reflected in
its investment in human capital, infrastructure and basic
services in Somalia. Moreover, Turkey's development
agency is conducting projects in 36 African countries,
with a focus on building communities' resilience,
capacity-building and offering technical assistance in
agriculture, education and health.

We must continue to share our experiences and
maintain our partnerships in line with the visions and
strategies defined by host Governments. Strengthened
and diversified cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU, as well as increased support to the
AU through various bilateral and multilateral means,
will enhance local ownership and self-sustainability.
Guided by those principles, Turkey will do its utmost to
contribute to peace and security in Africa.

