Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank the delegation of the Dominican
Republic for the invitation to participate in this debate.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on your excellent
job in conducting the work of the Security Council
this month. The peace process between Palestinians
and Israelis is experiencing its most fraught moment
since the Oslo Accords in 1993. The seriousness of the
situation on the ground requires a collective effort to
keep alive the prospect of a two-State solution, based
on the 1967 borders, and to move forward in resolving
all final-status issues identified in those agreements,
namely, the issues of Jerusalem, refugees, settlements,
borders and security measures.

Argentina resolutely supports all efforts aimed at
achieving peace and stability in the region. We also
support the efforts of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and
acknowledge the important contribution of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East in preventing further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We urge the countries friends of Israel
and Palestine to work constructively to help the
parties advance in the peaceful settlement of their
differences, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, the
Quartet road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the establishment of a viable and independent State
that is recognized by all countries, as well as the right
of the State ofIsrael to live in peace with its neighbours
within secure and internationally recognized borders.

Argentina reiterates its concern about the growth
of illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and urges Israel to cease such expansionist
activities. As recognized by the Security Council in
resolution 2334 (2016), the settlements are a breach
of international law, hamper peace and weaken the
prospect of a two-State solution whereby both live in
peace and security, thereby promoting the perpetuation
of an unsustainable status quo.

On the other hand, attacks against Israeli citizens
are inadmissible and must cease immediately. My
country vehemently condemns all terrorist acts, as well
as the violent actions of Hamas and other Palestinian
organizations, including the launching of missiles
from the Gaza Strip and the construction of tunnels to
infiltrate Israel.

In that context, we recognize the right of Israel to
exercise legitimate self-defence. Without prejudice to
that, however, we recall the need for Israel's actions to
be compatible with international humanitarian law and
take into account, inter alia, the principles of distinction
between civilians and combatants, proportionality and
military necessity in terms of the use of force.

Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
in accordance with the relevant resolutions, including
resolution 478 (1980). In that regard, my country rejects
any unilateral attempt to alter the status of the city
of Jerusalem. Argentina therefore believes that, as a
final-status issue, the matter should be decided by the
parties in bilateral negotiations.

Turning to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
achieved through dialogue and diplomacy, in
accordance with international law and while respecting
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria. Argentina attaches special importance to the
Geneva talks under the auspices of the United Nations.
We appreciate the work of Mr. Staffan de Mistura in
his tireless efforts as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General since 2014. We express our support for his
successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, in continuing negotiations
to reach a peaceful solution to the crisis, in line with
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). Moreover, we
recognize the contribution of the Astana agreements
and other ceasefire agreements to de-escalate violence
and alleviate the humanitarian situation on the ground,
with a View to creating the conditions conducive to
moving towards a definitive, inclusive and long-term
settlement. The establishment and integration of the
constitutional committee would be an important step
in that direction.

Finally, with regard to Yemen, Argentina welcomes
the establishment of the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hudaydah Agreement, with the goal of
supporting its implementation in the city ofAl-Hudaydah
and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa,
as established in the Stockholm Agreement. We hope
that the Agreement will be the first step towards a
peaceful and definitive settlement of Yemen's internal
conflict so that the very grave humanitarian crisis
facing the Yemeni civilian population can begin to be
reversed quickly.

