Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Minister, as President of the Security Council. We
also welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General in our meeting.

Today the Council, on the initiative of Pakistan,
is considering a very timely and multifaceted topic.
Your country, Mr. Minister, is a major troop contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. At the start
of this month, 7,680 Pakistani peacekeepers were
contributing to conflict settlement in eight
peacekeeping missions. That clearly shows the
important role played by Pakistan in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Our experience thus far clearly shows that
peacekeeping operations, including those in their
current, multidimensional form, are the most flexible
and effective instrument for resolving the broadest
range of tasks in the area of international peace and
security. We can easily see the positive changes that
are occurring in strengthening the ability of Member
States, of the Secretariat and of the entire United
Nations system to plan and carry out peacekeeping
operations.

We take special note of the effective activities of
the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations with regard to the
comprehensive study of tools to further improve
United Nations peacekeeping potential. The report
adopted at the Special Committee's recent session is a
good basis for efforts to build up United Nations
potential in this sphere.

It is important that this work be carried out in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, with
respect for generally recognized norms and principles
of international law and with a rational division of
labour between regional, subregional and coalition
structures. This is especially timely as the demand for
Blue Helmets throughout the world is growing.

For Russia, the basic principles and criteria of
United Nations peacekeeping operations remain
inviolable and include the following: the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
need for constructive cooperation by parties to a
conflict with the international missions of the United
Nations, and United Nations interaction with regional
structures pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Speaking at the fifty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, the President of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Putin, emphasized that our country is
prepared to intensify its participation, both in
peacekeeping operations under the aegis of the United
Nations and in coalition operations that are approved
by the Security Council. We advocate constructive
cooperation aimed at improving the machinery for
peacekeeping and post-conflict settlement. Within this
framework, we would ensure the effective coordination
of the peacekeeping component with the work of the
social, economic and humanitarian structures of the
United Nations system.

There can be no doubt that one of the most
serious problems facing United Nations peacekeeping
today is that of ensuring the safety and security of
peacekeepers in hotspots. The past year has given us
many obvious examples of this: the terrorist act against
the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad; the
killing of two military observers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the attacks on the international
presence in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro; and the
recent outbreak of rioting against ethnic minorities in
that province. And this is hardly a complete list. In this
connection, we support the need to enhance the
relevant potential of both the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and, first and foremost, its
field missions. We also emphasize that the receiving
country's responsibility for the security of contingents
and United Nations staff in the area of conflict is not at
all diminished in this regard.

The complex nature of the problems encountered
in current conflicts - most often with dangerous
regional dimensions and social and economic
consequences - requires constant attention to the task
of improving the comprehensive planning and
deployment of multidimensional peacekeeping
operations. We must also strengthen coordination
among the various components of missions and their
interaction with other international presences, within
the area under their responsibility.

Of special significance, as the Secretary-General
has stated, is the further improvement of a partnership
of a new type between the United Nations, regional
organizations and coalition peacekeepers. The use of
multinational forces, approved by the Security Council,
is especially effective in the initial stage of reacting to
crisis situations and may allow the necessary time for
the preparation and deployment of United Nations
operations.

Every crisis situation is unique and requires an
appropriate set of instruments for a settlement, whether
United Nations peacekeeping operations, coalition
operations or missions of regional organizations.
Indeed, this must take place in strict compliance with
the United Nations Charter, which clearly sets out the
key role of the Security Council at all stages, from the
establishment, preparation and creation of a mandate
until its conclusion. In this connection, it is
fundamentally important to not allow any
circumvention of the Security Council's powers,
especially in situations in which the issue arises of the
use of force on behalf of the international community.
In this regard, military action is, no doubt, an extreme
recourse, and the nature of that action should be agreed
upon and should be rational and sufficient.

The experience of peacekeeping in Africa, such
as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, clearly demonstrates the intricate
linkage of the task of establishing peace with the full
social and economic restoration of those countries that
have suffered from conflict. In this connection, we
support the importance of continuing an in-depth
consideration of a rational division of labour between
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and specialized agencies and programmes during the
transition from peacekeeping to peace-building. In this
regard, it is important to not allow any watering-down
of the prerogatives of those respective bodies or any
overburdening of peacekeeping operations with tasks
that are not incumbent upon them.

We advocate the further improvement of the
effective machinery for interaction between members
of the Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and the United Nations Secretariat. We fully agree with
the view as to the need for the most effective
implementation of the practice of Security Council
operative consultations, pursuant to resolution 1353
(2001). This should take place within the framework of
the special machinery of the Council's relevant
working group on the basis of the note by the President
of the Security Council of 14 January 2002
(S/2002/56).

In our View, one of the more effective ways to
improve military expertise within the Organization
could be to activate the work of the Security Council's
Military Staff Committee. However, this would not
take place within the traditional understanding of the
role of that body, but in an essentially expanded
format. Our proposal is designed not to enhance the
role of the permanent members of the Security
Council, but rather, in accordance with paragraphs 2
and 4 of Article 47 of the Charter, to finally fill out the
activities of the Military Staff Committee with
practical content, as a body not for five members, but
for the entire Security Council. All members of the
Council and other interested countries, including troop-
contributing countries, would be included in it. The
Russian initiative is designed to integrate into these
measures others that are now being discussed as we
enhance the professionalization and democratization of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and strengthen
interaction among the Security Council, troop
contributors and the Secretariat.

Russia, bearing fully in mind its responsibility
within the peacekeeping efforts of the international
community and as an active participant in United
Nations peacekeeping activities, will in future
continue, in close cooperation with all other interested
States, to make a practical contribution to enhancing
the efficiency and effectiveness of this important
international institution.

