Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): On
7 October, alongside my colleague Ambassador Kodjo
Menan of Togo, I led the Security Council's visit
to Uganda, which consisted of a detailed exchange
with President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, alongside
Defence Minister Kiyonga and Minister for Foreign
Affairs Sam Kutesa. In our meeting, I explained, on
behalf of the Security Council, that we saw a strategic
opportunity to bring stability to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider region, created
by the Addis Agreement, the strengthened mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Kampala talks. I expressed the
Council's appreciation for President Museveni's work
to improve regional relations and conclude dialogue
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).

The Council also wished to hear President
Museveni's concerns on security in the region, including
on the armed groups the Ugandan Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
and the Lord's Resistance Army. The continued threat
posed by those groups from the territory of eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to neighbouring
States is testament to the regional nature of the crisis.

President Museveni and Defence Minister
Koyongo updated us on the progress made so far in
the talks in Kampala between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the M-23. I
expect that we will hear a fresh update on those talks in
the briefing immediately following this meeting. The
President also referred to the importance of aligning
national, regional and international efforts to support
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
he expressed appreciation for MONUSCO's role in
helping to tackle armed groups. Council members said
that it would be important for the deal in Kampala to
avoid repeating the mistakes of 2009 peace agreement,
including allowing the worst human rights abusers to
remain on the scene. The President assured the Council
that sustained regional engagement would help deliver
full implementation of any deal.

President Museveni told the Council that the focus
needed to remain on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as well as the region. As we have already heard
this morning, we were able to reassure him that while
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo we had
delivered important messages on internal reforms.
Council members appealed to President Museveni to
use his influence to ensure the full implementation
of commitments in the Framework Agreement by
all signatories and continue to promote peace in the
region. Overall, the exchange of views with President
Museveni served to underline the important role that
Uganda plays in furthering peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region,
in the short term, by security agreement in Kampala,
and in the longer term, by maintaining focus on the
implementation of the Addis Agreement.

In closing, I would like to express my thanks to the
Ugandan Government for hosting that leg of our visit
and for the open exchange of views we had. I would
also like to thank the staff of the United Nations, in
particular James Sutterlin and Davey McNab, for
ensuring the success of that part of our trip.

