Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I should like to thank you,
Sir, for having organized today's meeting, and to
welcome Judge Theodor Meron and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism of Criminal
Courts, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and thank them for their
valuable, informative and enlightening briefings. We
also want to thank the Chair of the Informal Working
Group and his entire team for the outstanding work
they are carrying out.

In general terms, the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea welcomes the significant progress
in the execution of the mandate of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as
recognized in the March 2018 evaluation report
(S/2018/206) of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS).

However, we must note that we have observed
a lack of uniformity in the application of rule 151 of
the Rules of Procedure and Evidence, referring to the
General Rules for the Granting ofPardon, Commutation
of Sentence and Early Release. Specifically, we refer
to the latest persons convicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to have been released
before having served out their full sentences.

While those rulings were issued following the
consideration of circumstances held to justify a
reduction in sentence or a pardon, it is also true that
the gravity of the crimes committed and the irreparable
damage caused are not open to discussion. We therefore
urge the Mechanism to cooperate with victims and
take into account their opinions, especially in cases of
pardon or early release ofpersons duly convicted of war
crimes, genocide or crimes against humanity, always in
accordance with due process. There is no peace without
justice, and it is important that victims feel that justice
has been done, since decision may foment attitudes of
revenge and hatred.

We underscore the need for the Security Council
to show unity in upholding the rule of law, ensuring
accountability and preventing impunity, in particular
for those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, as well as other serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, in order to ensure they
are not repeated.

In establishing the Mechanism, to cite but one
example, the Security Council once again demonstrated
its commitment to peace and to upholding international
law and international humanitarian law by supporting
the peaceful settlement of disputes, ensuring
accountability and promoting the fight against a
pervasive culture of impunity. However, to echo
what Judge Meron said a few weeks ago in this very
Chamber (see S/PV.8262), demanding accountability
for international crimes entails doing much more than
simply cooperating with international tribunals and
specialized entities. We agree with his observation that,
for accountability and an international order based on
the rule of law to truly take hold, officials of national
jurisdictions will have to shoulder the lion's share of
this work, since it is only through broad-based national
participation and by using all the tools at our disposal,
including universal jurisdiction, that we may hope
to address the shortcomings in accountability. Any
training policy for national legal institutions in that
regard will therefore enjoy the strong support of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
We also support the recommendations of OIOS and
call on States to redouble their efforts to collaborate
with the Mechanism.

I would like to underscore that all of my remarks
should in no way detract from the excellent and arduous
work being carried out by the Mechanism. We simply
wish to point out that, in keeping with the foreign policy
of our Government, we always advocate dialogue, close
cooperation and cooperation.

Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
committed to an international order based on the rule
of law with the United Nations at its core, whereby the
Security Council must continue promoting mechanisms
such as the establishment of tribunals to combat the
culture of impunity in post-conflict situations.

