Mr. Baati (Tunisia): It is my pleasure and honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia. We would like to thank the President for organizing this briefing on cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations in maintaining peace and security, with a focus on partnership with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We also thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of ASEAN for their important briefings. It is important that the Security Council continue to engage ona regular basis with regional organizations on ways to encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes and maintain peace and security in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. On several occasions, regional and _ subregional arrangements have proved to be highly knowledgeable and efficient in dealing with local issues. Their understanding of local dynamics and deep insight into the history of events sometimes make all the difference. We believe that through stronger cooperation, the United Nations and regional organizations can leverage their respective comparative advantages in seeking effective solutions to the increasingly complex peace and security challenges all over the world. In that regard, we welcome the significant progress in the cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN since the adoption of the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations during the fourth ASEAN-UnitedNations Summit in Indonesia in November 2011, and the adoption in 2016 of the first ASEAN-United Nations Plan of Action to implement the Joint Declaration, for the period 2016-2020. We are pleased to hear that almost all the items included in that ambitious plan of action, which covers political, security, economic and sociocultural cooperation, have already been addressed. In particular, we would like to commend the efforts made to enhance the cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations in the area of peace and security. We further commend ASEAN's efforts to promote mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty, equality, territorial integrity and national identity of all nations within their region. These values mirror those enshrined in the United Nations Charter and create an important platform for bolstering cooperation with the United Nations. Through preventive diplomacy, ASEAN plays an important role in conflict prevention, resolution and management. The approach to promoting dialogue to resolve conflict supports the actions envisioned in Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, which emphasizes the pacific settlement of disputes. We believe that Chapter VI should be the first port of call for Council efforts to maintain international peace and security. The principles espoused by ASEAN therefore make it an important and natural partner in the pursuit of peaceful resolutions to conflicts in the region. In that regard, we appreciate ASEAN's contribution to efforts to address the root causes of the Rohingya refugee crises. We would also like to stress the need to intensify those efforts in order to ensure the refugees a voluntary, safe and dignified return to their homeland. The valuable contribution of ASEAN member States to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with the deployment of approximately 5,000 military and police personnel, as well as the organization of training programmes, is also commendable. We also highly value the cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations in the field of counter-terrorism and the adoption by ASEAN, in November 2018, of its Plan of Action to Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalization and Violent Extremism. ASEAN's role as a bridge-builder extending beyond its members, through such dialogue platforms as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN+3 - China, Japan and the Republic of Korea, which it initiated - is also now well established and we are confident that it can contribute to finding solutions to some of the security issues in the broader region. We believe that greater consultation in the decision-making of the Security Council with such regional organizations as ASEAN, the League of Arab States, the European Union and the African Union (AU), is essential for achieving strategic convergence and coherence with a view to addressing today's complex peace and security challenges. In that regard, we are pleased to note that the United Nations and the African Union have made significant progress in developing a strategic partnership to address such challenges in Africa, which has resulted in joint approaches and better-coordinated, coherent and effective initiatives to prevent, resolve and manage conflicts on the continent based on the spirit of the 2017 Joint United Nations- AU Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. As a testimony of that strategic partnership, the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council hold an annual joint consultative meeting, at which they discuss a range of matters, mainly related to conflict situations on the continent. Such joint meetings are preceded by informal consultations that focus on thematic issues, such as how to strengthen cooperation between the two organs. In addition, both organizations work together to identify a wide range of thematic issues designed to further promote peace and security in the African continent. Those issues include mediation; women, peace and security; electoral support, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and development; and youth, peace and security. The Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative clearly illustrates that enhanced cooperation and coordination, in accordance with resolution 2457 (2019), adopted in February 2019, and the AU Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020, on practical steps to attain the goal of a conflict-free Africa. Despite that important progress, cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations is still far from delivering on its promises, and greatly enhanced efforts are needed if the Security Council is to fully utilize this tool, under Chapter VIII. We need to reflect more on such issues as how to strengthen coordination and coherence between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations regarding peace and security matters, how to develop a jointdecision-making framework to make their joint action more effective and, most importantly, how to support peace efforts initiated by regional organizations through secure, sustainable and predictable resources. In that regard, we would like to echo the African Union request to endorse access to United Nations assessed contributions to fund its peace-support operations, which are undertaken on behalf of the United Nations and, in particular, the Security Council. In conclusion, let me thank you again, Mr. President, for choosing this important subject for our briefing. We are confident that under Viet Nam's able chairmanship, ASEAN will endeavour to further enhance its cooperation with the United Nations.
