Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Today's meeting is very important and very timely. I
wish to welcome you, Mr. Prime Minister, and to thank
you for personally presiding over this meeting in New
York. I should also like to welcome the presence of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico and representatives of
regional organizations.

The world is experiencing complex and profound
changes, and we are facing many threats and
challenges. Both traditional and non-traditional
security issues are increasingly assuming a
transboundary character. An effective response to those
threats and challenges depends on the concerted efforts
of all countries, the important role of the United
Nations and cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations.

For more than a decade, the United Nations has
been steadily enhancing its coordination and
cooperation with regional organizations both in conflict
prevention and resolution and in post-conflict peace-
building. This has had a positive effect in strengthening
the role of the United Nations and in the maintenance
of peace and stability.

We appreciate the renewed initiative by Romania
to convene a debate on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In that connection, I wish to highlight a number of
points.

First, the Charter of the United Nations confers
on the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council is thus at the core of the international
collective security machinery. Regional organizations
too can contribute to the peaceful settlement of
disputes. The Charter serves as a guide for United
Nations action and as a framework for the activities of
regional organizations. Chapter VIII provides for a role
by regional organizations in the settlement of disputes
and defines the relationship between the United
Nations and such organizations. Here, let me
underscore in particular Article 53, which states that
"no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies without the
authorization of the Security Council".

Secondly, effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations should be
further enhanced in order to create synergy based on
their respective assets; the United Nations should
maintain open communication with regional
organizations. Geographical proximity and similarities
in the historical and cultural backgrounds of their
members give regional organizations a unique
advantage with respect to the maintenance of regional
peace and security. Prior to debating or taking action
on a conflict situation, the Security Council must, as
appropriate, listen to the views and suggestions of the
regional organizations concerned so that it can take
informed decisions that are feasible, pertinent and
effective. Regional organizations, particularly those
from Africa, should be able to count on as much
support and cooperation as possible from the United
Nations in actions they initiate to resolve conflicts. At
the same time, as required by the Charter, regional
organizations should, on their own initiative, maintain
closer contacts with the Security Council in order to
provide the Council with timely and comprehensive
updates on actions they are taking. That is essential to
ensure that regional actions are correctly oriented.

Thirdly, the United Nations should actively help
regional organizations, especially those in Africa, to
build their capacity for peacekeeping. The African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development have all made very effective contributions
to addressing conflicts in Africa. The United Nations
and the international community at large should
provide resources, personnel, training and logistical
support to those organizations with a view to enhancing
their overall capacity in early warning and
peacekeeping so that they can make full use of their
strengths in maintaining regional peace and stability.

In recent years, regional cooperation has been on
the rise in Asia, thanks to joint efforts by Asian
countries. The Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) has continued to play an active role
in regional affairs, and the ASEAN Regional Forum
has become an important venue for multilateral
dialogue on security in the Asia-Pacific region. The 10-
plus-3 cooperation arrangement among ASEAN,
China, Japan and the Republic of Korea has also been
playing an increasingly prominent role in promoting
regional peace and development.

As a new mechanism for cooperation oriented
towards Asia as a whole, the Asia Cooperation
Dialogue forum has been making steady progress. That
shows the willingness of Asian States to cooperate
among themselves.

It is equally worth noting that the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) too is developing into
an effective mechanism for promoting regional
security, stability and development. The recent
declaration adopted at the Tashkent summit of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization stressed that the
SCO would cooperate with the United Nations and
would make its proper contribution to the maintenance
of security and stability in its own region and
throughout the world. I am confident that, over time,
cooperation between the SCO and the United Nations
will continuously grow in importance.

