Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
In January the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1044 (1996) to send a clear, unambiguous
message to the Government of the Sudan that the
international community, as represented in the Security
Council, was taking a firm stand against the phenomenon
of international terrorism, and to deter those
contemplating supporting terrorism, including countries
involved in such criminal acts.
In this respect, we should recall that the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) considered the
assassination attempt against the life of President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt to be an attack on the whole of Africa,
threatening regional stability and international peace and
security.

The report of the Secretary-General on the efforts of
his Special Envoy pursuant to resolution 1044 (1996),
drew two firm conclusions: first, that Sudan has not yet
complied with the Security Council's demand to extradite
the three suspects to Ethiopia; and, secondly, that all the
neighbouring countries of Sudan visited by the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, accused it, in one way or
another, of supporting terrorist activities within their
territories.

 

The Council gave the Government of Sudan more than
two months to comply with resolution 1044 (1996) before
meeting today to adopt the measures which must be taken
by the international community to force the Sudanese
Government to deal with this dangerous issue with due
seriousness. However, those in power in Sudan have,
regrettably, continued their policy of disregarding the will
of the international community. They have continued to
grant shelter to terrorists, and have helped them to evade
prosecution. Such prosecution would have revealed who
had provided them with shelter, assistance, weapons and
security cover.

I listened very carefully to the statement of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, and would like to
correct his claim - on page 16 of his text - that Egypt
circulated a document that included a record of an
investigation of some of the suspects currently in Ethiopian
jails. I would like to make it clear that Egypt has not
circulated this document, and I wish that he would be more
precise in such matters.

I would also like to say that I do not understand what
the Sudanese Ambassador meant when he wondered why
Egypt has not denied that one of the suspects is in
Afghanistan. I do not understand this. Egypt has nothing to
do with these suspects. It has absolutely no relationship
with them, so it cannot deny, confirm or affirm their
whereabouts. This stands in stark contrast to the established
link between the Sudan and the suspects.

It is regrettable that some official Sudanese circles, in
an attempt to deny the relationship of the Sudanese
Government to these terrorists, have proved this infamous
relationship beyond any doubt.
The Sudanese Ambassador mentioned a Sudanese
newspaper that was closely linked to security and official
circles in Khartoum. I would like to say that in a front-page
article, on 14 March 1996, that newspaper reported that the
three suspects harboured by Sudan would appear in a
different country and would tell the press that the Sudan
was innocent and had not taken part in the assassination
attempt. In fact, on 20 April, an Arab newspaper published
an interview with a person who said he was one of the
suspects, claiming that he was in Afghanistan. Despite the
fact that that terrorist confessed to his involvement in the
assassination attempt and stated that before that others had
entered Ethiopia via the Sudan, he denied that the Sudan
had taken part in the conspiracy, just as the Sudanese
newspaper had predicted more than a month before.

Consequently - and I hope this is clear - the piece
of evidence that was sought by the defence has turned
into proof positive that the Sudan was closely linked to
these terrorists.

Since the adoption of resolution 1044 (1996), the
Sudanese Government has hinted that it was about to
change its policies vis-a-vis the support of international
acts and activities that target the security and stability of
neighbouring countries.

We have heard two neighbouring countries today -
Ethiopia and Uganda. Regrettably, we do not see that the
words of the officials of the Government of Sudan match
their deeds. We hope that the resolution just adopted by
the Council will reaffirm the irreversible resolve to
implement the earlier resolution.

By adopting resolution 1054 (1996) today, under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Security Council
reaffirmed that the dangers of international terrorism
represent a grave threat to international peace and security
and that concerted efforts by countries to eliminate that
threat and to deter those who assist in its perpetration are
a basic requirement for the maintenance of international
peace and security in today's world.

History will record that in the Council's
deliberations on this resolution, Egypt categorically
rejected the inclusion of any measure that would harm the
Sudanese people or increase its suffering, which results
from the policies of its Government. Egypt also rejected
the inclusion of any measure that would negatively affect
the unity, independence and territorial integrity of the
Sudan. The members of the Council supported that
position, and I should like to extend my thanks to all of
them.

The measures imposed by the resolution adopted
today were restricted to diplomatic action in order to send
to the Sudan a clear warning of the consequences of
continuing its present policies, and I hope that the
Sudanese Government will not misinterpret the message.
The Council is determined, in accordance with the
resolution, to ensure the implementation of resolution
1044 (1996). It will look at the matter again in 60 days to
decide whether the Sudan has complied with the
resolution, and other measures can be adopted to
guarantee this compliance.

The Egyptian Government still hopes that the
Sudanese Government will comply, without delay or

 

stalling, with the international demands included in
resolution 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996). We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to come back to inform the
Council that the Sudan has implemented all the measures
included in the two resolutions. These are the same
measures that were called for by the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution and that
the Secretary-General of the OAU has tried to convince the
Sudan to implement, to no avail.

Egypt hopes that diplomatic measures adopted by
various countries in the implementation of the resolution
adopted today, along with the efforts of all other countries,
will contribute to encouraging the Sudan to comply.

The implementation by the Sudan of the resolution
adopted by the Council today can bring about a real change
in Sudan's orientation and in the Sudanese Government's
policies, which have led it to the present regrettable
situation.

Allow me to conclude my statement by reaffirming
that every Egyptian feels and appreciates the special nature
of the historical relations that bind the peoples of the Nile
Valley in Egypt and in the Sudan. I repeat once again -
and I am speaking to the Ambassador of the Sudan - that
we in Egypt feel that we are a natural extension of the
Sudan, that the Sudan is a natural extension of us, that
anything that harms the people of the Sudan harms the
people of Egypt and vice versa. There is no doubt that
Egypt is eager for relations between the countries to return
to normal so that the brotherly Sudanese people can enjoy
stability, prosperity and good relations with all its
neighbours, particularly with Egypt, and we trust that the
deep-seated links that bind the Egyptian and Sudanese
peoples together - links that were formed and
strengthened over time - will continue to be strong in the
future.

