Mr. Kamilov (Uzbekistan): I would like to express
our gratitude to the Republic of Kazakhstan for taking
the initiative to hold these debates on Central Asia
and Afghanistan at the Security Council. During his
address to the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev of the Republic
of Uzbekistan stressed that

"[t]he stabilization of the situation in Afghanistan
is an important precondition to ensure not only
regional security, but global security as well"
(A/72/PV5, p. 15).

Based on that, we believe firmly that Afghanistan
must remain at the centre of the global agenda and
that our shared determination to promote peace should
not weaken. The choice in favour of a peace process
remains the only solution to the ongoing confrontation
for all intra-Afghan forces. We believe that we are
seeing the creation of conditions conducive to a fully
fledged launch of the process for a peaceful settlement
of the situation in Afghanistan. Despite differences
that remain with regard to some aspects of the process,
the international community is becoming increasingly
aware that there can be no alternative to holding
peace talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the armed opposition, including the Taliban, in
support of the process of integrating Afghanistan into
trade, economic and infrastructural relations with
its neighbours.

Obviously, peace in Afghanistan will bring
benefits to all countries of the vast Eurasian continent,
promoting the construction of roads and railways,
laying of pipelines and development of regional and
transregional trade in all directions. But what must be
done to make that happen? There must first be a regional
and broad international consensus on the basic issues
of establishing peace and security in Afghanistan.
Secondly, there must be national reconciliation through
direct dialogue between the central Government and
the armed opposition.

To that end, the Republic of Uzbekistan and the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan are jointly initiating
an international ministerial conference on Afghanistan
and the peace process, security cooperation and regional
connectivity in Tashkent in late March. Together with
our partners in Afghanistan, we have made a detailed
preliminary study of the issue and have come to the
conclusion that the Tashkent meeting will represent
a logical continuation of the second meeting of the
Kabul Process, scheduled for late February, in order to
consolidate the results achieved within the framework
of the common international efforts at various levels.
Ultimately, holding a high-level forum in Tashkent
should demonstrate that the Afghan problem will
not go down in modern history as an example of the
helplessness and indifference of the world community
in countering the challenges and threats common to
all mankind.

As everyone here knows, Uzbekistan has experience
in promoting the peace process in Afghanistan. In 1999,
at our initiative, Tashkent hosted the meeting of the 6
plus 2 Contact Group at the level of high representatives
of the ministries of foreign affairs of Afghanistan's
neighbours, as well as of Russia and the United States,
with the participation of representatives of the warring
parties, including the Taliban movement. The Tashkent
Declaration on Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful
Settlement of the Conflict in Afghanistan was adopted
following the talks.

Today Uzbekistan is consistently making a real
contribution to the development of regional cooperation,
especially in terms of engaging Afghanistan in the
system of trade, economic and infrastructural relations
with the States of Central Asia We see the main goals
of the multilateral meeting in Tashkent as agreeing
on the basic principles for a peaceful settlement in
Afghanistan, formulating a mechanism for launching
direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the armed opposition, and coordinating
international joint actions to support that process. The
results that we hope the the conference will achieve are
the following.

First, we aim to adopt a final document, a Tashkent
declaration, that will define the basic principles and
conditions for a peaceful settlement and specify the
obligations of the Afghan Government and the armed
opposition, as well as those of the international
community, in terms of launching the negotiation
process and its support. Secondly, we will formulate a
regional and international consensus on the promotion
of a political settlement in Afghanistan. Thirdly, we
will consolidate the central and coordinating role
of the Afghan side in the process of the political
settlement in Afghanistan. Fourthly, we will appeal to
the participants in the Tashkent conference, and to all
the armed opposition groups in Afghanistan, to stop
the violence and take part in the negotiation process
with the Afghan Government. Fifthly, the forum's
participants will reaffirm their international obligations
for combating international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

To ensure the efficiency and productivity of the
Tashkent conference, and taking into account the
views of our Afghan partners, we would like to invite
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Afghanistan, the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the
foreign ministers of China, Russia, the United States,
India, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, as well as the countries of
Central Asia, to take part in the work of the conference.
Uzbekistan would be grateful for the support of
the members of the Security Council for this joint
initiative with Afghanistan. We are confident that its
implementation will demonstrate the determination of
the world community to ensure peace and sustainable
development in that country.

