Mr. Galouzeau de Villepin (France) (spoke in French): At the outset, France wishes to reiterate our
condolences to our American friends with regard to the
terrible tragedy that occurred with the space shuttle
Columbia.

I congratulate the German presidency of the
Security Council on having organized this meeting, and
I thank Colin Powell, Secretary of State of the United
States, for having taken the initiative of convening it. I
listened with much attention to the elements that he
shared with us. They contained information,
indications and questions that deserve further
exploration. It will be up to the inspectors to assess the
facts, as envisaged in resolution 1441 (2002). Already,
his presentation has provided new justification for the
approach chosen by the United Nations; it must
strengthen our common determination.

By unanimously adopting resolution 1441 (2002),
we chose to act through the path of inspections. That
policy rests on three fundamental points: a clear
objective on which we cannot compromise - the
disarmament of Iraq; a method - a rigorous system of
inspections that requires Iraq's active cooperation and
that affirms the Security Council's central role at each
stage; and finally, a requirement - that of our unity. It
gave full force to the message that we unanimously
addressed to Baghdad. I hope that today's meeting will
enable us to strengthen that unity.

Important results have already been achieved.
The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are
working. The deployment on the ground of more than
one hundred inspectors, with 300 visits a month on
average, an increase in the number of sites inspected
and full access to the presidential sites, in particular,
are all major achievements. In the nuclear domain,
these first two months have enabled the IAEA to
make - as Mr. ElBaradei emphasized - good
progress in its knowledge of Iraq's capacity, and that is
a key element.

In the areas covered by UNMOVIC, the
inspections have provided us with useful information.
For example, Mr. Blix has indicated that no trace of
biological or chemical agents has thus far been
detected by the inspectors, either in the analyses of
samples taken on the inspected sites or in the 12 empty
warheads discovered on 16 January at Ukhaider.

There are still grey areas in Iraq's cooperation.
The inspectors have reported real difficulties. In his 27
January report, Mr. Blix gave several examples of
unresolved questions in the ballistic, chemical and
biological domains. These uncertainties are not
acceptable. France will continue to pass on all the
information it has so they can be better defined.

Right now, our attention has to be focused as a
priority on the biological and chemical domains. It is
there that our presumptions about Iraq are the most
significant. Regarding the chemical domain, we have
evidence of its capacity to produce VX and yperite. In
the biological domain, the evidence suggests the
possible possession of significant stocks of anthrax and
botulism toxin, and possibly a production capability.
Today the absence of long-range delivery systems
reduces the potential threat of these weapons, but we
have disturbing signs of Iraq's continued determination
to acquire ballistic missiles beyond the authorized 150-
kilometre range. In the nuclear domain, we must clarify
in particular any attempt by Iraq to acquire aluminium
tubes.

So it is a demanding demarche, anchored in
resolution 1441 (2002), that we must take together. If
this path were to fail and lead us into a dead end, then
we rule out no option, including in the final analysis
the recourse to force, as we have said all along.

In such a hypothesis, however, several answers
will have to be clearly provided to all Governments and
all peoples of the world to limit the risks and
uncertainties. To what extent do the nature and scope
of the threat justify the recourse to force? How do we
make sure that the considerable risks of such
intervention are actually kept under control? This
obviously requires a collective demarche of
responsibility on the part of the world community. In
any case, it must be clear that, in the context of such an
option, the United Nations will have to be at the centre
of the action to guarantee Iraq's unity, ensure the
region's stability, protect civilians and preserve the
unity of the world community.

For now, the inspections regime favoured by
resolution 1441 (2002) must be strengthened, since it
has not been explored to the end. Use of force can only
be a final recourse. Why go to war if there still exists
an unused space in resolution 1441 (2002)? Consistent
with the logic of that resolution, we must therefore
move on to a new stage and further strengthen the
inspections. With the choice between military
intervention and an inspections regime that is
inadequate for lack of cooperation on Iraq's part, we
must choose to strengthen decisively the means of
inspection. That is what France is proposing today.

To do this, we must define with Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei the requisite tools for increasing their
operational capabilities. Let us double or triple the
number of inspectors and open up more regional
offices. Let us go further: Why not establish a
specialized body to keep under surveillance the sites
and areas already inspected? Let us substantially
increase the capabilities for monitoring and collecting
information on Iraqi territory. France is ready to
provide full support; it is ready to deploy Mirage IV
observer aircraft. Let us collectively establish a
coordination and information-processing centre that
would supply Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, in real time
and in a coordinated way, with all the intelligence
resources they might need. Let us list the unresolved
disarmament questions and rank them by importance.
With the consent of the leaders of the inspection teams,
let us define a demanding and realistic time frame for
moving forward in the assessment and elimination of
problems. There must be regular follow-up to the
progress made in Iraq's disarmament.
This enhanced regime of inspections and
monitoring could be usefully complemented by having
a permanent United Nations coordinator for
disarmament in Iraq, stationed in Iraq and working
under the authority of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei.

Iraq must cooperate actively, however. The
country must comply immediately with the demands of
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, in particular by permitting
meetings with Iraqi scientists without witnesses;
agreeing to the use of U2 observer flights; adopting
legislation to prohibit the manufacture of weapons of
mass destruction; and immediately handing over to the
inspectors all relevant documents on unresolved
disarmament questions, in particular in the biological
and chemical domains. Those handed over on 20
January constitute a step in the right direction. The
3,000 pages of documents discovered at the home of a
researcher show that Baghdad must do more. Absent
documents, Iraq must be able to present credible
testimony. The Iraqi authorities must also provide the
inspectors with answers to the new elements presented
by Colin Powell.

Between now and the inspectors' next report, on
14 February, Iraq will have to provide new elements.
The upcoming visit to Baghdad by the leaders of the
inspectors will have to be the occasion for clear results
to that end.

This is the demanding demarche that we must
take together towards a new stage. Its success
presupposes, today as yesterday, that the international
community will remain united and mobilized. It is our
moral and political duty first to devote all our energy to
Iraq's disarmament in peace and in compliance with the
rule of law and justice. France is convinced that we can
succeed on this demanding path so long as we maintain

our unity and cohesion. This is option of collective
responsibility.

