Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
firmly condemns the resumption of fighting in eastern
Ukraine in the past few days, specifically in Avdiivka.
We are dealing with the worst upsurge in violence and
the highest rate of violations of the ceasefire that we have
seen in months. They have been accompanied by a spike
in the number of victims, including among civilians,
as well as a serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, which we are following closely. We are forced
to conclude that neither the security or the humanitarian
situation has improved since the consultations we
had on the subject two days ago, despite the fact that
the Council called unanimously for the immediate
restoration of the ceasefire (SC/12700). In that regard,
France calls on all the parties to exercise restraint, and
supports the appeal of the Trilateral Contact Group for
the immediate restoration of the ceasefire in accordance
with terms of the Minsk agreements, in particular with
respect to the prohibition against the use and withdrawal
ofheavy weapons. The disengagement of forces on both
sides of the line of contact must also be implemented
without delay. We expect each of the parties to refrain
from any provocation that maight further aggravate the
situation. We also call on Russia to use its influence
with the separatists.

The work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in support of the ceasefire and de-escalation
is essential. We call on all the parties on the ground
to ensure the access and security of OSCE observers
in Avdiivka, as well as in all areas of the conflict, as
established in the mandate of the Mission.

The humanitarian situation is of particular concern
to us, as the civilian population is facing extreme
weather conditions and a disruption to the supply
of water and electricity in several areas, including
Avdiivka. We urge the parties to act as quickly as
possible to improve the living conditions of the civilian
population on the ground. Immediate compliance with
windows of calm is essential to enable the repair of
critical infrastructure in areas affected by fighting
and for the relief of populations. We believe that to be
crucial. The current crisis also calls to mind the crucial
importance of the ongoing presence of humanitarian
agencies throughout Ukrainian territory, including in
areas beyond the control of the Government.

Faced with the new resurgence in violence, France
recalls that the solution to the crisis in Ukraine cannot
be a military one; rather, it must be political. That is why

the implementation of the Minsk agreements remains
more than ever the only way forward for a peaceful
resolution to the conflict. France and Germany remain
fully engaged in their diplomatic efforts within the
framework of the Normandy format. Although we are
aware of the scale of the work that remains to be done
and the challenges to be overcome, we are convinced
that working in that format, the only one to bring
Ukraine and Russia together around the same table at
the political level, is necessary and must be continued.
In particular, work in the Normandy format has made it
possible in recent months to lessen the intensity of the
fighting and reduce the number of human casualties on
the ground, as well as to implement confidence-building
measures in the security and humanitarian spheres,
with respect to the re-establishment of the ceasefire,
the implementation of areas of disengagement or even
the carrying out of exchanges of prisoners.

Despite continued fighting, the number of civilian
casualties remains six times lower since the signing of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, according to estimates by United
Nations agencies. Our efforts are currently focused
on developing a common road map that would enable
concomitant progress with respect to the security and
political aspects of the Minsk agreements. We can
make progress only by moving forward on those two
tracks. It is the shared belief of France and Germany
that this is now the only way forward and that the
European sanctions implemented at the beginning of
the crisis are linked to the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

For France, a resolution to the crisis in eastern
Ukraine is more than ever a major priority. Alongside
Germany, we will continue tirelessly in our efforts
to mediate within the framework of the Normandy
format, for there is currently no viable alternative and
because every result on the ground counts. Our goal
remains the restoration of Ukrainian control over all
of its internationally recognized borders, which, we
recall, can take place only via the re-establishment of
its authority over Crimea.

In this challenging environment, everyone must
now shoulder their responsibilities and fulfil their
commitments. In our View, that is the main message
the Council should send, and it is the spirit with which
we are prepared to consider any draft presidential
statement that may be adopted by the Council.
