Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The
State of Qatar attaches great importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I therefore
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to participate in this important debate today. I would
also like to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, for his important briefing.

The Security Council has clear responsibilities in
the area of protecting civilians in armed conflict,
including situations of foreign occupation, which are
governed by the rules of international law.
International humanitarian law, and international
human rights law in particular, prohibit killing civilians
and exposing them to harm. They also prohibit
reprisals against civilians and civilian targets,
including health and educational institutions, and the
deliberate destruction of homes. These laws confirm
that the wilful commission of such prohibited acts
constitutes a war crime.

Despite the principles and provisions that
represent legal safeguards for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, such conflicts are still
claiming the lives of innocent civilians, whose
fundamental rights and freedoms are being violated.
The problem, therefore, lies in the non-implementation
of international legal instruments and in the use of
09-20856

double standards in addressing various situations in
which the international community has failed to
enforce international laws and resolutions and to hold
the perpetrators accountable before such laws. This in
turn emboldens the perpetrators and gives them carte
blanche to commit such acts.

Conversely, when the international community
has been determined to enforce the laws necessary for
the protection of civilians in times of armed conflict
and to achieve that through existing mechanisms, it has
succeeded on many occasions in fighting impunity,
ensuring the protection of civilians and strengthening
their human rights.

Today, the war on the Gaza Strip enters its
nineteenth day. Palestinian civilians in Gaza are subject
on a daily basis to relentless military attacks by Israel,
the occupying Power. Such attacks do not discriminate
between women, children, the elderly or people with
disabilities.

In a speech delivered on 4 January 2009, His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, the Emir
of the State of Qatar, called on the international
community to undertake efforts for the protection and
relief of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. His Highness
highlighted that the Israeli war machine targets
everybody and does not discriminate among its victims.
He also said that a war waged with such force against
civilian targets cannot but constitute a war crime, as it
clearly violates international humanitarian law and
international human rights laws, including the Geneva
Conventions, and in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which includes provisions on the protection
of civilians under foreign occupation. The number of
Palestinian civilian killed in Gaza Strip has almost
reached 1,000. What are we going to do about it?

United Nations reports, including reports by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and UNICEF, highlight the dire situation in which
Palestinian children and their families are still living.
Entire families have been killed and buried alive under
the rubble of their homes. Those who have managed to
survive suffer psychological trauma that will haunt
them for the rest of their lives. Others have suffered
serious injuries and have become mentally and
physically disabled.

The Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza
Strip is subjected to a campaign of collective
punishment, as stated by Mr. Richard Falk, the Special
3
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. The
infrastructure in Gaza, including hospitals and schools,
is also under constant attack. The continuous targeting
of such institutions leaves no safe areas for the civilian
Palestinian population to shelter.

This situation prompted Her Highness Sheikha
Mozah Bint Nasser Al-Missned, Consort of His
Highness the Emir of Qatar, in her capacity as
UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and Higher
Education, to address a letter to the Secretary-General
on 5 January, calling upon the Security Council and the
international community to ensure the necessary
protection for educational institutions in Gaza with a
view to providing a safe haven for the children of Gaza
and their families, allowing access to humanitarian
assistance and basic materials and evacuating the sick
and the wounded.

The world has witnessed how Israel targeted the
Al-Fakhura School run by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. The school provided protection for the children of
Gaza and their families, who took refuge in the
premises, believing they were in a safe haven. Forty-
five people were killed and another 130 were wounded.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities, meet its obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict and ensure respect
for the instruments of international law and Security
Council resolutions, which provide the legal basis for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
in situations of foreign occupation. The rule of law
constitutes a fundamental issue in armed conflict. It is
therefore imperative for us to realize that respect for
international law constitutes the true basis for a world
free of armed conflict.

The Security Council today, faced with the
indiscriminate aggression against the Gaza Strip, must
shoulder its responsibilities towards the Palestinian
civilian victims, especially the Palestinian women and
children who have been maimed, burned and buried
under the rubble by the Israeli war machine, which has
spared no one. We would like to remind the Security
Council that it is fully responsible for its failure to
enforce its most recent resolution, among several
others that provide for the protection to which the
afflicted Palestinian people are entitled, and to stop the
massacre being committed against them.
