Judge Meron: It is a great honour for me once
again to address the Council to present the first report
of the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), pursuant to
paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1534
(2004).

I am particularly pleased to address the Council
during the Presidency of Ambassador Baja of the
Philippines.

It is now slightly over eight months since I
addressed the Council to deliver the Tribunal's annual
report on 9 October 2003 under article 34 of the Statute
of the Tribunal. In the meantime, the Council, through
paragraph 6 of resolution 1534 (2004), asked the
Tribunal to provide, by 31 May 2004 and every six
months thereafter,

"assessments by its President and Prosecutor,
setting out in detail the progress made towards
implementation of the Completion Strategy of the
Tribunal, explaining what measures have been
taken to implement the Completion Strategy and
what measures remain to be taken, including the
transfer of cases involving intermediate and
lower rank accused to competent national
jurisdictions ...'.

I was very pleased to transmit my assessments
and those of the Prosecutor to the Council on 21 May
2004, and I am honoured to be able to address the
Council on the subject in person today.

It is now just over nine years since the first
accused, Dusko Tadic, was transferred to the Tribunal
on 24 April 1995. In that period, the Tribunal has tried
35 accused to final judgement in a total of 17 trials.
Seventeen accused pleaded guilty and were sentenced
during that period, most recently Milan Babic, who
pleaded guilty in January 2004 and whose sentence
was rendered this morning at The Hague.
A further eight accused are currently being tried
in six separate cases before the Trial Chambers. Two of
those cases are expected to conclude soon. The trial
judgement in the case of Brdanin is being written and
is expected to be rendered on 31 August of this year.
Final submissions in the case of Strngar are expected
to be made in September of this year, which could lead
to the rendering of the judgement as early as October.

Accordingly, as of today, the Tribunal has either
completed or is holding trials or, in the case of guilty
pleas, sentencing proceedings involving 59 defendants.
There are currently 33 accused in detention or on
provisional release who are awaiting trial.

The Appeals Chamber, for its own part, has also
been productive since it was first seized of an appellate
matter in 1995. If we take appeals from the ICTY and
the ICTR together, the Appeals Chamber has decided
20 appeals from judgements rendered by Trial
Chambers, including two in the first half of this year,
together with 236 interlocutory appeals, 17 requests for
review, and six contempt proceedings.

The Tribunal's current productivity is also very
high. The Trial Chambers are now operating at
maximum capacity, with six cases currently in trial or
at the judgement-writing phase. The Appeals Chamber
has heard six appeals from judgement since October
2003, and the judgements in those cases are currently
being drafted. Three further appeal hearings are
planned for this year. The number of appeals from
judgement and interlocutory appeals before the
Appeals Chamber more than doubled between May
2003 and May 2004.

The Judges of the Tribunal are committed to
sustaining that level of productivity throughout the
remainder of the life of the Tribunal. We are taking, or
have taken, several additional steps that will help to
ensure that the Tribunal's mandate is carried out within
the completion strategy deadlines. These steps have
been summarized in the assessments submitted to the
Council; I do not propose to restate them in detail.

First, the Judges amended rule 28(A) of the rules
of procedure and evidence to comply with the
requirement of seniority in resolution 1534 (2004).
Secondly, Trial Chambers continue to operate at full
capacity, with six cases simultaneously in trial or at the
judgement-writing stage; thirdly. the Appeals Chamber
has made efforts to make interlocutory appeals more
effective by allowing such appeals from both the ICTY
and ICTR only if the Trial Chamber certifies that the
appeal involves an issue that would significantly affect
the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceedings or
the outcome of the trial and for which an immediate
resolution by the Appeals Chamber may materially
advance the proceedings.

Fourthly, the Appeals Chamber is reducing the
length of its appeals judgements and limiting repetition
by invoking its own accumulated jurisprudence on
questions that have been previously resolved. And
fifthly, the Working Group on Scheduling of Cases,
which I established, continues to assist in forecasting
the resources and measures needed to achieve the
completion strategy and in ensuring that new cases are
ready for trial whenever a pending case is concluded.

One additional measure was taken earlier this
month that is therefore not reflected in my assessments
dated 21 May. I refer to an amendment to rule 11 bis of
the rules of procedure and evidence, which is the rule
that authorizes a Trial Chamber, either proprio mota or
upon a motion by the Prosecutor, to refer the case of an
individual already indicted by the Tribunal to a
competent national jurisdiction. The Judges of the
Tribunal, by a unanimous vote, have amended that rule
in two important ways.

The first amendment concerns the domestic
jurisdictions to which cases involving indicted persons
may be transferred. The rule formerly permitted a Trial
Chamber to refer a case only to the State in which the
accused was arrested or in whose territory the alleged
crime was committed. The rule now contains a third
option: referral to a State having jurisdiction and being
willing and adequately prepared to accept such a case.
That amendment expands the range of nations that
could potentially receive cases from the Tribunal
beyond States of the region. This is particularly
important should some courts in the former Yugoslavia
continue to suffer from deficiencies in their ability to
conduct trials in accordance with fundamental fairness
and due process.

The second change amends the criteria to be
considered by the Trial Chamber in deciding whether
to refer a case to a domestic jurisdiction. The rule now
provides that the Trial Chamber may order a referral
only after being satisfied that the accused will receive a
fair trial and that the death penalty will not be imposed
or carried out. That change makes explicit a
requirement that was implicit in the prior version of the
rule, and ensures that cases will not be referred to
jurisdictions that do not observe the minimum
guarantees of procedural fairness and international
human rights. The rule 11 bis amendments also reflect
similar initiatives taken in rule 11 bis of the ICTR.
As the Council recognized in resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), the ability to refer cases of
intermediate and lower-rank accused to domestic
jurisdictions, including the planned War Crimes
Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is an essential prerequisite to the
fulfilment of the completion strategy. But the referral
of cases depends on the presence of propitious
conditions, many of which are outside the Tribunal's
control. The most important condition is the presence
of domestic institutions willing and prepared to try
cases involving allegations of serious violations of
international humanitarian law in a manner that is
credible, fair, and in accordance with international
legal norms. Tribunals established by the United
Nations can transfer cases only if they are assured that
international standards are met, not only in terms of the
conduct of trials, but also in terms of the condition of
detention facilities and the treatment of detainees.

It has been reported that thought is being given to
requesting a Trial Chamber to decide motions to
transfer cases under rule 11 bis even before such
conditions have been met, and thus before the accused
can, in fact, be transferred to the custody of another
State. I believe that it is not helpful to consider
transferring a case before the national jurisdiction is
truly capable of living up to international standards for
trial and for detention. A decision by a Trial Chamber
to remove an indictee from the Tribunal's docket in
such circumstances could present serious human rights
problems for the accused, who would then be in a state
of "legal limbo". The accused would have left behind
his day in court at The Hague but could not yet be
transferred to the custody of national authorities. Any
such initiatives, prematurely taken, could conflict with
international norms of due process and human rights.

The Tribunal is committed to supporting the
achievement of credible and fair war crimes trials in all
States of the former Yugoslavia. As far as the War
Crimes Chamber in Sarajevo is concerned, I am
confident that it will fully meet international due
process standards. I am very grateful to the members of
the donor community that attended the donors'
conference held at the Tribunal at The Hague on
30 October 2003. I am also grateful to the Security
Council for recognizing, in resolution 1534 (2004), that
further support for the Chamber is essential to its
success. During my visit to Sarajevo last week, I held
talks on this subject with the High Representative,
Lord Ashdown, his Senior Deputy, Ambassador
Fassier, and the President of the State Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Judge Raguz. I was informed that
despite some delays in implementation, courtroom
facilities will be available to begin trials in January
2005. However, with regard to detention facilities,
which are essential for the transfer of accused from
The Hague and thus for the holding of trials, the
prospects are less reassuring. While the Office of the
High Representative is pursuing various options to
obtain temporary detention facilities meeting
international standards, that will require the support of
the international community.

At the moment, there are still doubts that credible
war crimes trials can take place in the domestic
jurisdictions of Croatia or Serbia and Montenegro.

With regard to Croatia, the European
Commission recently concluded that a single standard
of criminal responsibility is not yet applied equally to
all accused charged with war crimes before Croatian
courts. The Mission to Croatia of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
has monitored several war crimes trials in Croatian
courts throughout 2002, 2003 and the early months of
2004, reported that there are still significant concerns
about the capacity and impartiality of parts of the
Croatian judiciary. In a report dated 22 June 2004, the
OSCE mission to Croatia reported that its observations
through trial monitoring "suggest that there is a
considerable lack of impartiality among parts of the
judiciary". A second report issued the same day stated
that "the national origin of defendants and possibly
even more importantly that of Victims continued to
affect war crime proceedings in 2003".

However, let me emphasize that the overall
cooperation of Croatia with the Tribunal has improved
significantly. Although the failure to arrest the fugitive
Ante Gotovina is still a matter of grave concern, I View
the progress that has been made in Croatia's
relationship with the Tribunal with great satisfaction.
As I stated to the Rapporteur Group for Democratic
Stability of the Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe on 7 May 2004,

"Croatian authorities have recognized the
need to enhance the capabilities of their national
judiciary for purposes of handling cases which
may be referred to its courts by the Tribunal."

The European Commission has similarly
recognized that the Croatian authorities appear
determined to improve conditions for prosecution of
alleged war criminals in domestic courts. The OSCE
Mission to Croatia likewise reported "improving
conditions for the conduct of domestic war crime
trials" and noted "growing recognition among the
public of the importance of even-handed prosecution of
war crimes". The OSCE Mission also stated that

"there is no reason to believe that the Croatian
judiciary would not be able to handle a limited
number of cases in a fair and efficient way,
particularly if assigned to those judges and
prosecutors who have already received special
training and resources".

On that front, the Tribunal has been engaged in
several expertise-sharing initiatives with Croatian
authorities with a View to preparing the national
judicial system for the referral of cases from the ICTY.

Therefore, while progress is still needed, there is
cause for optimism with regard to the potential transfer
of cases to certain courts in Croatia that have
received - or will have received - special training
and resources for the trial of war crimes cases.

The likelihood of referring cases to the courts of
Serbia and Montenegro is diminished by the poor
record of cooperation between that State and the
Tribunal in recent months. The Government of Serbia
and Montenegro appears to have taken little or no
action with regard to four high-ranking fugitives who
were indicted by the Tribunal last fall and have
remained at large for over six months. The Government
has also failed to respond to requests by our Registrar
for explanation of its default in arresting individuals
subject to Tribunal arrest warrants.

Moreover, as indicated in my letter to the
President of the Security Council of 4 May
(S/2004/353) and the Prosecutor's report dated 29
April, contained in the annex to that letter, the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro has failed to
cooperate with the Tribunal in several other important
ways.

The OSCE Mission to Serbia and Montenegro,
which monitored several war crimes proceedings
before domestic courts throughout 2003, concluded
that the national judiciary lacks the full capacity to
conduct war crimes trials in accordance with
universally recognized standards.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal remains committed to
assisting the Government of Serbia and Montenegro in
laying the groundwork for fair and effective war crimes
trials in the courts of Serbia and Montenegro. The
Tribunal recently hosted a visit, organized by the
United Nations Development Programme, by seven
judges of the newly established Department for War
Crimes at the Belgrade District Court, designed to
transfer knowledge and experience from Tribunal
personnel to the members of the Court.

In addition to the requirement of a fair trial, rule
11 bis continues to require the Trial Chamber to
consider the gravity of the crimes alleged and the level
of responsibility of the accused before referring a case
to a national jurisdiction. Those requirements reflect
the Security Council's sensible distinction. expressed
in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), between
the most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, who are to be tried at The Hague, and the
accused of intermediate and lower rank, who are
potential candidates for trial in the former Yugoslavia
or in other competent national jurisdictions. That
approach of the Council is principled and faithful to
the established mission of the Tribunal as it has been
historically understood.

There may be a temptation, in the light of the
completion strategy deadlines, to consider the referral
of cases involving even high-level accused to national
jurisdictions. Much as I am committed to the goals of
the completion strategy, I have serious reservations
about the potential referral of cases involving senior
indictees for trial in the courts of the former
Yugoslavia. The entire rationale for the establishment
of our Tribunal was to ensure trials for those most
responsible for the heinous acts of savagery committed
during the Yugoslav conflict. I do not see a rationale
for distinguishing between some senior accused and
other senior accused, as opposed to the Council's
eminently rational distinction between senior accused
and accused of intermediate or lower rank. I am
concerned that selecting some senior accused for trial
in domestic jurisdictions would inevitably raise
questions regarding equality of treatment and the
fairness of trials.

Furthermore, trials of senior accused in the
former Yugoslavia would place tremendous stress on
the still-fragile socio-political environment there.
Questions would also be raised by victims, who
routinely insist that the most senior accused be tried at
The Hague. There would also be serious problems of
witness protection, which are already a concern in the
courts of the former Yugoslavia but would be
exacerbated in the trial of a high-level defendant.
When I discussed that matter with senior officials
during my visit to Sarajevo last week, I was told that
the national judicial system and the prosecutorial
authorities are currently not able to accommodate trials
of senior Tribunal indictees.

We must be careful to ensure that our dedication
to completing the Tribunal's mandate on time does not
detract from the Tribunal's basic purposes, which are
to administer justice even-handedly and to contribute
to the restoration and maintenance of peace in the
region. To depart from the Tribunal's mission to try
those most responsible for alleged violations of
international humanitarian law risks undermining the
Security Council's decision to establish the Tribunal
and does a disservice to the cause of international
justice. A rigid and mechanistic pursuit of the
completion strategy should be avoided, as it would lead
to the espousal of trials that fall short of the guarantees
of international human rights of which the United
Nations is - and should be - protective and proud.

I would now like to discuss the current prognosis
with regard to the completion strategy and additional
measures to be taken to enable the Tribunal to meet its
deadlines.

When I last addressed the Council, in October, I
stated that the Tribunal would be able to complete the
trials of all individuals then in the custody of the
Tribunal or on provisional release within the 2008
deadline. The estimate at the time was also that it
might be possible to try two high-priority fugitives -
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic - within the
2008 deadline, provided they were tried together and
brought into custody in 2005. However, it was
estimated that an additional year beyond the end of
2008 would be needed to try all indictees who were
still at large as of October 2003.

Since my last address to the Council, three new
indictments have been submitted and unsealed, and a
fourth previously submitted indictment has been
unsealed. One of those indictments has resulted in a
guilty plea, while another concerns four high-level
Serbian officials who are still at large. The remaining
two indictments, however, have resulted in the arrival
of eight senior accused at The Hague. At present, 33
accused in 17 cases are in the Tribunal's custody or on
provisional release.

I am pleased to report that the Tribunal is still in
a position to try all of the accused currently in custody
or on provisional release before the end of 2008,
including the eight new accused who recently arrived
at The Hague. It may also be possible to try the
fugitive Ante Gotovina within that period, provided he
is transferred to The Hague before 2006 and tried
together with two other co-accused.
There would be capacity to hold additional trials
if persons currently in custody or on provisional
release decide to plead guilty or are referred to
domestic jurisdictions for trials under rule 11 bis. Since
rule 11 bis referrals can be ordered by a Trial Chamber
only after consideration of the facts of each particular
case, it is not appropriate for me to offer predictions as
to how many cases are likely to be so referred.
However, as an example, if five cases of persons
currently in custody or on provisional release are
referred to national jurisdictions, it should be possible
to hold an additional major - I emphasize major -
trial before the end of 2008.

However, if any additional senior-level
accused - whether they are already indicted fugitives
or newly indicted accused - surrender to or are
transferred to the Tribunal, it may not be possible to
hold separate trials of those individuals within the 2008
deadline. Currently, there are eight indictments
outstanding that have not resulted in an arrest or
surrender. Those indictments involve 18 accused,
including Karadzic and Mladic. My understanding is
that the Prosecutor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte, may submit
up to six additional indictments involving 11 suspects.
It is therefore possible that additional senior-level
accused - who, under existing Security Council
guidelines, would not be suitable candidates for
referral to national jurisdictions for trial - will arrive
at the Tribunal in the future. Such arrivals would make
completion of all trial work by the end of 2008
impossible, although there may be some relief to the
docket through guilty pleas or referrals to national
jurisdictions.

All of those predictions are necessarily tentative.
It is possible that several cases might be deemed
appropriate for transfer to domestic jurisdictions or that
several high-level accused will choose to plead guilty.
Absent such outcomes, however, the Tribunal will not
be able to accommodate any additional trials beyond
those of the accused who are currently in custody or on
provisional release within the deadlines of the
completion strategy.

I now wish to turn to the most important
measures that, I believe, need to be taken in order to
enable the Tribunal to maintain and improve upon its
current level of productivity. Three measures deserve
special mention: staffing, election of judges and
cooperation by Member States.

The completion strategy poses a particular
staffing challenge - namely, that the Tribunal must
ensure that it can work at full speed until the very end
of its existence. The recruitment and retention of
qualified and highly motivated staff are essential yet
very difficult, given that other institutions can offer
more senior positions and longer-term career
opportunities. That problem has been exacerbated by
arrears in payment of assessments by Member States,
which led the Secretariat to impose a recruitment
freeze on the Tribunal in May 2004.

The current financial shortfall in contributions
from Member States has resulted in an unacceptable
and disruptive effect on the work of the Tribunal.
Unless we are able to replace staff members who
occupy critical posts that are necessary to the conduct
of cases, we will be forced to delay, suspend or stop
trials. That would be disastrous in terms of the
Tribunal's ability to remain on track with respect to the
completion strategy, and it would convey the wrong
message to the international community, especially the
region of the former Yugoslavia. A lack of adequate
funds for the Tribunal to conduct its trials would be
taken as a lack of commitment on the part of the
international community to the rule of law and to
international justice.

The Security Council established the Tribunal
with a View to ending impunity and to bringing alleged
criminals to justice. Our work is now imperilled. I
appeal to the Council, as the policy-making organ that
decided that international justice and the rule of law
must be upheld and that some of the worst crimes since
the Second World War should not be allowed to go
unpunished, to examine this situation and take
whatever measures are necessary for us to continue our
work and accomplish the goals of the completion
strategy.

The international community cannot, on the one
hand, expect the Tribunal to complete its work in an
efficient and effective manner while, on the other hand,
withholding the resources necessary to ensure that the
Tribunal is able to function. Indeed, the inability to
recruit qualified personnel - even to replace staff
members who leave - is a serious threat not only to
the completion strategy but to the very ability of the
Tribunal to continue its daily work. Should the arrears
and the freeze continue, it is only a question of time
before serious slowdowns occur. In a court of law,
where defendants have the right to their day in court
and to a speedy trial, such resource-driven delays are
unacceptable.

I therefore appeal to all Member States that owe
outstanding amounts - and especially to the
Governments which are responsible for the bulk of the
arrears - to heed the repeated calls of the Secretary-
General for immediate payment of these assessments.
Payments by smaller contributors are equally
important: although the amounts involved in most
cases are so low as to be virtually painless for the
Governments concerned, they add up significantly.
Their non-payment sends a distressing signal of
indifference by the membership towards international
justice. I have personally approached Governments
urging them to make payment and will appear together
with my colleague and friend President Mose before
members of the General Assembly's Fifth and Sixth
Committees in a meeting kindly organized by the
Government of the Netherlands, which is our host
country. If payment is not made promptly, and if the
freeze therefore continues in place, suspensions in
cases will likely become inevitable.

The second point concerns the election of
permanent judges of the Tribunal. I have previously
raised with the Council, both through a letter dated
13 January 2004 (S/2004/53, annex) and through
additional documents submitted to the Council's
informal working group on the ICTY and ICTR, that
disruption of the work of the Tribunal would be
unavoidable if, as past practice indicates, some judges
were not re-elected to the new mandate beginning on
17 November 2005. The Security Council has not taken
any action on this matter, and I respect its prerogatives.
I hope that disruptions in the work of the Tribunal can
be avoided, as they would if all currently sitting judges
were re-elected; but such an outcome, of course, cannot
be guaranteed.

Given that it appears that the judicial election
will take place, it is important that it be scheduled in a
way that will minimize any effect on the Tribunal's
work. On 17 June, I met with the Secretary-General
and, at the unanimous request of the judges of the
Tribunal, requested that he consider that the election be
held in mid-November 2004 rather than in March 2005
as prior practice would indicate. The advantage of
bringing the election forward to a date one year before
the beginning of the new mandate is that it would
enable the assignment of longer cases to panels of
judges who have been re-elected for the new mandate,
thus reducing the danger of disruption of a case. I am
happy to report that the Secretary-General has accepted
that suggestion and will send out letters to
Governments in July inviting nominations. I call on
Governments to submit their nominations as soon as
practicable, taking into account, to the extent possible,
the stability of the Tribunal.

I also remind the Council that the mandate of all
ad litem judges at the Tribunal will expire on 11 June
2005. Since ad litem judges cannot be re-elected under
the present Statute, the Council will have to take some
action to address the situation. I will discuss this matter
further with the Secretary-General and the Security
Council in the autumn.

The final point that deserves mention in the
category of measures yet to be taken in furtherance of
the completion strategy is improved cooperation by
Member States. The failure of the States of the former
Yugoslavia to arrest and transfer Radovan Karadzic,
Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina to the Tribunal is a
major impediment to the successful completion of the
Tribunal's mandate. As I have stated to the Council
before, the Tribunal's mission cannot be said to be
complete until those three fugitives have been tried
before the Tribunal. Mechanical pursuit of the
completion strategy must not lead to impunity for those
accused.

I View the completion strategy as entirely
compatible with the Security Council's aim in setting
up the Tribunal in the first place: it is a practical
manifestation of the international community's
commitment to delivering justice credibly and
effectively to the region, thereby contributing to
reconciliation. I am concerned, however, that the
completion strategy has led to the View that the
Tribunal now has a fixed termination date and
therefore no longer needs the support of the
international community. It certainly appears that some
in the former Yugoslavia think that, by hiding from
arrest, they can wait out the Tribunal until it goes
away.

The completion strategy rests on the assumption
that the Tribunal will continue to receive the financial
and political support of Member States that is needed
to carry out its work. It does not matter how productive
or efficient the Tribunal becomes if it cannot recruit
and retain staff, if judges sitting on lengthy trials must
be replaced, or if many senior accused remain at large.
No amount of structural reform or hard work on the
part of the Tribunal will solve those problems. Rather,
the international community must reaffirm its
commitment to the Tribunal's work and to the
elimination of impunity for violations of humanitarian
law by removing those obstacles from the Tribunal's
path. The completion strategy will not become a reality
if Member States start to back away from the Tribunal.
The Security Council's establishment of the
Tribunal recognized the important contribution that the
recognition of individual criminal responsibility plays
in the preservation of peace and recognized the need
for a mechanism for the trial and punishment of serious
violations of international humanitarian law. That
initiative has borne fruit not just through the Tribunal's
holding of fair and transparent war crimes trials in its
own cases, but also through the legacy of procedural
and substantive jurisprudence that is already providing
guidance to the ICTR and to the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, and that will no doubt likewise guide the
International Criminal Court and future national war
crimes trials. I urge the members of the Council to
continue their support for the Tribunal and to ensure
that the Tribunal is given the means necessary to fulfil
its promise and its full potential. In return, the Tribunal
will continue to take all available steps to carry out its
work in a timely and effective manner so that persons
alleged to have committed the most serious crimes
known to humanity are called to account.

