Mr. Ellwood (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate
on the Victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or
religious grounds in the Middle East. I also thank
the Secretary-General and all of the briefers for their
thoughtful and sobering statements.

Last week I had the somber privilege of speaking
alongside Kurdish friends at the United Kingdom
event marking the chemical attack in Halabja, Iraq,
in 1988. On 14 April, the United Kingdom will mark

Anfal Memorial Day. As a former soldier, I served in
Northern Ireland, the Middle East and on mainland
Europe, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have
seen at first hand the devastating and enduring impact
of attacks against ethnic and religious groups.
My message today is this: the key to ending the
suffering of ethnic and religious groups in the Middle
East is leadership - bold leadership that promotes
tolerance and stands up against hatred; leadership that
brings groups together, regardless of their ethnicity,
religion, belief, gender or sexual orientation, and
enables their full participation in society.

I welcome the Secretary-General's announcement
today of the establishment of an advisory panel of
experts, and Foreign Minister Fabius' proposal for a
conference to consider the findings of the panel.

We look to the future, but we can also learn from
the past. The past gives us hope, and the Middle East,
described by Foreign Minister Jose Manuel Garcia
Margallo as the cradle of civilizations, has long been
admired for its history of tolerance and cosmopolitanism
and for being what His Beatitude described as a mosaic
of religions.

Before Daesh began its brutal war against the
citizens of Iraq and Syria, Assyrians and Yazidis had
lived for millenniums alongside the Muslim majority.
Even in the recent past, leaders have boldly stepped
forth in the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance. In
1977, for example, Egyptian President Sadat stunned
the world when he became the first Arab leader to visit
Israel. Initially seen as an unpopular move after so
many years of conflict, it fundamentally changed the
relationship for the better.

But, in 2015, Daesh's actions have underlined
the urgent need for today's moderate voices and bold
leaders to make themselves heard. Daesh is slaughtering
Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Their cruelty knows
no bounds. The recent United Nations report on Iraq
describes Daesh's widespread abuses, including
killings, torture, rape and sexual slavery, forced
religious conversions and the conscription of children,
along with other horrific stories. For example, my
parliamentary colleague from Iraq, Mrs. Vian Dakhil,
articulated in her extremely passionate speech how
Yazidi girls and women are openly sold or handed over
as gifts to Daesh ministers, with witnesses describing
the screams of girls as young as six and nine as they
were raped by Daesh fighters.

Daesh is also destroying our shared cultural
history. As was mentioned by the President of the

Council, the ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud was
bulldozed. The human-headed bull statutes of ancient
Nineveh were literally defaced by pneumatic drill,
and priceless artifacts have been sold to fund Daesh's
brutality. But as the problem is wider than Daesh, our
response must be broad as well. Under articles 18 and
20 of the International Convenant on Civil and Political
Rights, each United Nations State Member has a duty to
protect all of its people. But how should we support that
in the Middle East? We must degrade and ultimately
defeat Daesh, working through the global coalition. As
the United Kingdom's Minister for the Middle East, a
large proportion of my time has been devoted to the
diplomatic efforts.

The other immediate priority is the appalling
humanitarian crisis that is taking place across Syria and
Iraq, where 11.4 million Syrians and over 2.5 million
Iraqis have fled their homes. The United Kingdom has
been at the forefront, helping to protect the Yazidis on
Mount Sinjar, contributing $12 billion to the Syrian
crisis, and nearly $60 million to Iraq.

With over 220,000 killed and over 2 million people
displaced in Syria, a generation is being denied the
education that they need and deserve. One day the
guns will fall silent in Syria, and the international
community must do its part to help educate free Syrians
and refugees so that there are, for example, doctors,
farmers, teachers and civil servants to help the country
get off its knees. We need others to step up urgently at
the pledging conference that will take place in Kuwait
next week. That is the opportunity to do so. However
more must be done to address the sexual Violence and
conflict, and to support survivors. That is why we hosted
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
last June, and produced an international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence in
conflict.

The Iraqi Government is the first in the region to
have a national action plan on women and peace and
security; but it needs our international support. To that
end, the United Kingdom and Canada recently set up
a scoping mission to Iraq, and are working with the
Iraqi Government to implement the recommendations.
However, the best defence against radicalization, the
best guarantee of stability and sustainable growth the
world over, is inclusive and accountable Government.
That will not happen overnight. It will not happen in
a year or, indeed, a decade. It will be the work of a
generation. But it is work that is crucial nonetheless. In
Britain, we have learned this the hard way. The Magna
Carta, whose eight hundredth anniversary we mark this
year, did not create a free and just society overnight.
Rather it was a critical step in an incremental process,

peppered with setbacks, civil wars and religious
persecution, towards the parliamentary democracy we
know today. But while the work in the Middle East
could take a generation, we must not let it take eight
centuries.

In the past, ideas could travel only as fast as a person
on a horse spreading the word from town to town. Now
ideas can be shared with the touch of a button. We can,
and must, be quicker to foster such ideas to enable the
creation of inclusive, representative Governments. On
that note, I should also say we should be mindful of
how modern technology, the Internet, is being hijacked
to promote extremism and incite violence. We all have
a role to play in tackling extremism. For example, I
commend the exceptional work in Lebanon of Mufti
Deryan, who I met recently, to build bridges between
faith communities to end extremism and terror. We must
give our full support to the Middle East peace process
and to the two-State solution to prevent more suffering
and an uncertain and dangerous future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. We must also continue to seek peace
in Syria. We should not fall for the regime's specious
argument that it can protect minorities. Al-Assad's
actions have fuelled sectarian Violence, and his regime
is ultimately responsible for the deaths of hundreds
of thousands of civilians. The Syrian people deserve
a more accountable, inclusive, representative form of
governance than Al-Assad could ever offer.

We, the international community, must heed
early warnings and seek to prevent atrocities before
they begin, as we did last year in the Central African
Republic. But where preventative action fails or comes
too late, then there must be no impunity for perpetrators.
Justice is neither easy nor quick, but it is essential.
From Rwanda to Yugoslavia, South Africa to Northern
Ireland, history has shown that peace can be built only
on accountability andjustice.

Finally, we must counter Daesh's twisted narrative
through education and good governance. We need to
underline the responsibility of authorities and civil
society alike to support counternarratives and tackle
what the High Commissioner for Human Rights calls
the toxins of extremism. And we must engage and
empower women to help build the secure, stable and
prosperous Middle East that we all want. We call on
the Governments in the region to guarantee freedom
of religion for all their people, as laid down in article
18 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. When children are brought up to
respect followers of all religions, and of none, extremist
ideologies will wither and die.

In conclusion, during this United Nations anniversary
year, let us take inspiration from its founders and our
shared history. Let our bold leaders, whether of countries
or indeed of communities, continue doing the vital
work for tolerance and reconciliation. To those leaders,
I will end with this: as together we tackle Daesh, as we
address the humanitarian crisis in Syria, as we build
a more stable, inclusive and more prosperous Middle
East, they should know that they have the support of the
United Kingdom.

