Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh
Annadif and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for their comprehensive
briefings on the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) over the past three months and the
implementation of the Mali sanctions regime.

We are pleased to see the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly,
who is with us in the Security Council this morning.

We wish to pay tribute to the memory of the
fallen peacekeepers serving under MINUSMA. Their
greatest reward would be the restoration of full security
and peace in Mali. It is in that spirit that we strongly
condemn the series of terrorist attacks in Mali that
claimed the lives of innocent civilians and MINUSMA
peacekeepers. We express our sympathy and solidarity
with Mali, and we support all the statements issued by
the Council in this regard.

We appreciate the efforts of MINUSMA forces
in carrying out their mandated tasks under extremely
difficult circumstances. MINUSMA's ongoing support
to Mali remains absolutely essential. It is indispensable,
as Ambassador Delattre said. That is also the case
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
to which we attach great importance. We welcome
the various efforts that have contributed to its full
operationalization. We acknowledge the contributions
of Operation Barkhane and of the European Union.
In the political area, we note with satisfaction
the appointment of a new Prime Minister and his
activities in working with the various stakeholders,
including fostering an environment conducive to
holding peaceful, credible and transparent elections
throughout the country. We very much welcome the
preparations made for the conduct of regional, district
and municipal elections scheduled to be held this month
and call upon all Malian parties to work towards the
smooth conduct of these elections, exercise maximum
restraint and resolve differences through dialogue. The
announcement made by the Prime Minister regarding
the measures to restore State authority and deliver
peace dividends to the people is also commendable.

It is encouraging that a timeline on the
implementation of the key provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was developed by
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, and we urge
that efforts be made for the speedy implementation
of the timeline and the strict implementation of the
peace Agreement. Those who are found to be creating
obstructions should be held responsible in line with
resolution 2374 (2017).

Despite the progressive registered, the continued
deterioration of the security situation in Mali largely
due to the terrorist attacks in the north and the centre
of the country remains a source of serious concern.
The destructive intentions of the terrorist groups to
undermine State authority has resulted in a decrease in
the number of State officials redeployed to the northern
and central regions. The insecurity in northern and
central Mali and the limited State presence has also
worsened the humanitarian situation. Urgent action is
therefore needed to quickly reverse this situation.

We recall when Mali was a leading democratic
country in Africa and a beacon ofhope for the continent.
There is no reason why Mali could not reach that status
again. It is with a view to assisting Mali regain the
momentum to achieve that noble objective that the
Council should do everything possible to have Mali's
back. As Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Annadif has stressed, our support should not
be limited to the security area, as much that is no doubt
extremely critical.

