Mr. Matnssek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Serbia, and the EFTA country
Iceland, member of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align
themselves with this declaration.

The European Union would like to thank the
Russian Federation, as presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing this very timely debate on the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission following the
first two rounds of country-specific meetings.

The European Union sees the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission as a key achievement of
the United Nations reform process. Together with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, it forms the core of the United Nations new
peacebuilding architecture. As a flexible instrument,
the Peacebuilding Commission is "learning by doing".
In our view, members should be willing to work
creatively within the given framework.

From its inception, the European Union has
supported the concept of the Commission as a body
that will ensure an integrated approach to
peacebuilding, taking into account the links between
security, development, human rights and the rule of
law. That very much corresponds to the European
Union's comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention, development and peacebuilding. Over the
years, the European Union has developed and used an
array of instruments. They include political and
development-related tools, as well as conflict
prevention and crisis management mechanisms.

The European Union, the States members of the
European Union and the European Community engage
in peacebuilding activities worldwide - in Africa and
Asia, as well as in the Middle East, Europe, Central
Asia and Latin America. European member States and
the European Community fund and implement projects
in all areas of peacebuilding. A few such important
areas include demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform, good governance, reconciliation efforts,
child- and gender-related post-conflict assistance,
trade-related measures and reconstruction operations.
The European Union is committed to actively
supporting the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
on the basis of its experience, resources and worldwide
operability.

The Peacebuilding Commission has got off to a
good start. After only two sets of country-specific
meetings, it has identified areas of priority action for
the two countries under consideration. The
Commission has also established a dialogue among
Governments concerned, the United Nations system,
institutional donors, regional actors and members of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Now, the
recommendations of the Commission must be
implemented in the countries concerned and within the
institutional framework of the United Nations. Here,
the Commission also needs the support of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council, and dialogue must be broadened in the
countries concerned to include national civil society,
the private sector and other relevant parties.

One year after its establishment, the Commission
will also have to make decisions as to its strategic
goals. If the Commission is to add value to
peacebuilding efforts worldwide, and particularly in
the countries themselves, it will have to be ambitious.
It will have to be more than the tools we already have,
more than a mere coordination mechanism, and more
than a donors' conference. Promoting the development
of a viable peacebuilding strategy that has broad
ownership is where the Peacebuilding Commission can
really add value.

The European Union would like to contribute to
the discussion among the Commission's members on
structuring the future work of the Commission and its
interaction with other actors. In doing so, we would
draw on our own experience in coordinating European
Union programmes, as well as on the experience of the
first country-specific meetings.

The Commission has defined general areas of
priority for each country under consideration. It will
now be useful to further prioritize within those areas,
in consultation with the countries concerned, United
Nations country teams, donors, civil society and the
private sector.

Defining priorities necessarily means making a
selection among a huge number of possible areas of
engagement. The Peacebuilding Commission should
focus on areas that have a direct and traceable link to
the causes of conflict, areas in which instruments of so-
called classical development are not available or
functional, and areas where coordination and
integration are especially needed. All peacebuilding
initiatives in the field should be linked to existing
strategies and programmes to avoid duplication of
efforts.

We want the Commission to be able to work
coherently, continuously and in a result-oriented way.
To achieve that, the Commission should focus on
activities in the field. It should enhance cooperation
with all relevant actors, including donors and non-State
actors. It should make use of regular informal meetings
in between formal meetings and find a way to capture
and condense lessons learned from its work.

The Security Council has started to discuss its
relation to the Peacebuilding Commission, how to
intensify communication between the Council and the
Commission, and how best to achieve implementation
of advice from the Commission. A similar dialogue is
getting under way between the Commission and the
General Assembly with the upcoming open debate in
that organ. The European Union welcomes those
efforts and also recognizes the contribution that the
Economic and Social Council can make.

There are many ways to enhance cooperation
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Regular meetings
between the Commission chairs and the presidents of
those bodies would be one possibility. Invitations to
the chairs and the chairs of country-specific meetings
to brief those bodies would be another.

The European Union remains committed to
working on integrated peacebuilding strategies with the
Peacebuilding Commission and with the countries
concerned. We are determined to make that key project
of United Nations reform a success and to make its
impact felt positively in the regions where the
Peacebuilding Commission is engaged.

