Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to express our appreciation to
Baroness Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her cross-cutting briefing on the
engagements of the European Union (EU) and its
relations with the United Nations.

A new phase in the EU's history started more
than a year ago with the entry into force of the Treaty
of Lisbon. The Treaty provides the European Union
with tools to strengthen and simplify its international
representation. During the past year, the European
External Action Service was created under the able
leadership of Lady Ashton. The Service should reach
its full potential in 2011, resulting in the EU's
increased aptitude for maintaining international peace
and security, combating poverty and providing
humanitarian assistance, to mention some of the
significant areas ofthe EU's activities.

Challenges and risks to international peace and
security require a multidimensional and multilateral
response. It is therefore commendable that the
European Union and the United Nations are jointly
addressing major global crises in the Middle East, the
Sudan, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Chad and Haiti. The European Union and the

United Nations share a strong commitment to peace
consolidation, the rule of law and socio-economic
development in post-conflict societies. Hence tangible
results have been achieved in those areas. However, we
believe that there is always room for improvement in
the multidimensional approach to which I have
referred.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has had rather intensive
cooperation and interaction with a variety of actors in
the international community in its recent history. One
of the lessons learned during the international
engagement in our country was that all actors of the
international community - civilian, military,
economic and political - should speak with one voice.
The Security Council presidential statement issued
under the symbol S/PRST/2011/2 underscores that
more coherent and coordinated actions represent an
essential precondition for the success of every mission
undertaken by international community actors -
whether the United Nations or the EU or UNHCR, the
World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme or the International Organization of la
Francophonie.

Bosnia and Herzegovina therefore strongly
encourages the European Union to be more vocal in the
United Nations, with a View to establishing adequate
coordination mechanisms for better coherence and
efficiency of EU and United Nations military and
civilian operations. The role of the EU is especially
important when it comes to the issue of sharing
experiences and improving coordination with other
regional and subregional organizations, especially with
the African Union.

Finally, as a member of the Security Council and
potential candidate for EU membership, Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains fully committed to bolstering and
developing cooperation and effective partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, including the European
Union.

