Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of October and
thank you for convening this open meeting on a matter
of grave concern to the whole United Nations
membership. May I also commend the diligent work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee under the competent
leadership of Ambassador Arias.

In the aftermath of the shocking tragedy of 11
September 2001, a broad international coalition
emerged to fight the dreadful scourge of terrorism.
Alas, we have to admit that, in spite of all the efforts
by the international community, terrorism is still on the
rise, from Bali to Moscow, from Casablanca to

Bombay. Moreover, the very symbol of peace - the
United Nations - suffered a brutal terrorist attack in
Baghdad this August.

All these events shed new light on the
phenomenon of terrorism, since they demonstrate so
distinctly that no nation and no individual is immune
from this scourge. Terrorism affects the security and
political and economic stability of all nations. At the
same time, no nation is able to successfully fight this
threat alone. As a global threat, terrorism must be
fought by means of a broad international reaction in
which measures at the national level are complemented
and supported by effective regional and international
cooperation.

It is imperative that all Member States increase
their cooperation in the fight against terrorism and
abide by the principles of the international conventions
and protocols relating to terrorism. Armenia stresses
the significance of an internationally agreed-upon
definition of terrorism. We believe that the adoption of
a common definition will enhance the collective efforts
to eradicate that evil. Armenia is fully committed to
continuing to work with the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) to combat terrorism, and we are
determined to contribute to all actions undertaken by
the United Nations towards that end.

Under the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001),
we have presented two reports to the Committee, and
another is due to be presented by the end of this month.
I would like to extend our appreciation to the
Committee and its secretariat for the vital contribution
they are providing in combating this global evil.

Conferences and seminars under the counter-
terrorism agenda taking place in different parts of the
world are an encouraging sign of the growing trend
toward multilateral cooperation in combating terrorism.
These kinds of international and regional events have
taken place in Armenia, also with the valuable support
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

There is nothing inherent in any religion or
civilization that generates terrorism. Terrorism by itself
is considered primarily the weapon of the politically
weak or frustrated, those who believe themselves to be
unable to redress their grievances through conventional
political or military means.

Whatever the causes, the actions of terrorists can
never be justified. However illegitimate terrorism is,
the root causes must be addressed for anti-terrorism
efforts to have a greater chance of success. We must
collectively undertake measures to change policies that
victimize vulnerable populations. Such victims often
hold others responsible for their suffering and thus
become easy recruits for terrorist organizations.
The United Nations should redouble its efforts in
the fields of economic development and poverty
eradication, since these are strategic battlefields in the
war against terrorism. Crafting a policy based on the
promotion of and respect for human rights,
international law and sustainable development would
probably make the world a much safer place.

