Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this open debate on a subject of such paramount
importance to all Member States as justice and the rule
of law. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the subject of how this issue should be applied in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2011/634*).

Colombia attaches great importance to the
maintenance and strengthening of judicial institutions
and to efficiency and effectiveness in the
administration of justice. In Colombia, international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
are a part of our constitutional foundation, bringing a
moral force to constitutional principles and taking
precedence in the domestic legal system. In applying
that moral foundation we act on our strong belief in its
underlying principles.

The Secretary-General's report notes a number of
initiatives by the Government of Colombia, especially
in the areas of reparation, judicial reform and
coordination with the United Nations team. Those
initiatives testify to our commitment in this matter. We
appreciate the interest in the Colombian Government's
formulating and implementing measures to guarantee
the rights of victims to truth, justice and reparation.
Examples include Act 975 of 2005, the Justice and
Peace Act, which sets out provisions for the
reintegration of extra-legal armed groups, and the more
recent 2011 Act 1448, the Victims and Land-
Restitution Act, which sets out means for care,
assistance and full reparation for Victims of internal
armed conflict. Those measures can serve as a
reference point in discussing strengthening the rule of
law in situations such as Colombia's.

We welcome the support that the United Nations
can provide in strengthening the rule of law, especially
the Security Council's contribution in situations on its
agenda and under its jurisdiction. We well know the
slow, arduous path to the full realization of the rule of
law. We are striving to pursue that path and to achieve
well-being and prosperity for all our citizens.

In our determination to build confidence in
institutions, we have developed programmes such as
the Crystal Urn, an online resource provided by the
national Government to give citizens an active hand in
the conduct of government. In a similar vein are the
"pact for prosperity" meetings held weekly around the
country and attended by the President and many of his
ministers, as well as the establishment of the High
Presidential Commission for Good Governance and
Administrative Efficiency. Both are impeccable
opportunities for direct interaction between the
Government and the people and bespeak our clear
awareness of the immediate needs of our people. We
are also aware of the responsibility to properly
administer justice. Act 1935 of 2010, which sets out
measures to clear up court congestion, aims to make
the judiciary a more effective tool for the speedy and
full administration of justice for all citizens.
Colombia wants to underline the importance,
when analysing such situations, of taking into account
the particular characteristics of each situation,
including the diversity of judicial traditions and

foundations, as well as differences in background, to
avoid generalized concepts that may not apply to the
reality on the ground. We strongly emphasize the
importance of the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, adopting a spirit of cooperation with
Member States in addressing areas needing
improvement in the sphere of strengthening the rule of
law. To that end, we should bolster communication
among the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council.

The credibility of measures adopted by the
Security Council lies in their effectiveness in restoring
international peace and security. Faced with complex,
multidimensional issues such as restoring the rule of
law, strengthening justice systems, fostering gender
equality and protecting children requires interventions
that promote those goals effectively and in a long-term,
sustainable way.

In conclusion, United Nations actions in such
matters work best when they complement the efforts of
States. It is hard to imagine that decisions adopted by
the Security Council in an abstract framework of
generally applied themes will work in particular
situations, if contrary to the course set by legitimately
constituted authorities for strengthening the rule of law.

