Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): It is
my honour, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, of
which I am chairman for this month, to extend to you,
Sir, our sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. We are fully confident that, with your experience
and diplomatic skill, you will lead the work of the
Council to a successful outcome. I also extend to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Argentina, our thanks and appreciation for his wise
conduct of the Council's work last month.

The Arab Group submitted a request to hold a
public meeting on the issue in View of the seriousness
of the developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Israel, the occupying Power, has, over the
past few days, continued an intensive attack against the
Gaza Strip in a campaign entitled Operation Southern
Arrow. During 48 hours of that campaign, 17
Palestinians lost their lives.

The Israeli army has used heavy weaponry of all
kinds, including rockets and attack helicopters, and has
indiscriminately shelled farms and civilian houses. The
bombing has been so powerful that innocent civilians
have been blown to pieces due to the force of the
explosions. The number of limbless or headless corpses
arriving in hospitals is staggering. Israeli attacks
against the Palestinians have continued daily, auguring
serious consequences if Israel continues with that
violent approach.

This military escalation by Israel is one of a
series of measures against the Palestinian Authority
intended to punish it and the Palestinian people for
having elected, by an overwhelming majority, Hamas,
which has been able to form a new Palestinian
Government. These measures include a complete
boycott of the Palestinian Authority and the severing of
all contacts and security coordination with the
Palestinians, in violation of international law and the
agreements signed between the two parties. The
Palestinian people's choice of its own Government was
made freely and democratically and was the result of
the Palestinian legislative elections that took place on
25 January, reflecting the free will of the Palestinian
people as it exercised its democratic rights. Those
elections were also certified by international observers
to be free and fair.

Based upon our strong belief in democratic
choice, we consider that all parties should respect the
outcome of that constitutional process in spite of the
extremely difficult environment in which the elections
were conducted and the continued Israeli military
harassment. Immediately after the elections, Israel took
a series of measures, including economic punishment
through the withholding of tax and customs revenues
owed to the Palestinians, in the knowledge that those
revenues are rightfully due the Palestinian people.

Israel has also taken other punitive measures by
boycotting the elected Palestinian Authority almost
completely, and by refusing all support to that
Government, thus putting further political pressure on
it. In addition, Israel has conducted brutal and
intensive military attacks against the Palestinian
people.

We are at a loss to understand what Israel hopes
to accomplish by its actions. If it wishes to have a
partner in a peace process, it cannot have a better
partner than the one freely chosen by the Palestinian
people. Those Israeli measures, in addition to others
taken over the past few days, have all been aimed at
intensifying and escalating the illegal unilateral
measures taken against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including in East
Jerusalem.

The Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Ehud Olmert,
has announced a unilateral plan to demarcate Israel's
borders over the next four years, in order to fully
control major strategic areas in the West Bank and to
maintain extensive settlements in those territories and
in East Jerusalem, in an attempt to legitimize the
confiscation of those lands. The plan includes a
complete denial of the rights of the Palestinian people,
in contravention of international law, Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions and the road map
and will thus in practical terms put an end to the two-
State solution.

The Israeli occupation is the crux of the conflict
in the region. We believe the best solution to all the
problem is Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan, a halt to
unilateral measures that would change the legal status
of the Golan, an end to Israel's repeated violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and a complete withdrawal from
the Shab'a farms in implementation of relevant
international resolutions.

The Palestinian people, who have for so long
suffered oppression and humiliation under Israeli
occupation, are now in greater need than ever of real
assistance from the international community with a
view to reaching a just and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question. This must come about by
peaceful means, as chosen by the Palestinian people,
and not through military measures, which have proven
ineffective over the years.

Two weeks ago in Khartoum, on 28 and
29 March, at the eighteenth Arab summit, the
importance of reaching a comprehensive and just
solution to the Palestinian question through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital was stressed. The summit
rejected all unilateral Israeli measures and called for a
halt to the construction of the separation barrier on
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and
other Palestinian lands. The Arab summit also called
for reactivation of the 2002 Arab peace initiative
adopted at Beirut and called on Israel to withdraw
completely from all Arab territories occupied since
June 1967, in implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as other
relevant resolutions, and in conformity with the
principle of land for peace.

We demand that Israel put an end to its policy of
starving the Palestinians, that it end the economic and
political blockade it is imposing upon them and that it
cease all its military operations against the Palestinian
people.

We call upon the Security Council and the
Quartet to shoulder their responsibility with regard to
these Israeli violations in order to ensure a
comprehensive and peaceful solution of the Palestinian
question, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, the road map and the Arab peace initiative.

