Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, may I also
express our delegation's words of congratulations to
the Secretary-General and assure him of our continued
wholehearted support.

Mr. President, we welcome your initiative to
conduct a wrap-up session of the work of the Security
Council in this chamber. As you yourself noted,
previous wrap-up sessions were conducted in the
informal consultations, and members of the general
membership had no opportunity to listen to what we
were saying about the work of the Council. We
therefore feel that your initiative testifies to your
delegation's dedication to the promotion of
transparency in the work of the Council and
enhancement of its accountability to the general
membership, on whose behalf the Council exercises its
functions under the Charter. The Singapore delegation
fully supports these very important objectives.

We feel that it is a good exercise to ask ourselves
periodically if we have had a positive impact on the
issues that arose for the Council's consideration each
month; and, if we have not had a positive impact, we
think that we should ask ourselves why, try to find out
the reasons, identify the steps that the Council can take
and the tools that the Council can try to find and use to
inject momentum and progress. Also, of course, the
whole objective is to draw lessons, where appropriate,
so that we can apply them in the future.

From the outset, Mr. President, we note that you
had prepared a very full programme. You had even
managed to lead a Security Council mission to Kosovo
in the middle of the month. Time does not allow me to
make an exhaustive review of the work of the
Bangladeshi presidency, but I would like to touch on
some of the items that we feel are important. Basically,
we would like to give our views on where we feel the
Council has done well and where we could have done
better.

On the substantive issues, let us start with
Burundi. We feel that it was right to keep a close watch
on the volatile developments in Burundi. As to the
statement that you read just this morning, while an
important one, we feel that we should have had a more
reflective discussion so that we could agree on the
steps that the Council should take to bolster the highly
fragile peace process in cooperation with the regional
organizations and other relevant actors. Therefore, we
look forward to further discussion on this issue fairly
soon so that we can build on the outlines of our policy
on Burundi.

In relation to Western Sahara, it is obvious that
discussions on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) was not just a routine affair this
month. We feel that this marked a turning point. Here
the Council was faced with a difficult choice on this
long-standing item on its agenda, and there were
deeply held interests and principles that we needed to
reconcile. The shared objective, however, which we
note was positive - that is to say, that we deliver a
clear mandate to the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General - would not unfairly compromise the just
interests of the parties. However, in keeping with the
responsibility of the Council as a whole, to exercise
due diligence before taking action, we would have
preferred to have a fuller discussion in the Council on
the terms of the draft resolution to extend MINURSO's
mandate. In our View, it also raised the issue of the
"Group of Friends" practice and whether we can
improve our working methods in this regard.

On the substance of the matter, of course, we will
fully support the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy for Western Sahara, Mr. James Baker III, over
the next five months in their efforts to find a mutually
acceptable political solution, including possibly on the
basis of the draft framework agreement or any other
proposal that may be submitted.

On Kosovo, we found the activities very useful,
especially the important stop in Belgrade. It allowed
the Council to update itself on the recent developments
in Kosovo and the wider region and assess the impact
on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is also
commendable, Mr. President, that you convened an
open debate to enable non-members to express their
views on issues that arose out of the mission.

We feel that Kosovo is not yet out of the woods.
Many problems of a fundamental nature remain, not
least among them, the issue of inter-ethnic
reconciliation. There are also differences within the
Council of which we need to be aware and that we
should bridge. Nevertheless, it should be recalled that
Kosovo is a ward of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole, and we should not
spare any effort to build a consensus within the Council
on our policy in Kosovo, of course within the
framework of existing Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1244 (1999).

On Afghanistan, while the Council discussed the
report and recommendations of the Committee of
Experts in an open debate, we feel that there is a need
for the Council to follow up on the recommendations
of the Committee, and we also hope that there will
soon be an opportunity for the Council to engage in a
discussion on finding a well-defined long-term and
comprehensive strategy on Afghanistan. We fully
appreciate that adequate preparation must be made, and
intensive consultations have to be undertaken, if such a
discussion is to be substantive and useful, but we hope
to have such a discussion soon.

In relation to the situation in the Middle East, we
appreciate the updates which the Council has received
on the efforts of the Secretary-General, particularly in
connection with his recent visit to the region. The
situation in the Middle East remains delicate, and the
Council should continue to remain actively seized of
this matter and follow developments there closely.

On Iraq, work on this issue focused on the
follow-up to resolution 1352 (2001), which was
adopted very early in your presidency, Sir. It was right
and timely, we feel, that you responded swiftly to the
request of the Russian Federation and convened a
public meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait.

The open debate attracted the largest number of
speakers from outside the Council this month,
demonstrating the importance attached by the
international community to the work of the Council on
its sanctions policy towards Iraq and the Iraq
humanitarian programme.

The work of the Council on this issue, as we all
know, is not complete, and we will have informal
consultations this afternoon to enable us to further
discuss the draft resolution proposed by the United
Kingdom. While we are not altogether sure whether we
will be able to remove all of the difficulties and reach
an agreement, we should recall the statements made by
several non-members of the Council suggesting that the
Council should not squander the present opportunity to
inject greater focus into the Iraq humanitarian
programme and address many of the perceived
shortcomings of the programme.

Before closing, I should like to make some
comments on the issue of the procedures and working
methods of the Council. I would like to touch on two
significant developments during your presidency that
we think will substantially enhance the working
methods of the Council.

First, the Council adopted a resolution to enhance
cooperation between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, which was the result of the
good work done by the Council's working group on
peacekeeping operations, led by Ambassador Curtis
Ward of Jamaica.

Secondly, after an inexplicable hiatus of several
months, the working group on documents and
procedures met again to consider proposals of the
presidency to improve the working methods of the
Council. We congratulate you, Sir, on your delegation's
initiative on the note that will be issued that will clarify
the procedures to be followed to communicate
messages to parties involved in issues discussed by the
Council.

In relation to this issue, which Ambassador
Valdivieso earlier raised, we recall that he said that he,
along with you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Greenstock of the United Kingdom, were members of
the troika that made a presentation at a meeting of the
Open-ended Working Group on Council reform earlier
this month. We recall also that Ambassador Valdivieso
suggested that the Council have a briefing on this
meeting. We heard that it was a very substantive
meeting, and we note that this has not been taken up.
We hope that it will be taken up without further delay.

Lastly, I should like to raise the issue of the
speakers' list. Members will recall that Ambassador
Mahbubani had brought to the attention of the previous
presidency a recurrent problem in the Council on the
drawing up of the speakers' list. We are grateful to the
Bangladeshi presidency for innovating practical
improvements to the existing system. At the earlier
stage of your presidency, Sir, you made it a point to
announce during informal consultations or at Council
meetings when the speakers' list would be opened.
Later we noted that the announcement was only put in
the daily Journal, and we appear to have regressed on
this issue.

While the initiatives taken under your presidency
have enhanced transparency in form, we regret to note
that in substance the drawing up of the speakers' list,
particularly on certain key issues, has not entirely lost
its Byzantine character. We find that the Orwellian
principle is still alive and kicking 7 that is to say, that
some members are more equal than others.

If the rules of sovereign equality enshrined in the
United Nations Charter were to be strictly applied, the
principle of first come, first served should be the
primary guide in the drawing up of the speakers' list.
We will continue to speak out on this matter as long as
the phenomenon is not corrected.

I should like to repeat what we have said before:
that while we could accept some degree of inequality
on matters of substance in the work of the Council, on
matters of procedure there should always be a level
playing field, and we will continue to insist on this.

