Mr. Vukobratovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. I would also like to thank
Judge Agius and Mr. Brammertz, the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, for their respective reports and for
today's comprehensive briefings.

We note the continued progress by the Mechanism
in fulfilling the residual activities of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In
addition, we would like to underline that the successful
conclusion of the Mechanism's mandate in an efficient
manner and within a reasonable time frame is of crucial
importance for justice and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region.

Throughout the years, the cooperation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina with the ICTY and its successor has
been steadfast and full, as evidenced by the Tribunal's
reports. In the same vein, we remain committed to
contributing actively to the Mechanism's efforts to
accomplish its mission.

Accountable, independent and impartial judicial
institutions that enjoy public trust throughout
the entire country are a precondition not only for
bringing perpetrators to justice, but also for achieving
reconciliation among the three constituent peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, namely, Bosniaks, Croats
and Serbs. That is of crucial importance for long-term
stability in the country and the region. We recognize
that there is a need for the adoption of a revised national
war crimes strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We would like to highlight our appreciation for
the support of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
United Nations Development Programme with regard
to strengthening the human and material resources
of the judicial institutions that are processing war
crimes and general capacity-building. Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates the importance of the consistent
cooperation among the Prosecutors' Offices and the
relevant authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbouring countries, Croatia and Serbia, in
accordance with the principles of international justice
and the rule of law, which is crucial to investigating and
prosecuting war crimes.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina remains committed to investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all persons responsible for
war crimes. We will continue to work on strengthening
the national judicial system. More justice means more
trust and stability.

