Mr. Kubis: I would like to start by congratulating
the Iraqi Government and people on their historic
victory against the Da'esh terrorist group and its so-
called caliphate. On 17 November, the Iraqi security
forces fully recaptured the Rawa district, the last
remaining area under Da'esh control in Iraq, although
some mopping-up operations continue. Iraqis took
back their country through the heroism and sacrifices
of the Iraqi security forces, including the popular
mobilization forces, working alongside the Peshmerga
and tribal forces, supported by neighbouring countries
and the Global Coalition against Da'esh.

This victory has come at a very high cost. Many
thousands of fighters and civilians have been killed
or wounded, leaving behind thousands of widows
and orphans, hundreds of thousands of brainwashed
children deprived of a proper education and entire
cities in ruins, while some 6 million people have been
displaced from their homes in several waves. Many
thousands of people from both Muslim and minority
communities - particularly women and girls - have
been exterminated or enslaved by Da'esh in inhuman
ways as a result of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and possibly even genocide.

I should also underline the sacrifices of those who
have been selflessly sheltering millions of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), including in Kurdistan. Our
condolences today go to all the victims of the war
against Da'esh. Da'esh is down but not yet out - even
in Iraq. The military victory is only one component of a
complex battle. Only by defeating its takfirist ideology,
cutting offits external support and addressing the causes
that have prompted so many Iraqis to join or tolerate
Da'esh can it finally be terminated. I encourage the
global coalition against Da'esh, including the countries
of the region and the wider international community, to
continue both military and non-military efforts - and
especially by increasing the latter - aimed at helping
Iraq to ensure Da'esh's permanent, sustainable defeat.

In Iraq, while continuing humanitarian assistance,
priority must be given to facilitating the speedy and
voluntary return of IDPs under conditions of safety
and security, as well as to demining, stabilization,
reconstruction and rehabilitation, which will also
help minorities and create the conditions needed for
their safe and sustainable future in a post-Da'esh Iraq.
An international conference planned for February
in Kuwait, on the reconstruction and rehabilitation
of Iraq, should affirm the lasting commitment of the
international community, including the countries of
the region. Those efforts should complement support
for security-sector reform, aimed at increasing the
country's ability to fully enforce law and order against
the continued presence of the multitude of armed
groups outside State control, including criminal gangs,
militias and tribal elements.

Just as the country is beginning to breathe a sigh of
relief at the defeat of the Da'esh terrorists, many long-
standing unresolved issues, until now overshadowed by
the urgency of fighting Da'esh, are once again coming
to the fore. Prominent among them are the tensions
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government, prompted by complaints on
both sides regarding deficiencies in implementing the
Constitution. The response of the Kurdistan regional
authorities was to hold an independence referendum on
25 September - against the will of Baghdad and the
advice of the regional countries and the international
community - in the Kurdistan region and the disputed
territories under its control since 2014.

Challenged by the referendum, the Government
of Iraq took determined steps to re-establish federal
authority over its external border-crossing points, the
international airports in the Kurdistan region and the
disputed territories, as well as over oil exports. On
16 October, federal security forces launched operations
in Kirkuk and proceeded rapidly through other disputed
territories, going almost as far as the so-called green
line of 2003. Although in most cases the withdrawal
of Peshmerga forces from those areas took place in
coordination with the Iraqi security forces, sporadic
clashes did occur. Even now, however, control over
some disputed areas and border crossings, including
Fish Khabur, remains unresolved. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) received reports
of civilian casualties, primarily from the Kurdish
community in Kirkuk, Tuz Khurmatu and other areas.
I welcome the measures taken by Prime Minister A1
Abadi to enforce law and order through the federal
forces in areas that have witnessed an increase in
violence as a prerequisite for the mostly Kurdish IDPs
to return to their homes. I also urge the competent
authorities, both federal and of the Kurdistan region, to
carry out prompt and impartial investigations into all
incidents and to bring those responsible to justice.

On 6 November, the federal Supreme Court
concluded that it did not find any provision in
the Constitution authorizing the secession of any
component of the federal system of the Republic of
Iraq. On 20 November, the federal Supreme Court
decided that the referendum was unconstitutional and
that all of its results and effects should be cancelled.
The Government of Iraq welcomed both decisions. On
14 November, the Kurdistan Regional Government
confirmed its respect for the federal Supreme Court's
interpretation of article 1 of the Iraqi Constitution, and
thereby the unity of Iraq, pursuant to its decision of
6 November. Following the second verdict of the federal
Supreme Court on 20 November, Kurdistan's Prime
Minister Nechirvan Barzani again affirmed his respect
for the Constitution, noting that the federal Supreme
Court's rulings are final and cannot be challenged.

UNAMI has repeatedly called on all sides to refrain
from the threat or use of force and from inflammatory
statements and confrontational steps. Our message
is clear. All outstanding issues between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
must be resolved through a constructive partnership
dialogue aimed at arriving at sustainable solutions on
the basis of the Constitution that will also guarantee
the full constitutional rights of the Kurdistan Region of
Iraq and its people. Now that the issue of the referendum
has found its constitutional resolution, UNAMI urges
for the continuation of the high-level intergovernmental
dialogue on military and security issues, in order to
avoid confrontations during the deployment of federal
forces in the disputed areas and to enable federal
authority to be established over Iraq's external border
crossings, including the international airports in
the Kurdistan region, with the aim of enabling their
reopening for international flights as soon as possible.

UNAMI also calls for an immediate start to
negotiations with Government representatives on
other key matters, such as the budget, salaries and
oil exports. UNAMI has offered its support for such
negotiations, should both sides request it. In the wake
of the resignation letter received on 29 October from
the-then Kurdistan Regional President, Masoud
Barzani, the regional parliament promulgated a law
that temporarily redistributed his presidential powers
among the executive, legislative and judiciary. It has
given Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani and his
Deputy, Qubad Talabani, the heavy responsibility of
finding a way out of the region's political, economic
and social crisis and steering Baghdad-Erbil relations
away from confrontation. For that, they will need the
support of every sector of Kurdistani society and its
political forces as the Regional Government works on
solutions to the crisis.

UNAMI continues to engage with Iraqi political
parties to advance national reconciliation and
settlement, working with the Government of Iraq to
identify key priorities and deliverables over the next
few months in the run-up to the national and provincial
elections in May. Social reconciliation, focused on the
return of IDPs, is now a critical priority.

On 23 October, a new Board of Commissioners
for the Independent High Electoral Commission was
approved by the Council of Representatives. It was a
major disappointment for Iraqi civil society and UNAMI
that, for the first time, no women were appointed to the
Board. Elections for the Governorate councils and the
Council of Representatives are scheduled to take place
on 15 May 2018, in accordance with the Constitution,
and the Constitution should be fully respected in this
respect as well.

The elections will face a number of challenges,
including the first-time use of new voting technology,
the holding of two simultaneous elections, a tight
timeline, pending provincial council and parliamentary
elections laws, and security concerns, notably in
the areas where internally displaced persons have
returned to their homes. I urge that these challenges be
resolutely addressed in the months to come. Otherwise,
holding elections when parts of Iraq remain insecure
and large numbers of people, particularly from the
Sunni communities, continue to be displaced could
cast doubts on the inclusiveness and credibility of the
elections and thus the acceptability of its results both
internally and abroad.

Humanitarian partners have reached more
than 6 million Iraqis this year, including 2 million
impacted by military operations in Mosul. The Iraq
Humanitarian Response Plan has received 71 percent
of the $985 million required for 2017. We ask partners
to continue to make their generous contributions so as
to ensure that the people who have suffered the most
receive the assistance they need.

Through the Funding Facility for Immediate
Stabilization of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), more than 1,460 projects have
either been completed, are under development or
are being implemented in 23 liberated cities and
districts in Anbar, Salah al-Din, Diyala and Ninewa
governorates. More than 95 per cent of all stabilization
projects implemented under the Funding Facility
are undertaken by the local private sector. We are
committed to ensuring that the more than 200 projects
under way in priority Christian and Yezidi towns are
implemented as quickly as possible. In the year ahead,
the UNDP estimates that $289 million is needed to
stabilize priority locations in liberated areas, and we
are appealing to donor countries to step forward to
provide these urgently needed resources. Demining is
a critical priority, and the United Nations Mine Action
Service needs continued support as well.

On the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
the Government of Iraq is fully cognizant of its
international and humanitarian obligations relating
to the file. Since assuming a proactive role last year,
the Iraqi Ministry of Defence has made impressive
efforts, including through exploration and excavation,
to identify additional grave sites. The long-awaited
review report of the International Committee of the Red
Cross was submitted to last week's forty-fifth Tripartite
Committee meeting in Cyprus. It offers an exhaustive
historical overview and technical assessment of all
aspects of previous search efforts for burial sites, and
makes concrete recommendations on prioritization
and further exploration of specific locations. Members
of the Tripartite Commission will work together to
translate the recommendations into a plan of action.

In November, Alice Walpole, my newly appointed
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
and Electoral Assistance, took charge of this file in
accordance with resolution 2107 (2013). I would like to
thank former Deputy Special Representative Gyorgy
Busztin for his excellent work, efforts and commitment
to the file since the adoption of the resolution in 2013.

