The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.

Father Charters: I would like to thank the Polish
presidency for convening today's open debate on
children and armed conflict.

The theme of our discussion today should cause us
to stop and reflect. The juxtaposition of children and
armed conflict is deeply incongruous yet, as we are
hearing once more in this Chamber, it is the sad reality
for so many boys and girls in our world that young lives
are interrupted tragically by violent conflict. Children,
who should be free to learn and to play, as they grow
in knowledge of themselves and of the world around
them, are instead the victims of grave violations that
not only rob them of the unique and irreplaceable joys
of childhood, but also run the risk of causing long-
term physical, emotional, psychological and social
damage, with its obvious impacts on their families and
wider community.

As the latest report of the Secretary-General
dramatically shows,

"In times of armed conflict, throughout the world,
millions of people, children foremost among them,
have inadequate access to or have been denied
assistance that is essential for their survival and
well-being" (S/2019/509, para. 11).

One has only to consider the scramble for minerals and
other precious resources in parts of Africa, where so
many children and young people give up their education
to work in mines. It is worse still when children are
forced to fight in wars not of their making or recruited
under the guise of being able to provide for their
impoverished families.

There is a need to examine the root causes
of this situation, particularly how socioeconomic
disadvantages and lack of prospects too often make
armed conflict an alternative for our young people. It is
also deeply worrisome that in some cases radicalization
and extremist ideologies have motivated the decision of
young people to embrace nefarious causes, and thereby
become themselves the cause of destruction and despair
in the lives of so many others. Education towards
peace in the family and in schools and the crucial role
of women as teachers of peace are indispensable to
confronting these root causes.

Long and protracted conflicts, often fought in
urban settings, mean that schools, medical centres and
shelters often come under fire, leading to the partial
or complete destruction of buildings essential for the
health, instruction and well-being of children. Such
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks are in
contravention of international law and international
humanitarian law and must stop. In that regard, Pope
Francis recently expressed his deep concern for the
lives of children caught up in bombings in the Idlib
province in Syria.

The Holy See takes note of the evolution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to include provisions
for child protection and outreach to armed groups,
inform and educate the wider population and create
a culture of peace. There are also new initiatives
manifesting the will ofMember States to end and prevent
the grave violations committed against children living
in armed conflict. It is particularly encouraging that
such initiatives include working towards the universal
ratification and implementation of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

Today's open debate must contribute to awakening
the collective conscience of the international
community so as to ensure that these children, who are
often invisible, are not forgotten, that increased efforts
be made for the release of child soldiers and that the
young victims of other grave violations are given the
support they need for reintegration. Such support must
include the most vulnerable, including those children
conceived and brought into the world as a result of
conflict-related sexual violence. Children in those
circumstances have no less dignity, and similarly must
be protected from violence and death.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.


