Mr. Haysom: I would like to describe briefly the
situation in which Afghanistan finds itself at the end of
the first year of its transformation decade, and to frame
the challenges it faces in 2016.

The international civilian and military Withdrawal
at the end of 2014 coincided with a political transition
and confronted Afghanistan with a triple set of
challenges - economic, security and political. The
National Unity Government, itself a product of
political crisis, inherited a weakening economy, an
empty treasury and a war that it needed to fight with
decreasing levels of international military assistance.
None of those circumstances were of its own making.
Indeed, a difficult year was expected. As President
Ghani himself put it 12 days ago at the ministerial
meeting in Islamabad, Afghanistan would be fighting
for its survival in 2015.

On the economic front, the fiscal gap between the
revenue raised and spent by the Government would
remain of concern. Poverty is no less prevalent, and the
economic contraction has led to high unemployment
and its attendant frustration, particularly among youth.
Corruption has yet to be overcome.

On the security front, there was overall
deterioration as the Afghan National Security Forces
(ANSF) grappled with an intensified conflict, but with
much reduced international military support. Civilians,
as ever, continue to bear the brunt of the conflict, as
casualties rise at an ever increasing rate and more
people have been displaced from their homes by the
conflict.

On the political front, the National Unity
Government has at times struggled to project the
necessary national unity and has seen the level of its
public support diminish markedly. An increasingly
vocal political opposition has emerged, drawing on the
anxiety generated by the perceived security deterioration
and economic contraction. As a consequence of this
situation, many Afghans are anxious about the future.
Some evidently feel that they have no choice other than
to leave the country in search of economic and security
opportunities elsewhere.

While we must acknowledge those realities, we
also must take note of the many significant steps being
taken to keep Afghanistan on the path to stability and
greater self-reliance. While the challenges are of such
a scale and complexity that any Government would be
tested in its efforts to meet them head-on, there has
been progress nonetheless.

On the political front, the National Unity
Government has held together and is advancing its
agenda, including that of implementing the terms of
the September 2014 political agreement, as well as
attempting to professionalize the civil service. An
example of progress would be the submission today
of the second and final set of recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission. I look forward
to the finalization of that process, which will allow for
an electoral calendar to be set and will mark another
step towards restoring public confidence in the electoral
institutions and the democratic process.

The United Nations maintains its view that there is
no viable alternative to the National Unity Government,
a point that, encouragingly, much ofthe Afghan political
opposition also appears to recognize, as evidenced at
the gathering ofpolitical critics that took place in Kabul
just three days ago. We encourage a continued dialogue
and outreach - within Government and outside - to
ensure a greater unity of purpose, notably from the
political elite, which is necessary for public confidence,
governance reforms and military morale.

On the economic front, the Government is pressing
forward with its reform agenda, as articulated in
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework and its thoughtful implementation plan.
Economic growth, although low, is actually projected
to increase in the next years. When it took office in
2014, the Government faced a significant year-end
financial fiscal gap. In 2015, domestic revenues have
increased and the Government is confident that it
has averted a second fiscal crisis, albeit that this was
managed primarily by failing to expend budgeted funds
for development.

I commend the Government for continuing to
put into place the building blocks for long-term
economic improvement, including through an
increased commitment to promoting regional economic
integration. On that note, we welcome the recommitment
by the members ofthe Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process to
shared objectives at the recent ministerial-level meeting
in Islamabad. I would also like to draw attention to
the ground-breaking ceremony, held just last week
in Ashgabat, for the launch of the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistaanakistaanndia natural gas pipeline,
which will supply energy-hungry Afghanistan, Pakistan
and India with natural gas from Turkmenistan. That is
a noteworthy development, showing as it does just what
can be achieved when Afghanistan and its neighbours
work in partnership.

On the security front, the ANSF have shown
resilience in the face of an intensified insurgency.
Certainly, the temporary loss of key district centres
and the provincial centre of Kunduz city were worrying
developments and revealed major ANSF shortcomings.
However, almost all of the district centres have been
retaken, as has Kunduz city. The ANSF may be
stretched to capacity but, for the most part, they are
holding their ground. That does not ignore the need for
improvements to ANSF functioning, with a particular
focus on logistics and administration, and remedial
measures to boost both morale and diminish rates of
attrition, as well as continued international support for
its attempts to build its own air support capabilities.

Afghanistan, as a sovereign nation confronting
countless challenges, has made it through its first
post-transition year, an achievement in itself. But in
2016, it is vital that the National Unity Government
demonstrates increasingly its effectiveness, not only to
the Afghan people but also to donors, on whom it is
largely dependent for financial, material and technical
assistance.

In 2016, the international community will make
critical decisions on the level and type of assistance that
it will continue to offer. In Warsaw, NATO countries
will pledge their further military commitment for
four years, while in Brussels the donor community
will pledge its renewed civilian assistance. The
international community, although committed to
supporting Afghanistan, must make difficult choices as
events elsewhere in the world compete for international
attention and limited resources. For that reason, they
will need to be assured not only that their assistance
meets evident needs, but that it will have a tangible
impact. In particular, Afghanistan must show that it is
commited to tackling corruption, making the necessary
governance reforms and generating hope for the future,
which will decrease the rate of emigration. UNAMA
will be encouraging donors to invest in Afghanistan's
reconstruction and security, rather than facing the costs
of integrating immigrants

In the long term, the single development that would
allow for material progress towards a stable and self-
reliant Afghanistan would be an agreement among
Afghans as to the arrangements by which they can live
together in peace and harmony. Beyond the immediate
suffering being inflicted upon the Afghan people,
the war is impeding efforts to bring the political and
economic progress that ultimately will ensure stability.
Substantial human and material resources are being
blocked or diverted on account of the insecurity.
This situation cannot continue indefinitely; sooner or
later the financial resources currently available to the
country will decrease. Afghanistan needs to find a
political route to peace.

After some promising developments earlier this
year, most notably with the July talks in Murree, peace
efforts reached an impasse as the Taliban leadership
appeared to fragment and strains reappeared in
Afghanistan/Pakistan relations. The events in Kunduz
also caused some to question whether the time was
ripe for peace talks. This loss of momentum was
disappointing, but peace processes rarely move forward
in a linear fashion. \We welcome the reiteration,
made on 9 December in Islamabad, by the Afghan
Government of its commitment to a peace process. I
call upon the Taliban, which has not yet committed
to entering into a peace process, to reciprocate the
Government's commitment by stepping forward to
directly engage with the Government. There is no other
way for insurgent groups to demonstrate a commitment
to the welfare and prosperity of their fellow citizens
than to search for a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
The reliance on violent conflict to achieve political
ends places a question mark over their intentions.

In 2016, UNAMA will continue to support
the Afghan Government and people in laying the
foundations for peace. As part of its broader efforts,
UNAMA will continue to pursue its three track
approach to engagement with the Taliban on human
rights, humanitarian access and political engagement.

On human rights, we will engage with the Taliban,
as with the Government, on the issue of protection of
civilians and on women's and children's rights. We
will continue to promote respect for and adherence to
international human rights and humanitarian law.

On humanitarian affairs, United Nations
humanitarian agencies will engage with the Taliban,
again as with the Government, to promote humanitarian
access to health care for those in need, wherever they
are in Afghanistan, while ensuring protection for those
who deliver such aid, especially in regard to polio
immunization.

On political issues, we will continue to meet with
the Taliban, with the knowledge and support of the
Government, to explore possible entry points to a peace
process and ways to conceptualize and promote the best
format for talks to build trust and confidence in a proper
political engagement. During 2015, we have floated
several such proposals for talks and other initiatives,
which, unfortunately, failed to find traction.

We stand by our call for a track-I dialogue - namely,
direct, face to face negotiations between representatives
of the Government and the Taliban leadership. We
are encouraged specifically by the offers made by
Pakistan, the United States and China on 9 December
to support such a process. UNAMA supports all efforts
to establish a peace process. We continue to offer our
good offices in any facilitative role, while recognizing
that any peace process must be Afghan-owned and led.

