Mr. Rassoul (Afghanistan): It is truly a pleasure to
be among the members of the Security Council today at
this critical juncture on Afghanistan's path to peace and
prosperity. I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
September, and convey our appreciation for Germany's
continual support and assistance for Afghanistan during
its tenure on the Council. Let me also convey a warm
welcome to my good friend and colleague the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Jan Kubis. We
thank him for his clear presentation of the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2012/703).

We meet at an important time as Afghanistan is
transitioning confidently into a vibrant, self-reliant
and sovereign nation - a nation that is increasingly
taking full charge of its destiny. The Afghan people are
inspired by the prospect of a future free from violence
and war. And thanks to our joint efforts, important
progress towards that endeavour continues.

As we speak, Afghanistan has surpassed the halfway
point on our transition to full security responsibility.

Given the commencement of the third tranche of
security transition in May, 75 per cent of the country
will be under Afghan security responsibility by the
end of November. Our progress is on track to complete
the security transition by the end of 2013. The Afghan
army and police are showing more resilience and
effectiveness as they take on increasing responsibility
to meet the country's security needs.

Needless to say, the sustainability of the Afghan
National Security Forces is inextricably linked to the
international community's long-term support. The
outcome of the recent Chicago NATO Summit was
a clear manifestation of our international partners'
resolute commitment to a strong and effective Afghan
national security force. We also welcome NATO's
decision to develop a new training, advising and
assistance role, which will take effect in 2014, and we
look forward to working with our relevant partners on
the scope and mandate of the new mission.

The Afghan people are encouraged by the
international community's assurance of assistance in
ensuring peace and prosperity throughout the transition
into the transformation decade of 2015-2024. In that
regard, commitments made at the Bonn conference last
year, the NATO summit in May and more recently at
the Tokyo Conference in July are crucial to our long-
term success.
The Tokyo Conference marked the beginning
of a new relationship between Afghanistan and
our international friends based on results-oriented
cooperation and conducted under the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. We expect the international
community to meet its commitment in channelling
assistance through our core budget and aligning its
aid with the Afghan national priority programmes.
Combating corruption, strengthening governance and
consolidating the rule of law will remain key priorities
for us.

President Karzai's decree of July of this year is
a significant step in our counter-corruption efforts.
It will be implemented through clear, time-bound
measures conducted by all Government ministries,
agencies and departments with a View to achieving full
accountability and transparency.

Afghanistan is regaining its legitimate place in the
region and the world, through playing an active role in
its neighbourhood and the international community.
Our multilateral agreements and strategic partnerships
involve long-term commitments among Afghanistan
and our international partners. The partnerships we
have formed, both in our neighbourhood and beyond,
are essential to preserving the historic achievements
of Afghanistan's young democracy and securing the
country's future peace and stability.

Thus far, we have concluded strategic, long-term
partnership agreements with United States of America,
India, China, Germany, France, Italy, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
Australia. We see those partnerships as key elements
in our collective fight against the twin menaces of
terrorism and extremism and in supporting our evolving
national ownership in order to achieve future peace and
stability.

As we continue our transition, with bold steps
towards strengthened Afghan sovereignty and national
ownership, the enemies of Afghanistan have continued
their desperate attempts to undermine our progress
towards a brighter future. Terrorist attacks have
increasingly targeted families and innocent Afghan
men, women and children in many parts of the country,
putting a brutal and tragic halt to their peaceful lives.
Undoubtedly, the unremitting violence plaguing
Afghanistan has resulted from the continued military,
financial and ideological support enjoyed by terrorists,
and the presence of sanctuaries and safe-havens outside
the country's borders.

Despite the continuing fight against terrorism,
the next few years of political and security transition
will be vital to a stable future for Afghanistan. We are
working diligently to ensure fruitful results in the peace
and reconciliation efforts under way. Our inclusive
peace and reconciliation process seeks to build trust
and confidence among all Afghans. We are determined
to integrate within the folds of society those elements
of the armed opposition who are willing to renounce
violence, cut ties with the terrorist groups and accept
the Afghan constitution.

The High Peace Council has revitalized its approach
to reconciliation efforts. The international community
and our region have an important part to play. The role of
the Security Council will be imperative in that process.
We thank the Council for supporting our reconciliation
efforts by meeting the delisting requests that we have
presented. By the same token, we hope that the new
mandate of the Taliban sanctions committee will

include the necessary adjustments - in recognition
of the importance of an Afghan-owned and Afghan-
led peace and reconciliation process - to promote a

more responsive and flexible sanctions regime to be
used more effectively and positively in encouraging
those who are willing to join that process. We therefore
look forward to working closely with Council members
to amend resolution 1988 (2011) in a way that further
benefits and accelerates the Afghan peace process.

The violence in Afghanistan has had a drastic
effect on the security and well-being of our citizens. We
express our serious concern about the growing number
of civilian casualties in Afghanistan, the majority of
which are caused by the Taliban and other extremist
groups. Meanwhile, loss of innocent life and harm to
populations have also occurred in the course of NATO
operations. The loss of even one innocent life is one
too many. We underscore, yet again, the need to exert
all measures necessary to protect civilian populations.

The greatest challenges to peace and stability in
Afghanistan, such as terrorism, extremism and narcotic
drugs, are shared regionally and internationally. Our
shared threats require cooperative solutions. We are
working with regional countries and other partners for
a comprehensive response to those menaces. Launched
in November of last year, the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan is gaining momentum. The process
was further crystallized at the Heart of Asia ministerial
conference in Kabul in June, with the prioritization of
key confidence-building measures. We look forward to
coming together with our Heart of Asia partners in this
city, in less than a week from today, at the next meeting
of senior officials.

Let me now turn to a matter of deep and serious
concern to my Government and the Afghan people.
The shelling of areas of Kunar province in eastern
Afghanistan from across the Durand Line has led to
unprecedented anger and frustration among Afghans
from all walks of life. We reiterate our call for an
immediate and complete end to such acts, which have
taken the lives of dozens of Afghans, mainly civilians,
and left many more wounded. We remain in close
contact with the Government of Pakistan to address
that issue holistically and resolutely.

Failure to end such attacks risks jeopardizing
Afghanistan-Pakistan bilateral relations, with potential
negative consequences for the bilateral cooperation
necessary for peace, security and economic development
in our two countries and the wider region. Afghanistan
desires close and fruitful relations with Pakistan, a
neighbour with whom we share historical, cultural and
traditional ties.

As we work to tackle the challenges on the
road ahead, let us not lose sight of the historic,
transformative successes achieved thus far. Significant
advances in social and economic development are
clearly evident. Millions of students - boys, girls,
men and women - are enrolled in primary and higher
education. A majority of Afghans now have access to
basic health services and are increasingly taking part
in the democratic process through the exercise of their
right to shape their own destiny.

While we have seen such changes unfolding
throughout the last decade, today we can be proud that
the initiatives under way in the area of development
are increasingly Afghan-driven and Afghan-led,
with support from the international community.
That characteristic is crucial for the sustainability of
development efforts and for helping Afghanistan to
realize its full potential. With the next Presidential
elections fast approaching, we are fully committed to
ensuring a transparent election process, free of any
external interference.

After over three decades of struggle and suffering,
we are moving ahead with Afghanistan's recovery and
renewed strength. Afghans recognize the important
indications of our sovereignty. We are determined to
further our efforts towards national ownership across
the board, as the most effective way to ensure lasting
peace and security in our country.

Before concluding, allow me to register the
Afghan Government's strong condemnation of the
recent senseless, provocative acts of insult to Islam
and Prophet Mohammad, Peace Be Upon Him. While
acknowledging our fellow Muslims' right to peacefully
protest against those insults, we deplore any violence
resulting from such protests, especially against
diplomatic representations anywhere in the world.

The key to Afghanistan's future success
is cooperation, both in our transition and the
transformation decade to follow. Building trust and
confidence with the international community is
the basis for our path to security and prosperity. We
are pleased that the Security Council continues to
follow the situation closely, and we are thankful for
their support and the support of the United Nations,
including with regard to revising the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
line with the demands of Afghan sovereignty. With
long-term cooperation and partnership at the centre of
our efforts, we are confident that together we can build
a more peaceful, stable Afghanistan.

