Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Nepal would like to
commend and express its appreciation to the Council's
Dutch presidency for convening this important open
debate, which is giving peacekeeping the priority and
momentum it deserves. I thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks and the other briefers for offering
their perspectives.

I align myself with the statement delivered earlier
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I will read
an abridged version of my statement in the interests
of time.

With its steadfast commitment to global peace,
Nepal has been a dependable and enduring partner
in United Nations peacekeeping operations for the
past 60 years, during which more than 130,000 of its
peacekeepers have served with distinction and 73 have
laid down their precious lives in the line of duty. They
have frequently been deployed at the shortest notice and
in the most difficult theatres, where they have shown
the greatest flexibility, never accompanied by caveats.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to all
past and present Nepali Blue Helmets, and all others,
for their supreme service in the effort to make our
world a safer place.

Nepal is currently the sixth largest troop- and
police-contributing country in the world, serving in 14
of 15 missions. We combine the experience of United
Nations peacekeeping around the world with that of
a successful nationally driven post-conflict peace
process at home. From that perspective, my delegation
would like to highlight a few points that should be built
into the framework of our collective action to improve
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations should be designed and
deployed solely to complement and support an inclusive
domestic political process, thereby ensuring their own
impartiality and credibility and supporting the domestic
capacity-building of the countries affected by conflict.
The design of mandates must be based on thorough and
broad analyses of conflicts and their root causes. All
partners must be constructively engaged in the process
of formulating mandates. It should be compulsory
for penholders to consult with the prospective troop-
and police-contributing countries on mandates before
they are finalized, and mandates should be clear,
credible, achievable and adequately resourced. Each
should define the role and responsibility of all the
key stakeholders and actors - the Security Council,
the troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat and others.

Mandates should be clearly communicated to
peacekeepers on the ground and the tasks expected
of them must be clearly linked to those mandates.
Mission leaderships must set clear expectations for
peacekeepers and be more accountable for the whole-of-
mission performance. At no time should the fact that
a contingent comes with no national caveats make it
prone to unreasonable demands, deployments, rotations
or scapegoating. Performance should be the primary
basis for rotating contingents from different troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially in transitional
times. Mandates and peacekeepers' capacities should
be consistently aligned and adjusted based on the
evolving realities on the ground, with mobile training
support teams provided as necessary.

The United Nations should work closely with
relevant regional organizations without undermining the
host country's sovereignty or its prerogative of initiating
a nationally led peace process. Peacekeepers must win
the trust and confidence of the civilians they protect,
including by helping local communities improve their
living conditions and ensuring harmonious relations
among themselves.

Last but not least, peacekeepers should always be
able to operate at the highest possible level of morale,
with adequate measures taken to ensure their safety,
security and dignity as they risk their lives to uphold
the principles of the United Nations. They must have
the confidence of knowing that they are never alone.
Bringing the perpetrators of crimes against United
Nations peacekeepers to justice is critical in that regard.
Peace and security, development and human
rights, the three pillars of the United Nations, are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Thanks to
the United Nations, the world has come a long way on
those fronts, but with a paradox. Poverty, hunger and
exclusion, the breeders of most conflicts, no longer
appear invincible, but those working to end them
are in dire need of more resources. And conflicts,
where the largest part of our resources go, appear to
be perpetuating themselves or breeding new ones,
destroying development gains in most cases. Why
has that happened? It is largely because the efforts to
combat them have not been even-handed.

In conclusion, only our collective political will and
action to address philosophical, policy and strategic
questions relating to conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding will ensure success on the peace and
security front. That success will continue to elude us
until inclusive development is fully embraced as the
ultimate prevention tool, until politically negotiated
peaceful solutions are found to settle every conflict and
until conflicts anywhere are taken seriously long before
they pose threats everywhere.

