Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank the President for organizing this
debate, which is timely in the context of the current
review of resolution 1540 (2004).
Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

As a member of the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004), we wish to stress the importance and
relevance of that instrument in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly their manufacture, possession and use by
non-State actors.

Today, that struggle must take into account
the evolution of the risks posed, in terms of both
the hardware and propaganda used and its ongoing
geographical proliferation.

My country calls for the full implementation by all
States of all of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004)
and for its strengthening. While progress has been
observed in the adoption by States of legal frameworks,
those measures sometimes still lack implementation.
It is also important that all organizations involved
in the implementation of the resolution coordinate
their efforts, seek constructive synergies and avoid
duplication of effort.

The fight against terrorism has a multidimensional
character, and we can only welcome the adoption
by the General Assembly of the Global Strategy
against Terrorism, revised in June, and call for its
implementation. The definition of new legal provisions
to take into account recent technical and technological
developments and to prevent the financing of terrorism
should also be encouraged.

Awareness of the private and civil-society sector is
also essential, as is, more specifically, outreach to the
academic world. In that regard, my country launched
an awareness campaign in the academic and research
sectors regarding the risks of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the role of academic
and scientific research in that context.

The issues of the maintenance and transport of
weapons of mass destruction deserve greater focus.
The adoption by the Security Council, on 22 July, of
resolution 2298 (2016), on the chemical weapons found
in Libya, is welcome. Another challenge concerns
export controls, the fight against traffickers and
border security.

Finally, international cooperation is the catalyst
needed to strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) in its
preventive aspects. My country is committed to
the concept of peer review. In the framework of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Biological and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, the Benelux
countries organized apeer review conference in 2015, the
results of which were shared with other States parties to
the Convention in view of the upcoming eighth Review
Conference in November this year. The objective is to
improve the implementation of the Convention at the
national level, build trust among partners, share best
practices and strengthen the debate on international
verification of compliance with the Convention.

The review of resolution 1540 (2004) must
also enable progress through joint efforts aimed at
strengthening the national structures of each State.

