Mr. Corr (Ireland): First, I, too, would like to
thank you, Sir, for arranging this open meeting of the
Council on West Africa. It is fitting that we discuss the
regional approach to West Africa during Mali's
presidency of the Security Council.

I would also, on behalf of my delegation, like to
pay tribute to President Konare's chairmanship of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

My delegation is grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General Fall for his very detailed briefing this morning
on the follow-up to the inter-agency mission he led to
West Africa in March.

Belgium, as Presidency of the European Union,
will be making a statement later in this debate with
which Ireland fully associates itself.

The report of the United Nations inter-agency
mission to West Africa last May noted the possible
domino dynamic of instability spreading from one
country to another in the subregion. For this reason, it
made a range of recommendations, including the
establishment of a United Nations regional office. It
especially noted the value of strengthening subregional
cooperation in fostering national reconciliation and in
strengthening institutions of civil society and economic
and social development in the subregion.

Ireland warmly supports the concept of
strengthening institutions of cooperation among the
countries of the subregion and, flowing from that,
including this goal in the approaches to be adopted by
the United Nations system and other partners involved
in the economic and social development of the
subregion. Advancing regional cooperation is a
fundamental theme in the Cotonou Agreement between
the European Union and its partners in the African-
Caribbean-Pacific Group of States. Regional
cooperation is an approach that makes eminent
economic, political and development sense; it is an
idea to shape the future and Ireland warmly endorses it.

For this reason, my delegation regards the
decision of the Secretary-General to establish a United
Nations office for West Africa as an event of great
importance not only for the subregion, but in the wider
role of the United Nations in fostering peace and
economic development in Africa and beyond.

The United Nations regional office will have
specific tasks of liaising with and assisting, as
appropriate, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union.
Ireland believes that, within the United Nations system,
all its institutions must play mutually reinforcing roles
at all levels in addressing the challenges facing the
countries of the West Africa subregion. An integrated
approach by the United Nations and the international
community to trade, development and other issues is
more than ever necessary. The role of the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, for example, in
relation to poverty reduction strategies and debt
alleviation can also be crucial. My delegation supports
the recommendation in the inter-agency report on West
Africa that the international financial institutions
review the conditionalities relating to financing
arrangements for countries in transition or poverty. We
welcome the World Bank's integrated development
strategy report for West Africa.

The inter-agency report notes the abysmal fact
that poverty is pervasive in the subregion, with about
50 per cent of the population living on less than $1 a
day. The Secretary-General, in his report on conflict
prevention, called for development cooperation
assistance to focus on decreasing structural risk factors.
In our view, the primary risk factor is poverty, and
development cooperation, clearly focused on poverty
eradication, is the most powerful instrument that the
international community has at its disposal to address
the long-term root causes of conflict and to promote
peace.

The countries of the Mano River Union provide
the clearest illustration that regional interrelationships
are not only at the heart of both the political and
humanitarian problems that afflict the subregion, but
also provide the key to the solution to those same
problems. The conflict among the countries of the
Mano River region is characterized by many of the
problems detailed in the mission report: the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, such as diamonds;
enormous internal displacement and critical problems
of humanitarian access; the proliferation of small arms;
and appalling levels of sexual abuse. It is also central
that the three countries suffer from extreme poverty.

Yet, within the Mano River Union, there are signs
of the other side of this coin, such as the positive role
of regional civil society. The Mano River Women's
Peace Network springs to mind in this regard. On small
arms, ECOWAS has played a enormously positive role.

Despite the issues that continue to give rise to
concern within the Mano River Union, most notably
the recent upsurge of fighting in Liberia, there is no
doubt that much progress has been made in the Sierra
Leone peace process. This is a vindication of the two-
track approach of the robust deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the opening of
political dialogue with the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF). The imposition of targeted sanctions against the
Government of Liberia until it convincingly breaks its
links with the RUF has also played a role.

The period before the May elections in Sierra
Leone will be critical, when we will wish to see the
wholehearted politicization of the RUF and their
complete rejection of military action to further their
ends.

Again, there has also been progress arising out
the meetings of the Mano River Union joint security
network. My delegation looks forward, in particular, to
the heads of State and Government meeting of the
Mano River Union countries to be held in January.

The disarmament component of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme in
Sierra Leone has been very successful, with 36,000 ex-
combatants having been disarmed since May. Assistant
Secretary-General Fall raised an significant concern in
the May report relating to the importance of the
reintegration programme. My delegation agrees with
the reference by the Assistant Secretary-General this
morning to the need for full support by the
international community for this programme.

As a final note, I would mention that the mission
report of last May stated that poor governance and
human rights violations were among the main causes of
conflict in the region and that a human rights
dimension should be part of all activities aimed at
conflict prevention, management and resolution
programmes at the subregional and national levels. My
delegation wholeheartedly endorses this perspective
and looks forward to its mainstreaming in our shared
work ahead.

Mr. President, my delegation looks forward to
working with you on the draft presidential statement
that your delegation is preparing.

