Mr. Jayasekara (Sri Lanka): At the outset let me
express our condolences to the Government and people
of China on the loss of lives and property due to the
devastating earthquake today.

Permit me to congratulate your delegation,
Mr. President, on the assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. We also wish to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his briefing.

My delegation believes that a resolution of the
Palestinian issue is crucial for restoring peace in the
entire Middle East, with implications elsewhere. Sri
Lanka has consistently supported peaceful settlement
of the Palestinian issue and called on all sides to fully
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council and
the General Assembly regarding the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people and the realization of the
two-State solution. Our hope is that the day will soon
come when Israel, Palestine and their other regional
neighbours can coexist in peace and harmony.

We remain deeply concerned at the daily
widespread suffering and hardships that the Palestinian
people continue to endure as a result of the economic
blockade and the ensuing grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. While we note the
relaxation of some restrictions by the Israeli
Government, we call for the removal of all restrictions.
Further relaxations could enhance the confidence level
of all concerned. The Palestinian people have suffered

for too long and continue to live under occupation. The
denial of their fundamental right to statehood, which
has been recognized by the United Nations, due to
continued Israeli occupation has seriously affected
progress in the socio-economic indicators for the
population in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem.

In that context, my delegation believes that, if
peace is to be viable and sustainable in the Palestinian
territory, Israel must withdraw from all occupied
Palestinian territories back to the 1967 borders. It must
end the economic blockade, the illegal expansion of
settlements and the construction of the separation wall.
Changing the demographic character of the Palestinian
territory will only increase tension and animosity in the
entire Middle East region.

The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort it can to improve law and order and ensure that
its territory is not used for illegal attacks on Israeli
civilians. Allegations of illegal arms flows must be
investigated. Both sides must do everything possible to
ensure the safety and security of civilians.

Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and
protect national and democratic institutions, which are
vital to a future independent Palestinian State. We
therefore urge Palestinian groups to act speedily to
reconcile and reunite within the framework of the
Palestinian National Authority. Unity among the
Palestinian people is their strength.

My delegation supports international efforts
towards the early resumption of negotiations and
believes that the unity of the Palestinian people is
essential to ensuring proper conditions for the
resumption of dialogue between Israel and Palestine at
an early stage. We also urge both sides to ensure a
climate conducive to the resumption of negotiations.
We regret that the announcement of new settlement
construction has resulted in a setback to the progress
that has been made.

We also remain concerned about the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan, including the plight of
Syrian detainees. We call for the implementation of all
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981).
Sri Lanka reiterates its support for lasting peace
in the Middle East, including the peaceful settlement of
the Palestinian issue.

