Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Central Africa remains one of the crisis-
ridden subregions ofthe African continent and requires
the ongoing attention of the Security Council. We have
studied in detail the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa
(S/2004/52), and on the whole we agree with the
assessments and conclusions it contains.

With regard to specific situations in the
subregion, we would like to highlight a number of
issues. The overall situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains generally stable. The
process of resolving the crisis in that country is gaining
ground. Some positive trends are emerging in the areas
of achieving national reconciliation, extending State
authority to the entire territory of the country and
preparing for the general elections to be held in
2005- although all of these processes are
encountering significant difficulties. Steps to create the
first integrated army brigade in Kisangani effectively
marked the beginning of the formation of a unified
armed force in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Thanks to active international intervention, there
has been an obvious improvement in the security
situation in the eastern part of the country. Steps are
being taken to end impunity for war crimes, although
much remains to be done. It is important that all parties
participating in the peace process remain fully
committed to their obligations and that the forces that
are resisting the peace process be prevented from
continuing their activities. Additional efforts are
required to disarm and repatriate foreign combatants.

Some progress has been made in the resolution of
the situation in Burundi. State structures for the
transitional period are functioning and contacts are
continuing with the forces that have not yet laid down
their weapons. An end to violence must be achieved in
the provinces. The progress achieved in the repatriation
of Burundi combatants from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should be further developed. The African
Mission in Burundi deserves our appreciation. We hope
that the transitional period will end, on time, with the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections.

The situation in Central Africa has been
positively influenced by the overall improvement in the
regional situation. We take note of the trend towards
normalization in relations among Kinshasa, Kigali,
Kampala and Bujumbura, which signed, in September
2003, a declaration of principles on good-neighbourly
relations and cooperation. All of these developments
encourage the creation of a context that is more
conducive to efforts by the interested parties to prepare
the way for an international conference on peace,
security, confidence-building measures and economic
development in the Great Lakes region.

Given the effective role played by United Nations
structures in establishing good-neighbourly relations
and settling crises in Central African countries, we
express support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Swing, his Representative
for Burundi, Mr. Dinka, and his Special Representative
for the Great Lakes region, Mr. Fall.

