Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Lithuania for presiding over the earlier segment of
this meeting, and we also thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Promoting and strengthening the rule of law
at the national and international levels is of utmost
importance to the State of Palestine. In recent years, our
country has progressively built and continues to build
its State institutions, specifically regarding the rule of
law and governance at the national level. Currently, this
effort is supported through the 2014-2016 Development
Assistance Framework concluded between the State of
Palestine and the United Nations; governance, rule of
law, justice and human rights are one of the six pillars
of the agreement.

While we continue to make progress in promoting
and strengthening the rule of law nationally, the rule of
law internationally continues, regrettably, to founder.
This is what the international community, specifically
this Council, must address, based on the conviction that
the rule of law at the international level is the key to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
its Charter mandate. We hold that the rule of law is
also the key to ending Israel's nearly 47-year military
occupation.

The challenge for the State of Palestine is that the
Council too often protects the powerful and deflects
the weak. That is evident in that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to colonize Palestinian land, carry
on with illegal practices and commit war crimes,
setting back our development, curtailing our rights and
sabotaging the possibility of peace and the credibility
of the international legal system.

In the case ofthe question of Palestine, the shelving
of international law has led only to a chronic failure
to achieve peace and the compounding of the conflict
and the human suffering it is inflicting. Today's debate
concerns a broader theme, and we welcome that; yet it
is imperative to be realists, as there is a simple reality:
without justice you cannot have peace, and without law
you cannot have justice. Further, without compliance
with the law, chaos will prevail, and the outcomes will
be difficult to fully predict.

If we are to succeed in our endeavour of building
and institutionalizing a culture of law, we must ensure
that the Israeli occupation ends and that the conflict
is resolved on the basis of law. In the case of the State
of Palestine, the law has, at best, been sidelined and,
at worst, transgressed in the most egregious manner.
The rights of the Palestine refugees have been ignored.
The human rights of the Palestinian people have been
systematically violated. The humanitarian rights of the
Palestinian people as protected persons continue to be
trampled. Their rights under the Charter are perpetually
denied, particularly the right to self-determination.

It is accurate to say that this is an unprecedented
case of lack of rule of law. The Security Council has
failed to implement its own resolutions; it has failed
for over 46 years to prevent the insidious and active
colonization of Palestinian land and the constant
attempts to change the status of Jerusalem, a city of
international importance; and it has failed to be faithful
to the purposes and principles of the Charter. Through
the Council's failure to uphold the law, it has created an
environment of impunity, allowing a State to continue
acting above the law.

The Declaration of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the rule of law states:

"We commit to ensuring that impunity is not
tolerated for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity or for Violations of international
humanitarian law and gross violations of human
rights law, and that such violations are properly
investigated and appropriately sanctioned, including
by bringing the perpetrators of any crimes to
justice, through national mechanisms or, where
appropriate, regional or international mechanisms,
in accordance with international law, and for this
purpose we encourage States to strengthen national
judicial systems and institutions." (General Assembly resolution 67/], para. 22)
Time is of the essence for the international
community to act to prevent Israel's settlement
annexation enterprise from destroying the viability
of and the prospects for a negotiated two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders and the long-
standing international consensus. We urge all States
to take concerted, collective action to disassociate
their economies and institutions from Israel's illegal
practices, specifically settlements, and to insist on
respect for the rule of law, as enshrined in the Charter,
international covenants and conventions and United
Nations resolutions, so as tojustly resolve this decades-
long conflict.

In this regard, we welcome initiatives by the
European Union and other States to deny any funding
to Israeli entities in the occupied Arab territories, and
those States, such as South Africa, that have begun
labelling Israeli settlement products as such. We
encourage others to follow, with the hope of salvaging
the prospects for ajust and peaceful two-State solution
strengthened by the rule of law.

The Palestinian people continue to wait for the
international community to fulfil its pledges and
continue to be not the exception to the rule, but an
example of the achievement of freedom, peace and
justice through the rule of law.

