Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is honoured to deliver this statement on
behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to reiterate its
full commitment to promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes, in line with the provisions of Article 2
and Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, based on the conviction that those
principles serve to strengthen international peace and
security, thereby contributing to our collective efforts
to save future generations from the scourge of war and
armed conflicts.

We emphasize that the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
lies with the United Nations and that agreements
reached with regional and subregional organizations
should be pursued under the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. Those agreements
must not in any way serve as a substitute for the
role of this Organization nor should they bypass the
full application of the guiding principles of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. At the same time, we
underscore that the implementation of all tasks entrusted
to peacekeeping operations under the auspices of the
United Nations should be supported by a comprehensive
peace process and the provision of adequate resources
and should be based on national ownership, the support
of the international community, and the consent and
acceptance of all of the parties concerned.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
has become increasingly more important, and they
should receive support from the United Nations,
bearing in mind that those organizations tend to have
a better understanding of the realities, dynamics and
background of the conflicts in their respective regions.
That means that they have a comparative advantage to
both tackle and prevent conflicts, as well as to support
political processes aimed at achieving the peaceful
settlement of disputes. On many occasions, such as in
the case of the African Union, regional organizations
also have a well-established road map for the region
and enjoy respected political authority.

The countries of the Non-Aligned Movement
therefore wish to highlight the role of regional and
subregional agreements or bodies - including those
to which Non-Aligned Movement countries and
developing countries are a party - in the promotion
of international peace and security, as well as in the
economic and social development of their peoples,
through cooperation among countries in their
respective regions.

We underscore the need for the Peacebuilding
Commission to establish coordination among regional
and subregional organizations, with a view to ensuring
that regional efforts receive the necessary attention and
support. We also express the need to develop integrated
peacebuilding strategies with programmes that are able
to adapt to the needs of the host countries in order to
ensure national ownership.

Speaking now in our national capacity, Venezuela
rejects the manipulation pursued by certain regional
organizations, such as the Organization of American
States, in contrast to our relations with the African
Union. The United States of America - the most
powerful Power in the hemisphere - is in clear
violation of all of the norms of international law and the
foundational Charter of the Organization of American
States itself, by insulting, coercing and punishing
the States members of that Organization in order to
subject them to United States economic and political
interests and designs. The United States has a political
doctrine - the Monroe Doctrine - that still today,
200 years after its inception, openly considers the
entire American region as part of its own backyard and
states that the United States has the right to act as the
overriding police authority in the region.

The Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Charter of the United Nations are being
deliberately violated in that States are being threatened
with the imposition of unilateral and illegal coercive
measures, if they do not comply with the aggressive
campaign of the United States of America. We have now
reached the point whereby the Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States has made a public
call for war and military intervention, endangering the
peace of the region, while benefiting from the protection
and support of the United States Government. In that
regard, we reject the United States' manipulation of
that regional organization in order to advance its own
imperial interests, promote its warmongering policy
and attempt to undermine the peace and security of
Latin America and the Caribbean.

