Ms. McAskie: I thank the Security Council for
the opportunity to be here today. I am very pleased to
provide a short statement in my capacity as head of the
Peacebuilding Support Office.

The links between the Commission and the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council are critical, and I know
that members of the Commission are exploring how to
make the relationships among and between those
bodies as effective as possible. How to deal with the
critical post-conflict period has escaped our collective
best efforts, despite several attempts to address the
issue through transitional mechanisms. The creation of
those new mechanisms - the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund - offers a new opportunity to
address that critical and fragile period in the life of a
country ravaged by conflict.

For that to happen, the Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in bringing
all the actors together. That means that it must and will
take on board the work of the Council, as well as that
of the Economic and Social Council, the General
Assembly, the United Nations agencies and all the
partners, be they the financial institutions and other
donors, the regional players, internal actors - such as
civil society * and any others, as appropriate. That
does not mean duplication; that does not mean overlap.
Rather, it is the strategic way in which the Commission
will work by bringing everyone together.
5

There is general agreement that, if it is to be most
effective, the work must play out at the country level.
The test of relevance for all of us will be to apply that
approach in a way that will bring results for Burundi
and Sierra Leone, in the first instance, and others as
time goes on. The Chair and the Vice-Chairs will be
working closely over the next several weeks with
members of the Commission and with the Governments
of Burundi and Sierra Leone to frame the next stage of
the Commission's work, building on the first round of
work accomplished so far.

For its part, the Support Office will do everything
it can to support the Commission in that important
work. The Office must work with the players in the
United Nations system, both in the field and at
Headquarters, to ensure that the strategies of the
Commission are applied to all relevant areas of the
United Nations work.

An important part of the Commission's mandate
will be to marshal resources. While we all agree that
the Peacebuilding Commission is not another donor
forum, its work should generate significant additional
resources for countries committed to staying on track
for peace, to prevent their becoming, once again, the
forgotten crises.

The Secretary-General just announced, a few
days ago, the first allocation under the Peacebuilding
Fund - $35 million for Burundi - and will soon
make an announcement regarding Sierra Leone. The
Fund, however, can act only as a catalyst. Alone, it
cannot address the peacebuilding resource needs of
countries emerging from conflict. The role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in marshalling resources
will be much broader, although the Peacebuilding
Fund - which has been set up rapidly and which has
attracted very significant contributions from donors -
is an extremely useful start.

It is only by bringing all the actors together that
the Peacebuilding Commission can fulfil its mandate to
advise on and propose integrated strategies for
peacebuilding and to identify critical elements of
peacebuilding in the countries under its consideration,
bringing them together under an integrated strategic
approach. It is in that way that the Commission can
work inclusively to define its own objectives, enter
into agreements with the countries under its
consideration and provide guidance to the various
actors as to how they can meet the broad goals of

peacebuilding across the range of political, security,
human rights and economic and social interventions -
always under the lead of the country concerned itself.

As I said, my Office is committed to supporting
the Commission and the overall efforts of the
international community in that important endeavour,
including through extracting lessons learned and
becoming the repository for peacebuilding advice
within the United Nations Secretariat. We are now
closer to completing the staffing requirements for that
stage of the Office's work, and will continue to discuss
with members of the Commission their vision for the
work of the Support Office, in particular in the context
of this year's budget discussions.

Under the leadership of El Salvador, in its
capacity as Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, work on lessons learned will begin soon,
with the establishment of a working group that will
include broad participation by all Commission
members.

In the long run, peacebuilding must not be
another layer of work for Governments or the United
Nations or donors on the ground. Instead, it should
define the way in which we frame our interventions to
ensure that we can most effectively respond to the
immediate needs of a post-conflict society and keep
hard-won peace processes on a sustainable track.

