Mr. Danon (Israel): From Brussels to Istanbul and
from the Ivory Coast to Tel Aviv, the world is facing an
unprecedented surge of terrorism and violent extremism.

Radical extremist groups such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab have declared war on our societies. Terror
is the common enemy of humankind and requires a
unified effort to fight it. The State of Israel, my State,
stands shoulder to shoulder with the international
community in this global effort.

Unfortunately, the reality of terror is one that
the people of Israel have known for decades, and it
continues today. From the Fedayeen attacks of the
1950s to airplane hijackings in the 1970s and suicide
bombings in the 19905, Israel has faced wave after
wave of terrorist violence.

In the last six months alone, we have endured more
than 300 attacks. That means two terror attacks a day,
every day, for half a year. Thirty-four people have been
killed and hundreds injured.

In order to defeat this terror, we must have moral
clarity. The decision to pick up a knife or put on a
suicide vest is not about human nature. There is nothing
natural about repeatedly stabbing an innocent woman
in front of her home or shooting a young husband and
wife in front of their children. Terrorism must never be
excused orjustified; it must be fought. And there can be
no double standards in this fight.

Since the beginning of this wave of terror, the
Security Council has not condemned a single terror
attack against Israel, not even one. The lives of Israelis
killed in the streets of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv are no

less precious than those of Europeans murdered in
Paris and Brussels. The attacks against Israel must be
condemned by the Council. Terror is terror is terror.

In order to fight terror effectively, the Council must
speak out against all terrorist groups, without distinction.

Hizbullah, a terrorist proxy of Iran, openly threatens
to launch attacks against Israeli civilians. Just recently,
the leader of Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, warned of
an attack on the ammonia storage tanks in the Israeli
city of Haifa. He described it as "exactly the same as a
nuclear bomb".

Let me remind all present that Hizbullah has more
than 100,000 rockets and long-range missiles that can
target any place in Israel. It has transformed the villages
of southern Lebanon into terror outposts, placing rocket
launchers next to schools and United Nations facilities,
and storing missiles in living rooms.

The Secretary-General warned only recently that
Hizbullah was ready and willing to use those weapons.
He has condemned Hizbullah's alarming rhetoric. He
emphasized the very grave consequence of this military
buildup not just for Israel but for the entire region.

Even the Gulf States and the Arab League have
called Hizbullah a terrorist organization. So why
does the Security Council refuse to call this terror
organization by its proper name? If it makes threats
like a terror organization, if it stockpiles weapons like
a terror organization, if it shows disregard for human
life like a terror organization, then what is it?

Hizbullah is a terror organization, and it is
preparing for another round of violence. The Council
must take action now. Resolution 1701 (2006) must be
enforced. Hizbullah must be disarmed.

The major source ofviolent extremism in our region
is Iran, the world's leading State sponsor of terrorism.

Iran sponsors terror groups throughout the region,
including the deadly activities of Hizbullah in Syria.
Recently Iran conducted ballistic-missile tests. These
missiles are designed to carry the nuclear warheads
they have promised not to build. Written in Hebrew on
the side of these missiles were the words "Israel must
be wiped off the face of the Earth".

Such a threat by one State Member of the United
Nations against another Member State is outrageous
and unacceptable.
The voice of the Council must be heard. Iran must
be condemned.

While Iran supports Hizbullah in the north, it
sponsors and supplies Hamas in the south. Hamas,
an internationally designated terrorist organization,
also employs the cynical terror tactic of using civilian
infrastructure for terror operations. And it has never
stopped working to achieve its goal: the destruction
of the State of Israel. Ever since the end of the last
conflict, Hamas has worked to rebuild it arsenal of
rockets and reconstruct its network of terror tunnels.
When groups like Hamas and Hizbullah are more
interested in warfare with Israel than in the welfare of
their own people, it is a recipe for disaster. The Council
must denounce these terror organizations by name.

Because of the ongoing need to protect our people,
Israel has developed techniques, technologies and
tools for counter-terrorism unmatched by any other
country. We are committed to sharing this knowledge
and expertise through bilateral collaboration and
constructive engagement here at the United Nations.
As I said at the beginning, Israel stands firmly with the
family of nations in the fight against terror. We expect
that the international community and the Council will
stand with Israel in our own fight against terror. If we
stand united, we can defeat global terrorism and stop
those who seek to undermine our way oflife.

