Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): May I at the very outset
express my appreciation to the United Kingdom for the
very timely initiative of organizing this very important
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding.

I have the honour and pleasure to speak on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

During the relatively short time of its existence,
the Peacebuilding Commission has worked diligently
towards fulfilling its mandate of addressing the special
needs of the countries on its agenda, working
specifically towards their rehabilitation, recovery and
reconstruction with the clear aim of creating the
foundation for sustainable development, as stipulated
by its founding resolutions: General Assembly
resolution 60/ 180 and Security Council resolution 1645
(2005).

The underlying feature of the Peacebuilding
Commission's sustained engagement with the countries
on its agenda has been to strengthen State capacity by
ensuring national ownership of the peacebuilding
process through the inclusion ofa wide cross section of
key players in the decision-making process,
particularly as it relates to the identification of
priorities and the recommendation of strategies for
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Our focus after virtually two years of the
Commission's existence is on further bolstering its
effectiveness and capabilities to better fulfil its
mandate as the lead player in peace consolidation and
on ensuring that the wide network of actors involved
can operate effectively, efficiently and coherently in
building legitimate national ownership and in
establishing and strengthening capacity where
necessary, while maintaining sustained international
attention on the countries on its agenda.

In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses the central role of the Peacebuilding
Commission as the dedicated institutional mechanism
to address the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards recovery, security and sustainable
development through a coordinated and integrated
approach to post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation.

A close scrutiny of the concept paper presented as
the basis for these discussions reveals certain
fundamental questions, the most critical of which are:
What do such civilian capacities encompass? How do
such capacities differ from already existing
international capacity, especially the relationship
between such capacities and national capacities, the
improvement of which must remain the central
objective of all peace consolidation efforts?
Furthermore, will the utilization of such capacities
come at the expense of other elements of the
development agenda? Following upon this, the
Movement hopes to see more detailed, inclusive and
wide-ranging discussions on how such civilian
capacities are to be organized, financed and deployed
and on the nature and extent of the role of the United
Nations in that regard.

Additionally, the concept paper seems, in our
view, to be based on a similar document under
discussion in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, on enhanced rapidly deployable capacity.
In that regard, NAM. believes that clarification as to the
nature of the relationship between the two documents
would be appreciated.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains of the view
that the leadership and the coordinating role of the
Peacebuilding Commission are critical components of
the peacebuilding architecture and the spearhead for a
coordinated, coherent and integrated approach to post-
conflict peacebuilding and reconciliation, as
underpinned by the founding resolutions. The lead role
of the Commission in post-conflict situations is
becoming even more crucial, particularly against the
backdrop of the dire situation being faced by countries
emerging from conflict, including critical humanitarian
and socio-economic challenges such as the high levels
of debt burden and severe fiscal constraints, which
require the provision of medium- to long-term
resources in order to strengthen the foundations for
security and stability countries emerging from conflict.

The issues raised by the concept paper -
leadership on the ground, the need for a rapidly
deployable and skilled civilian capacity and more rapid
and flexible funding - are already being considered
by the Peacebuilding Commission, especially in its
country-specific configurations, and should therefore
continue to be subjects for discussion and analysis, in
accordance with the Commission's mandate. Advice
and recommendations on these and other conceptual
issues should thus be provided by the Commission.

Furthermore, in addition to the discussions within
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Non-Aligned
Movement is of the view that consultations among the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on the issues raised by
the paper can unearth practical workable results and
pragmatic recommendations in an integrated and
holistic manner. Given the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission as an intergovernmental advisory body,
the Movement considers it appropriate - and indeed
necessary - that any advice required for the
consideration of these issues be sought from the
Commission.

The Movement remains convinced that the
appropriate forum for addressing matters relating to
building peace in post-conflict situations is the
Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard, and taking
into account the equal stake of the principal organs of
the United Nations in the long-term success and
viability of the Commission, robust efforts to craft
additional comprehensive yet flexible measures to
consolidate peace in post-conflict societies should be
based on the fullest utilization of the capabilities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

