The President (interpretation from French): I should
like, at the outset of the meeting, to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile, His Excellency Mr. Jose Miguel Insulza,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, His Excellency
Mr. Amr Moussa, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, His Excellency Mr. Herve de Charette, the Vice-
Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
His Excellency Mr. Klaus Kinkel, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, His Excellency Mr. Ali Alatas, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
His Excellency Mr. EVgeniy Primakov and the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, His Excellency the Right Honourable Malcolm
Rifkind. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to them.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories.

Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/790)

Letter dated 26 September 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1996/792)

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Canada, Djibouti, Ireland,
Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Norway, Pakistan, Senegal, Tunisia and Turkey, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Levy (Israel)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali (Algeria),
Mr. Fowler (Canada), Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr.
Campbell (Ireland), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr. Al-
Sabah (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon), Mr.
Agam (Malaysia), Mr. Filali (Morocco), Mr. Biprn
Lian (Norway), Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Ka
(Senegal), Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), and Mr. Tang
(Turkey) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter dated 27 September 1996 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, which will
be issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/1996/797 and reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite His Excellency, Mr. F arouk Kaddumi,
Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine to the
fifty-first session of the United Nations General
Assembly and Head of the Political Department of
the Palestine Liberation Organization, to participate
in the current debate of the Security Council with
regard to the situation in the occupied Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, and the latest illegal
Israeli actions in Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine to the
fifty-first session of the United Nations General Assembly
and Head of the Political Department of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, Mr. Farouk Kaddumi, to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and with previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kaddumi
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
response to the requests contained in letters dated 26
September 1996 from the Permanent Representative of
Saudi Arabia and Egypt addressed to the President of the
Security Council, contained in documents S/1996/790 and
S/1996/792, respectively.

 

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1996/772,
S/ 1996/779, S/ 1996/786 and S/1996/791, letters dated 23,
24, 25 and 26 September 1996, respectively, from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1996/793, letter dated
26 September 1996 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/ 1996/795, letter
dated 26 September 1996 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People addressed to the Secretary-General.


The President (interpretation from French): The first
speaker is the Head of the Observer Delegation of Palestine
to the fifty-first session of the United Nations General
Assembly and Head of the Political Department of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now call.


