Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our
condolences to the Government and the people of
Mexico for the destruction and loss of human life
caused by the terrible earthquakes.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson ofthe African Union Commission, and
the Chairperson of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations for their briefings on today's topic.
We welcome Ethiopia's initiative in holding a meeting
on reforming United Nations peacekeeping.

In June 2014, the Russian Federation, as President
of the Security Council that month, held an open debate
on the same subject (see S/PV.7196). Even then it was
evident that United Nations peacekeeping activities
needed to adapt to present-day and international
realities. Since that time, a great deal of work has
been done. We have had reports from the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and several
reports by the Secretary-General, and reform of the
peacebuilding architecture is under way. However,
there are new tasks in the area of peacekeeping that
will require comprehensive discussion both among
Member States and in the Secretariat, with the aim
of developing consistent and balanced approaches,
dealing with the fragmented nature of the political and
legal foundations, crafting corresponding doctrines
and the timely drafting normative documents based on
the analysis of accumulated experience.

Russia's principal position is that to settle any
conflict we must first use political methods with
an emphasis on national dialogue, and that helping
to establish the right conditions for that should be at
the forefront of peacekeeping operations. The first,
founding principle of United Nations peacekeeping
is as valid as it has always been - that Blue Helmets
can be deployed only with the consent of the parties to
a conflict.

The second pillar of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is impartiality. It is absolutely unacceptable
for peacekeepers to side with any party to a conflict
under any pretext. Our attitude to strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping missions is one of extreme
caution. Our peacekeepers can use force only in self-
defence and to protect their mandate. The experience of
giving peacekeepers additional authority, for example
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Mali, has
so far not convinced us that the results on the ground
justify the increased casualties among peacekeepers in
operations involving force. If we are to retain the option
of robust mandates, they should be extremely carefully
calibrated to specific situations.

We welcome the ongoing thought process in the
Secretariat with regard to peacekeeping reform. The
Secretary-General has a certain degree of leeway in
administrative decisions, including on organizational
changes in the structure of the Secretariat and United
Nations missions. However, where the political
aspects of peacekeeping are concerned, any changes
must be approved by the relevant intergovernmental
body, and that applies particularly to sensitive issues
touching on State sovereignty. A recent trend, actively
promoted by the Secretariat and a support group from
among certain States, is that of so-called intelligence
in peacekeeping. Of course, peacekeeping operations
consist first and foremost of military units deployed
in regions where there are security threats, and in that
case they certainly cannot manage without appropriate
reconnaissance of the area, but even here there remains
the important question of how the information received
will be controlled and its confidentiality maintained.

However, we will not accept any attempts to
interpret such intelligence broadly or apply it flexibly.
Any transfer of data regarding the operational activities

of any peacekeeping mission can occur only with the
consent of the host Government, and only for the
clearly defined, limited, legitimate goals of ensuring
the security of peacekeepers and the protection of
civilians, an approach endorsed by Member States
when they approved the report (A/70/19) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We believe
that it would be unacceptable to interpret arbitrarily the
mandates given by Member States to the Secretariat.
It would undermine the authority of the United
Nations and have an adverse impact on the conduct of
peacekeeping operations.

One very important factor in the maintenance
of international peace and security is a genuine
partnership among the members of the international
community. We welcome the efforts of the regional and
subregional organizations that are operating in areas
under their jurisdiction in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We note
the significant achievements of the African Union in
establishing a continent-wide architecture for peace
and security. We firmly believe that only the proactive
efforts of Africans themselves will make it possible to
resolve conflicts on the continent.

We call on all States to help to ensure that African
countries play a principal role in determining ways to
establish peace and security, in line with the principle
that they themselves have established of African
solutions to African issues. African countries not only
have to deal with domestic problems and conflict but are
also facing an unprecedented surge in terrorist activity
that has increased sharply as a result of adventurist
military actions in the Middle East and North Africa.

The flood of arms and munitions flowing through
Libya southward to Mali, the Niger and Chad has created
numerous terrorist threats in the Sahara-Sahel region.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has ramped
up its cooperation with Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb. In northern Mali and the Niger,
Al-Mourabitoun has launched activities in an attempt
to unite every extremist group in Mali, the Niger and
Mauritania. Al-Shabaab remains active in Somalia.

Russia has continued to advocate for more effective

assistance to African countries in building their

capacity to combat terrorism. We stand ready to share

our experience in counter-terrorism with our African

partners. Hundreds of African peacekeepers and police

are trained every year in Russian educational facilities.

African countries are raising the question of material
and financial assistance for their efforts in maintaining
international peace and security, including as part of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, and we are ready to work to arrive at
mutually acceptable agreements.

There are also prospects for cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), an opportunity
predicated on the Russian initiative to establish a United
Nations mission in south-eastern Ukraine to protect the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, with
the goal of facilitating strict and full implementation
of the Minsk agreements on resolving the crisis in
Ukraine. As we know, those agreements were approved
under the Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
2202 (2015), and it would not be a good idea to retreat
from them.

Peacekeeping is one of the key areas of United
Nations activities and has enormous practical
significance for the lives of millions of people. Every
Member State contributes to it, particularly the troop-
contributing countries. We call for all shared issues
pertaining to peacekeeping to be discussed in forums
dedicated to them, such as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee. I
believe that synergistic efforts at the General Assembly
and Security Council will enable us to better preserve
the universal nature and unique legitimacy of United
Nations peacekeeping.

