Mr. Luksic' (Montenegro): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate the delegation of Nigeria on its successful
conduct of the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his second report and recommendations on
security sector reform (S/2013/480). Montenegro
particularly welcomes this afternoon's adoption of
a draft resolution that I am sure will provide for a
strengthen United Nations role in support ofthe security
sector reform (SSR) agenda.

Montenegro fully aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

Seven years after the first Security Council
presidential statement on this topic (S/PRST/2007/3),
our understanding of security sector reform (SSR) has
significantly evolved. We realize that SSR is not only
about activities directed towards the professionalization
of individual security pillars, such as police, defence,
border management and civil emergency, inter alia.
It is indeed much more. If we truly want to have an
effective, legitimate and accountable security sector,
we need to consider SSR within a broader, more
comprehensive approach that should be consistent with
the values and principles of democracy, the rule of law,
good governance and respect for human rights.

The main objective of SSR is to help ensure that
people feel safer. But if we wish to have safe and stable
societies, because of their closely interconnected
nature, we have to look at SSR through the prism of
security and development. In that context, security
threats must be tackled through joint efforts and
in an integrated manner across the entire nexus of
development, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the rule
of law and human rights. That will allow us to have
societies with durable peace and in a position to gain
from SSR efforts.

Taking into account its vast accumulation of
expertise and knowledge, the United Nations, through
its inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, is
well positioned to provide such holistic and customized
support to nationally led undertakings of member
States. Moreover, as stated in the Secretary-General's
latest report,

"partnerships must be deepened and expanded
given the increase in the number and type of
actors providing support to security sector reform"
(S/2013/480, p. 2).

I would like to echo the message from today's
draft resolution that security sector reform is critical
to addressing impunity for grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, as that is a
Vital enabling factor for the success of SSR.

We could not agree more with the Secretary-
General's assessment that

"experience has shown that the viability of security
sector reform efforts depends on the political
environment in which reform is carried out" (ibid).

It is in that sense that inclusivity is one of the instrumental
factors for the success of SSR. To be transformative and
sustainable, SSR processes, with host Governments
playing a primary role, need to promote inclusiveness,
including in institution-building. That assumes the
active engagement of national and local authorities,
along with parliaments, communities, civil society,
academia and women's groups. Only in that way will
the political reforms be allowed to take root and open
a space for national dialogue, reconciliation efforts
and other initiatives to develop. Focus also needs to
be equally placed on transparency, accountability and
effective management and oversight, with a view to
strengthening the legitimacy and integrity of security
institutions.

Fully cognizant of this dynamic, Montenegro
has been diligently working to improve the overall
functioning of its security sector in order to be able to
respond successfully to the threats of our age. Along
with an intensive campaign and activities in the area
of the rule of law as our national priority, we have
undertaken further security and intelligence sector
reforms. As a result, new legislation has recently been
passed to ensure that the national security agency and
military intelligence service operate in accordance
with international standards and best practices.

Aware of contemporary challenges in the area of
cyberterrorism, we are implementing a cybersecurity
strategy for the period 2013-2017 and other
cybersecurity-related regulations. The implementation
of a law on parliamentary oversight of the security and
defence sectors will further strengthen the legislative
and oversight role of the Montenegrin Parliament. We
also participate in the Building Integrity programme,
which seeks to increase capacity to combat corruption
in the security sector. Montenegro is also committed
to the implementation of measures related to gender
equality, with special emphasis on resolution 1325
(2000) as well as to training concerning gender-based
Violence.

Let me conclude by expressing our firm support
for the full implementation of the first ever stand-
alone resolution on SSR and to all efforts of the United
Nations system, complemented by the activities of the
Group of Friends of SSR, that aim to contribute to
further advancing the concept of SSR within the United
Nations and beyond.

