Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to welcome your presence at the
Security Council, presiding over this open debate. I
should like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Under-Secretary-General Holmes and Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights Kang for their
briefings.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Council's discussion of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Over the past decade, the Council has
been paying ever greater attention to the protection of
civilians and has made positive efforts to deal with this
issue. However, with the changes in the nature of
armed conflict and the effects of various complicated
factors, large numbers of civilians in many regions of
the world continue to be harmed by armed conflicts.
Thus the international community continues to face an
uphill struggle in addressing the protection of civilians.

We are deeply concerned over the threat and
harm to the lives and property of civilians in situations
of armed conflict. We urge parties to conflicts to
comply with international humanitarian law and
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and to
protect the lives, property and legitimate rights and
interests of civilians. We are in favour of strengthening
the Council's efforts in this regard.

The issue of the protection of civilians involves
many aspects and is very complex indeed. The
countries concerned, relevant international agencies of
the United Nations and regional organizations should
make the most of their strengths and expertise, working
in a concerted manner to respond to this issue together.

The Security Council bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and, as such, it is duty bound to keep the protection of
civilians in armed conflict on its agenda and to deal
with it accordingly. The Council must tackle this issue
at its root, devoting greater attention to preventing and
containing conflicts. At the same time, it is necessary
to make sure that this issue is addressed within the
overall framework of political processes aimed at the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies with national Governments. When
providing assistance, the international community and
external organizations must comply with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, fully respect the
will, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
concerned, and refrain from forceful interference.
Dialogue between the United Nations and non-State
armed groups may be helpful in the protection of
civilians, but such dialogue should be conducted within
the general framework of cooperation between the
United Nations and the country in question and with
the consent of its national Government.

With regard to the question of impunity, we
support the leading role played by the domestic judicial
system of the country concerned as the main avenue
for achieving justice. The international community has,
over the years, developed a relatively complete system
of international legal norms. The 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Protocols provide a
comprehensive and systematic regime for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, in
the reality of today's world, many provisions are yet to
be fully respected and observed. Therefore, the
pressing issue is to ensure the comprehensive, just and
effective implementation of the existing norms. In this
context, the competent United Nations entities and
international treaty bodies should continue to play their
important roles.

The Council has adopted many resolutions and
presidential statements on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The priority for the next stage should
be to push forward the effective implementation of
these documents.

Tasking United Nations peacekeeping missions
with the protection of civilians is a decision that the
Council takes on a case-by-case basis. We are of the
View that a mandate to protect civilians should be
prepared in the light of real need, taking fully into
account the situation on the ground and the existing
capacities and conditions of a given peacekeeping
mission. A one-size-fits-all approach is not advisable.
We attach great importance to the protection of
civilians, but we are not in favour of indiscriminately
expanding such mandates while ignoring real-world
conditions and the physical viability of implementing
such mandates.

It is necessary to emphasize that the key to
ensuring a successful peacekeeping mission is
adherence to the three principles governing
peacekeeping operations, namely established local
consent, mission neutrality and the non-use of force
except in self-defence. Any deviation from these
principles in implementing a mandate to protect
civilians would only create more controversy and
problems than it could solve, and could even
jeopardize the overall peacekeeping process.

In addressing the mandate to protect civilians in
armed conflicts, the efforts of the Council alone are far
from adequate. Tackling the problem through its
symptoms, while ignoring the root causes of a conflict,
will not contribute to finding a lasting solution to the
protection of civilians. Today, most conflicts take place
in the less developed areas of the world. The United
Nations should mobilize world resources and provide
the relevant countries with financial and technical
assistance to help them to develop their economies,
free themselves from poverty and thereby avoid
conflicts.

We hope that the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and other
international institutions and regional organizations
will play a part in assisting the countries concerned in
areas such as economic development, conflict
resolution and the protection of civilians. We also
welcome non-governmental organizations playing a
more positive role in that regard.

