Ms. Sison (United States of America): Resolution
2360 (2017), which we have just adopted, reaffirms the
Council's commitment to continue the work started by
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, two members of the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who tragically lost their lives in March while on
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. By
renewing the Group of Experts' mandate, the resolution
sends a clear message that the Council will continue
to advance Michael and Zaida's work to advance peace
and address human rights Violations and abuses in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The resolution
also underscores the Council's commitment to take
action against those who seek to harm United Nations
personnel, including the Group of Experts.

To the families of Michael and Zaida, the members
of the Groups of Experts, the personnel of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
Special Representative Sidikou, let me say that our
expressions of support and praise are just not enough.
We know that they deserve our commitment to finding
out the truth and holding those who target United
Nations personnel accountable. Today we took a small,
but important, step to do that.

Just as important, the resolution is for the Congolese,
who have witnessed far too much violence, corruption
and far too many human rights abuses. The gruesome
reports coming out of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, specifically from the Kasais, should prompt us
into action not only in the Security Council, but also
in the Human Rights Council. Just yesterday, we read
reports that over 3,000 people had been killed in the
Kasais region in the past eight months.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo military
has notjust engaged in violence against civilians, it has
actually filmed summary executions. We have heard
numerous reports of villages being burned and looted,
rape used as a weapon of war, and children being
targeted and executed in their homes. Approximately
20,000 people have fled the Kasais since early April,
and yet the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
rejected offers for international support to investigate
the violence. Zaida and Michael lost their lives seeking
the truth in the Kasais. We cannot let that search end,
particularly as the reports coming out of the region
grow increasingly disturbing and the refugee flows
continue unabated.

There will be no peace or security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without elections
and a democratic transition of power. All parties,
both the opposition and the Government, must remain
committed to the 31 December agreement and take
action to expedite the implementation of the agreement,
including much needed confidence-building measures.

The Council and the United States Government
stand ready to hold accountable those that foment
violence, undermine peace and increase instability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

