I wish to thank both Special Adviser Khan and Ambassador Bahr Aluloom for their extensive briefings on this difficult topic. The United States is committed to supporting the critical work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) to collect, store, and preserve evidence of atrocities by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We urge the Iraqi Government to recommit to fair, evidence-based trials that allow the victims and survivors of ISIS brutality and false ideology to have their day in court. Those evidence-based trials will not only establish the clear culpability of ISIS and its members for the perpetration of such atrocities, but will help showcase Iraq's justice system and its commitment to the rule of law. We are encouraged to hear that the Iraqi Parliament is considering legislation that would allow Iraq to prosecute ISIS suspects for international crimes. We support such efforts. It is imperative that those heinous crimes be labelled for exactly what they were - genocide and crimes against humanity - so that no one can ever doubt what took place, and so as to reflect what the Iraqi people have overcome. We also support UNITAD's expanded cooperation with the Government of Iraq, including with the Iraqi judiciary. We are confident that their increased cooperation will contribute to additional successful prosecutions of ISIS members in Iraq and abroad, and that the partnership between UNITAD, the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government will help to ensure positive outcomes for Iraq and the victims of those awful crimes. We know that coronavirus disease further complicated that critical work, worsening already difficult conditions. But, despite those obstacles, Iraq's Mass Graves Directorate of the Martyrs Foundation and the Medico-Legal Directorate of the Ministry of Health, in cooperation with UNITAD, continue to build the capacity of national Iraqi forensic teams to conduct evidence-based investigations and exhumations. That was evidenced in late October when Iraqi authorities resumed the exhumations of mass graves left by ISIS in Solagh, known as the "grave of mothers", where dozens of elderly Yazidi women were executed by ISIS because they were deemed too old to be sold into sexual slavery. In that case, and in so many others like it, we must never forget the brutality that ISIS inflicted on their victims. We recognize and applaud the Government of Iraq for its plans to exhume all mass graves and to remember and honour all those victimized by ISIS brutality. The United States also recognizes that while the evidence-based trials are absolutely critical to justice and to the healing process, so is support for victims and survivors. That includes psychosocial support, as well as the realization of victims' rights through legal proceedings. Exhumations are a painful process that can trigger difficult emotions, including sadness, anxiety, anger, loneliness and fear, and we commend UNITAD and its partners for providing psychosocial support to staff, survivors and family members. We also commend the Iraqi Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government for their continuing support of those goals. In recognition of this critical work, the United States continues its financial support to UNITAD. As we noted in our last meeting on UNITAD, the United States provided $2 million in support of UNITAD's first exhumations of mass grave sites in Iraq in the Sinjar region. As of December 2020, United States funding for UNITAD totals $8.85 million, which supports a wide range of different activities associated with UNITAD's mandates. The United States once again urges Member States to repatriate, prosecute, rehabilitate and reintegrate, as appropriate, their citizens and nationals who travelled to Iraq to join ISIS. Iraq should not have to continue to shoulder responsibility for those foreign terrorist fighters and associated family members alone. We note the valuable support UNITAD can provide to other Member States in conducting such investigations and prosecutions. We thank the Government of Iraq and UNITAD for their continuing cooperation and work to hold ISIS accountable for all its atrocities.
