Mr. Rostow (United States of America): A year
ago, the abominable terrorist attacks of 11 September
compelled the international community to take a stand
in defence of the shared values embodied in the United
Nations Charter. The adoption of resolution 1373
(2001) and the ensuing work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) represent a chapter in the history of
the Security Council and the United Nations in which
we can take pride together, while forever recalling the
mortal menace and cruelty that have spurred our
collective action. The efforts of the CTC are an
essential front in our common fight.

By now, all are familiar with the series of binding
obligations that this resolution imposes on each and
every Member State. Moreover, the establishment of
the CTC through operative paragraph 6 of resolution
1373 (2001) will have an enduring resonance and
significance. I might add that one should reflect on
where we would be today had the CTC not been
created. We would be way behind in the fight against
terrorism and in the effort to improve the world's
capacity to conduct counter-terrorism operations and to
protect every nation State against terrorism.
Last September, during the drafting and
negotiation of resolution 1373 (2001), my delegation
admitted to scepticism at the intent to create a body to
monitor its implementation. However, as my remarks
just indicated, that scepticism has long since vanished.
The achievements of the CTC in this first year would
not have been possible without the contributions of the
people who stand behind it. First and foremost, of
course, the United States would like to commend
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock for his vigorous
and committed leadership of the CTC. We would also
like to thank the dedicated team of the United Kingdom
mission - Anna Clunes, Dominic Fortescue, Juliet
Gilbert, Iain MacLeod and Karen Williams - for their
hard work in support of Ambassador Greenstock's
efforts.

Secondly, we commend the three Vice-
Chairmen - the Ambassadors of Colombia, Mauritius
and Russia - for their, and their staffs', tireless efforts
in making sure that the three subcommittees conducted
their work in an efficient and professional manner and,
indeed, in making the innovation of creating the
subcommittees such a success. Thirdly, we would like
to acknowledge the important contributions made by
the dedicated team of CTC experts. Without their
cooperation and skill, the CTC could not have
reviewed and responded to the over 200 reports it has
so far received.

Finally, I would like to extend our congratulations
to and acknowledgement of the important contribution
of the Secretariat in support of the CTC.

Ambassador Greenstock has insisted on serious
and energetic implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and on monitoring by the CTC. He has been
imaginative and effective both in building and
maintaining consensus within the CTC and among the
United Nations membership. Indeed, in this work, he
has set an example which others might follow, to the
general benefit of the Organization.

Effective counter-terrorism requires international
cooperation. There is simply no substitute for it, and
the CTC has encouraged this cooperation. Effective
counter-terrorism is also an effort to vindicate and
defend the rule of law. The effective protection of
human rights is always the defence of the rule of law.
Terrorists and their supporters are enemies of the rule
of law and we must not have any confusion on that
point. The core of resolution 1373 (2001) is an
obligation on all States to strengthen their legal
institutions and capacities to combat terrorism. In that
respect, there is no incompatibility between this effort
and developing the rule of law and, therefore, the
protection of basic human rights.

We believe that the priorities of the CTC for the
next period, as set forth by Ambassador Greenstock
and endorsed by the Committee, are sound and provide
good guidance for the future work of the Committee,
but they are based on the achievements of the
Committee in its first year. The first achievement is the
substantial number of States revising or upgrading their
laws to fall in line with resolution 1373 (2001).
Secondly, the Committee has helped accelerate the
pace of ratification of the 12 international terrorism
conventions and protocols, particularly the conventions
on terrorist bombings and on the financing of
terrorism. Finally, a wide array of international
institutions and regional and subregional organizations
have joined the CTC in the effort to enhance and speed
up implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In the
view of the CTC, that is an indispensable partnership.

Another critical aspect of the CTC's work this
past year - and it will be in the future - has been its
efforts to facilitate the provision of technical assistance
to those States lacking capacity. That effort has
included the creation of what will be a comprehensive
dictionary or database of technical-assistance providers
and an ongoing effort to facilitate the link-up between
States requiring assistance and States willing to
provide assistance.

As the CTC begins its second year of work, it
should continue to approach its task with the same
level of urgency and enthusiasm that has characterized
its work over the past year. We also urge all Member
States to continue to cooperate with the CTC and to
implement their obligations under resolution 1373
(2001) with a sense of urgency. It cannot be stated
often enough that the threat of terrorist attack is still
with us at all times.

For my country, the one-year anniversary of
resolution 1373 (2001) is, and forever shall be, bound
to the events of 11 September 2001, when nearly 3,000
persons from over 90 countries lost their lives in the
attacks we all remember. It is important that the United
Nations has taken key steps in this struggle against
terrorism, and will in the future, by strengthening
international standards and norms through resolution
1373 (2001) and the work of the CTC, and by striking
to cut off the financial lifeblood of terrorists through
resolutions 1267 (2000) and 1390 (2002). The United
Nations and this institution have shown their capacity
for important ongoing and indispensable effort on
behalf of the international community as a whole.

