Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing and
to assure him of our full support in finding a political
solution to all conflicts, not just the one in Syria.

Since we are discussing the situation in the Middle
East and in particular the current situation in Syria, let
me begin with a very sad observation. Even with our
unanimously adopted resolutions, such as resolution
2401 (2018), we are still not seeing any substantial
change on the ground. The fighting is far from being
over and the human suffering is tremendous. Taking
into consideration the current situation and the growing
risk of the loss of human life owing simply to a lack
of food or medicine, we should try to do our utmost
to find possible ways to ensure that life-saving aid
convoys can reach those in need. Unfortunately, that
applies not only to eastern Ghouta but also to Idlib and
Aleppo provinces. We must find a way to alleviate the
suffering of ordinary Syrians. The civilian population
in Syria has already suffered too much.

International public opinion is watching our
meetings and sees our lack of agreement on the most
basic principles under international humanitarian law.
The Council bears enormous responsibility and will
be held accountable for its actions. We therefore call
on the Council to take the necessary steps to ensure
that all the parties to the conflict, especially the
regime and its allies, implement the ceasefire, enable
humanitarian access and medical evacuations and fully
engage in the United Nations-led talks in Geneva, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), which represent the
best path to peace.

With regard to the issue of chemical weapons, a
century ago that was a normal way to wage war. Just
recently we commemorated the hundredth anniversary
of the first use of chemical weapons, on the Western
and Eastern fronts of the First World War alike. French,
British, American and other Allied soldiers were
targeted with chlorine in Ypres, while Russian soldiers
were dying from the same gruesome weapons in
Bolimow, now part of Polish territory. Now, a century
later, we are being challenged by these ghastly weapons
yet again. Our nations are seeing the effects of the same
toxic gas through the images of civilians who sought
refuge in basements in Ghouta and other areas in Syria.

Chemical weapons were banned when the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) cam into effect
in 1997. We had begun a new chapter in the history
of non-proliferation and disarmament. All of us in
this Chamber agree that the use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere is deplorable and unacceptable.
Can we really allow the success story of the CWC to
be reversed? Will the Security Council allow the vision
of a world free of chemical weapons to be destroyed? It
is regrettable that the establishment of an independent,
impartial investigative mechanism on the use of
chemical weapons in Syria was vetoed on Tuesday
(see S/PV.8228), thereby enabling those responsible for
chemical attacks to remain unpunished. Accountability
for such acts is a requirement under international law
and is central to achieving durable peace in Syria.
As members of the Security Council, we must find a
way to reach agreement on how to properly respond
to chemical attacks in Syria. We hope to see the Fact-
finding Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) deployed to Douma
as soon as possible. We reiterate our appreciation to
the Director-General and staff of the OPCW for their
commitment to its goals and work, often in particularly
challenging circumstances.

