Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) under the leadership of Ambassador
Quinlan, as well as the Panel of Experts, for their
continued work in supporting implementation of the
Security Council's resolutions on Iran. The United
Kingdom would like to pay warm tribute to Ambassador
Quinlan's efforts during the period in which he has
chaired the Committee.

As is well known, following negotiations in
Vienna in November between the E3+3 and Iran on
the comprehensive agreement regarding Iran's nuclear
programme, agreement was reached on continuing
negotiations and extending the terms of the interim
nuclear deal until the end of June 2015. We aim to have a
political framework for a final deal as soon as possible.
The recent Vienna talks were tough and intensive, but
progress was made. Both sides are committed to a deal
that we still believe is possible. Extension does not and
must not mean a pause. We have momentum towards a
deal and must capitalize on that. Further talks have also
just concluded in Geneva on continuing to explore with
Iran ways to bridge some of the significant gaps that
remain. Iran needs to show greater flexibility with its
programme, and take some tough decisions, if we are
to achieve a lasting deal. In return, the E3+3 is willing
to give substantial sanctions relief that would have a
positive impact on Iran's economy.

As today's report reminds us, and as the Chair ofthe
Committee has just emphasized in his remarks, while
negotiations continue the bulk of sanctions, including
all United Nations sanctions and obligations on States
Members of the United Nations arising from Security
Council resolutions, remain in place and fully in force.

Turning to the work of the Committee, the United
Kingdom remains concerned about breaches by Iran
of its international obligations, and by Iran's failure to
respond to the concerns of the international community,
represented by the Committee. We note in particular
Iran's continued failure to respond to previous requests
for information on the interdiction on 31 March of a
vessel carrying a cargo of conventional arms on the
Red Sea. We urge Iran to reply to the Committee's
letter of 9 July seeking comments on the incident. We
also urge Iran to respond to the Committee's letter of
27 March concerning a carbon fibre interdiction. We
continue to call on Iran to engage with the Committee
on such incidents.

The Committee must continue its work to robustly
implement and enforce the relevant Security Council
sanctions measures on Iran. We therefore welcome
its guidance and assistance to Member States and
international organizations, and the range of activities
and investigations carried out by the Panel of Experts.
Notwithstanding the progress of the nuclear negotiations,
Member States should continue to be vigilant and
willing to report any violations, in accordance with the
requirements set out in the resolutions.

The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a negotiated and lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. A comprehensive deal with Iran is in all our
interests, and the ongoing discussions provide the best
opportunity in years to achieve it. For the international
community, it would provide reassurance that Iran's
nuclear programme is exclusively for peaceful purposes,
as well as a safer region in a time of great unrest and
instability. For Iran, it would mean the ability to trade
freely with the world again and to reset relationships
with the international community.

