Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Mr. Arias, Mr. Verbeke and Mr. Burian for their
briefings to the Council this morning. We would also
like to thank them and their staff for their time and
commitment to these important committees and for the
energy and seriousness that they bring to the task.

I would also like to associate myself with the
comments that will be made later by the representative
of Portugal on behalf of the European Union.

I will start with a few words about the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Committee. Let me say how
much we welcome the Chairman's outreach and
dialogue with Member States, especially through his
open briefing in July; we look forward to the next
briefing, due to take place in December. I think that
these sessions demonstrate his and the Committee's
willingness to conduct their business in as transparent a
manner as possible. We believe that they can only
encourage a beneficial dialogue between the
Committee and States, and we echo his call to Member
States to participate. I think that it is important that the
Committee have the widest possible information so
that it can take the best available decisions.

The Monitoring Team has continued to provide
invaluable support and advice to the Committee. In
particular, we would like to commend the Team's work
with a wide range of international organizations such
as INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Air Transport Association, and in
particular to commend its efforts with those
non-governmental bodies, such as banks and financial
institutions, which have important roles to play in the
implementation of the measures. In that respect, we
were very interested in what Ambassador Verbeke had
to say regarding ensuring greater accessibility to
information, which will help banks take the necessary
measures. We look forward to the Committee's further
work on the Team's recently submitted seventh report.

Looking forward, we fully support the
Chairman's focus on improving the consolidated list.
The consolidated list lies at the heart of the sanctions
regime. We are pleased to note the progress on the
Taliban section of the list, and we hope to see even
more movement on that section of the list in the near
future. We look forward to the Committee continuing
its discussion on improving its guidelines on de-listing.

The United Kingdom continues to see the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) as central to the
Security Council's responsibility to tackle threats to
international peace and security. The CTC's reach, its
mandate and the expert support available to it are
unparalleled anywhere else in the United Nations
system. We are very grateful to Ambassador Arias for
the extensive information that he gave us today on how
this is working. I would like to echo his call in
welcoming Mike Smith, the new Executive Director of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), and to say how much we will look
forward to giving him our full support and to
discussing with Ambassador Smith his vision for the
work of CTED in support of the CTC.

This year, the CTC has made significant progress
towards obtaining a full picture of global
implementation of States' counter-terrorism
obligations - partly by means of the analytical
process behind the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments, and partly through CTED's survey of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), which the Committee Chairman mentioned
earlier.

A strong global survey of this type fulfils the
CTC's obligation to report to the Council on
implementation of the resolution. Furthermore, it
provides a basis for planning the work of the CTC. We
believe the CTC should focus on political engagement
and on technical assistance. We must engage
proactively with Member States to ensure that their
overall legal frameworks and specific capabilities are
adequate for the huge challenge we face. The first
priority in our view is that all States must fulfil the
basic obligation to criminalize terrorist acts, which too
many have not yet done.

It has now been more than two years since the
Council adopted resolution 1624 (2005), which tackles
incitement to terrorist acts. We welcome the latest
report on resolution 1624 (2005), and we look forward
to further work in the Committee on steps to promote
implementation, best practices and assistance. The
CTC continues to have a considerable task ahead of it,
and we are conscious of the impending issue of
CTED's mandate. But as I mentioned earlier, we will
have a new and highly qualified colleague in Mike
Smith to help us. We again commend the work of
Ambassador Arias on this.

I turn now to the 1540 Committee. Many thanks
go to Ambassador Burian for all of his work. The
United Kingdom particularly commends the work that
the Chairman and the 1540 experts have been doing to
reach out to international organizations and to engage
in substantive dialogue with States. Some of this work
does not grab the headlines, but it does add great value.
We found the Committee's meetings this July with
assistance providers to be very useful, and we continue
to support outreach events held in-country with experts
from capitals.

Implementing resolution 1540 (2004) is complex;
I think we heard some of that today from Ambassador
Burian. We recognize that it can be burdensome for
small countries. We call on all United Nations
Members to lend assistance and to share their expertise
and good practice. For our part, we will continue to
give this priority, both nationally and through the
European Union. We give our full support to the
Committee's work on its role as a clearing house for
assistance. We will continue to encourage further work
in this area.

Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) remains
as important and as relevant as when it was enacted in
2004, and we remain fully committed to its goals. I
would like to voice my Government's strong support
for the rollover of the 1540 Committee's mandate next
year.

We welcome the increasing level of cooperation
between the three expert bodies of the Committees,
something we have called for some time. The fact that
we had an overview of that work today is very helpful.
We are also pleased that the experts play their part in
the cross-United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. We continue to encourage
the Committees and their experts to seek new ways to
strengthen coordination of their work with States to
reduce the reporting burden on Governments and to
make more time for high-quality engagement on
implementation.

Finally, I would like to touch on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), adopted by all United
Nations Member States last year. In three weeks' time,
we will meet to discuss progress and future prospects
for its implementation. We look forward to that
opportunity to take stock of what the United Nations
family and each Member State have been doing.

Finally, we should remind ourselves that the work
we are doing in this area is not just theoretical; it is
designed to save lives. Tackling terrorism is truly a
global issue, and although there has been substantial
progress in recent years, we believe that it is only by
all of us playing our part that we can truly hope to
succeed.

