Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Abou Moussa for his briefing.

Most Central African States have maintained
overall stability and achieved economic development.
The regional integration process is proceeding steadily.
China is pleased with those developments.

We take note of the fact that the spillover effect
of the crisis in the Sahel, the re-emergence of conflict
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the lingering threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and the serious problem of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea have had a negative impact
on the security situation in the region. The countries
of the region continue to face many challenges in
achieving lasting peace. China expresses its concern
about that situation.

We support the countries of the region in
strengthening cooperation in order to address the
threats and challenges I have mentioned. We hope
that the international community will continue to pay
attention to the Central African region and, on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty of the countries of the
region, provide concrete to support to countries and
regional organizations.

China strongly condemns the continued movement
and activities of the LRA in various countries. We
are deeply concerned about the humanitarian issues
generated by that. We demand that the LRA immediately
lay down its weapons, halt all hostilities and violence
and disarm.

China appreciates the efforts made by the countries
of the region to combat the LRA. We support the
African Union in its efforts to continue to implement
its Regional Cooperation Initiative. We welcome the
United Nations cooperation with the AU and look
forward to the effective implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy for the LRA.

China calls upon the members of the international
community to strengthen coordination and
communication in order to vigorously support the
efforts by the countries of the region.

Since its inception, the United Nations Office
in Central Africa (UNOCA) has conscientiously
implemented the mandate of the Security Council
and made positive efforts aimed at the maintenance
of international peace and security. China appreciates
that and hopes that UNOCA will continue to effectively
carry out its communication and coordination efforts
and promote synergy among the efforts of the United
Nations system, regional organizations and the
countries in the region, so as to make its contribution
to the achievement of lasting peace and security in the
region.

China will continue to support the work of UNOCA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa.

