Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his efforts
throughout his tenure to secure peace and protect
civilians in the Middle East and throughout the world.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
trends are indeed discouraging, which is why it is so
critical that we all work to keep the possibility of peace
open. There really is no alternative. The United States
remains committed to achieving a lasting resolution of
the conflict and we will continue to work to advance
the interest that we all share - bringing about a
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. We remain
in close consultations with the parties to the conflict
and key stakeholders to try to move things in a more
positive direction. We continue to call upon all sides
to demonstrate with actions and policies a genuine
commitment to the two-State solution, which will
enable a resumption of meaningful negotiations in
the future.

The current United States Administration has
consistently opposed every effort to delegitimize
Israel or undermine its security, including at the
United Nations. We will continue to oppose any draft
resolutions that would seek to do so.

As the Council knows, we are very concerned about
the situation on the ground and believe that current
trends are moving in the wrong direction. That includes
our serious concerns about continued settlement
activities. Make no mistake: the United States views
settlements as illegitimate and counterproductive to
the cause of peace. In his recent remarks at the Saban
Forum, Secretary Kerry made clear that Israel now
faces a choice between continued settlement activity
and a two-State solution in the future. As he said, while
we do not believe that settlements are the root cause of
the conflict, they clearly represent a barrier to achieving
a two-State solution. The number of settlers in the West
Bank has increased from 110,000 at the time ofthe Oslo
Accords, in 1993, to nearly 400,000 today.

We are deeply disturbed by Israel's moving
forward on the unprecedented legalization under Israeli
law of outposts deep in the West Bank. We believe
the potential legalization of thousands of settlement
housing units that are currently illegal under Israeli law
would profoundly damage prospects for a two-State
solution. We are further troubled when Ministers in the
Israeli Government say publicly that there will be no
Palestinian State.

Terrorism, incitement to violence, glorification
of terrorists and other violent acts also profoundly
threaten efforts to advance peace. We continue to stress
to the Palestinian leadership the importance of strongly
opposing violence in all forms. We continue to make
clear that the terrorism and incitement to violence
must end. Such acts run contrary to efforts to preserve
prospects for peace.

We strongly condemn terrorist acts and other
violence against Israelis and Palestinians. There is
absolutely no justification for such acts. We are also
deeply concerned about reports of excessive use of force
by Israeli security forces against Palestinian civilians.
Authorities should conduct timely and transparent
investigations into these incidents and ensure that
appropriate measures, including prosecution when
warranted, are taken to follow through on the findings.

There are some positive examples of coordination
between Israelis and Palestinians that should be
encouraged. For example, coordination between Israeli
and Palestinian security forces has played a key role
in preventing a greater deterioration in the security
situation, and that coordination should continue. We
have also seen coordination among civil-society actors
work to the benefit of both sides. Facing some of the
worst fires in recent memory, Palestinian civil-defence
teams funded by the United States Government again
came to the aid of their Israeli counterparts, battling
fires in Haifa and in Beit Meir and Nataf, near Jerusalem.
This is the type of cooperation that can benefit all.

Economic development is also necessary, and
the private sector can play a vital role. For example,
the first Coca Cola factory opened in the Gaza at the
end of November. The plant will create 300 direct
jobs and 3,000 indirect jobs in the Gaza supply chain.
The licensed manufacturer of Coca Cola in the West
Bank and Gaza also committed an initial $1.3 million
to a corporate social-responsibility fund to create
additional jobs for Gaza youth and improve access
to clean drinking water in a Gaza refugee camp. On
1 December, donors pledged at least $175 million in
grants and $270 million in soft loans for the trilateral
Jordanian-Israeli-Palestinian Red Sea-Dead Sea water
project. Cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority is vital to addressing the region's water
scarcity and ensuring the survival of the Dead Sea.

Still, additional steps are urgently needed to
stabilize the economic situation, especially in Gaza,
and to reverse current trends. We continue to stress
the importance of both sides demonstrating through
policies and actions a genuine commitment to a two-
State solution in order to reduce tensions, rebuild trust,
avoid a cycle of escalation and restore hope.

