The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Equatorial Guinea.

We welcome the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
thank him for his briefing on recent developments
in Syria. This was his first briefing to the Security
Council. Equatorial Guinea would like to extend its
full support for his new mission. We are pleased that,
since his first meeting, held in mid-January with
the Damascus authorities, he has expressed his full
willingness to make every effort to achieve a credible
political solution that will allow for a lasting resolution
to a conflict that has lasted more than eight years. Such
a commitment reaffirms, without a doubt, that there is
no military solution to the conflict, but only a political
one. Based on that premise, the Special Envoy would
agree with me that it is essential to establish objective,
frank and unhindered cooperation between the Syrian
authorities and the United Nations, as well as with the
Astana guarantors, with the aim of exploring common
ground and divisions.

We would like to see progress in establishing
the constitutional committee. We believe that the
committee could be very valuable in promoting a
peaceful and inclusive solution to the conflict. The
Syrian Government has managed to strengthen its
control and authority throughout its national territory.
Given the situation, we believe that the Government
must demonstrate considerable willingness to negotiate
and make concessions in order to reach a broad-based,
acceptable political solution and end the violence that
has affected the country for more than eight years.

With the relative decrease in the level of violence
and expected increase in humanitarian aid for a
population that has been adversely affected by the war,
the political process must be accelerated. The former
Special Envoy made a considerable effort in the past
four years to promote the political process, with the
support of the Council. The current Special Envoy has
our ongoing support to ensure that efforts continue
with a View to reaching the desired outcome that
Syrians and the international community long for. That
is why we welcome the meetings between Mr. Pedersen
and the Syrian opposition, in particular the Syrian
Negotiation Committee and the Russian authorities,
the recent summit ofthe Astana guarantors in Sochi, as
well as the meeting with the High Representative of the
European Union.

For the Government of Equatorial Guinea, it is now
time for Syria and all parties involved to move into an
active phase of the political process. In that regard, we
have high hopes for the transition to an active political
process, which includes establishing a constitutional
committee, drafting a constitution, and developing
a mechanism to adopt and proclaim the constitution,
which would all improve the situation in Syria. We
emphasize the need to establish a mechanism to ensure
that it is launched and becomes operational, under the
auspices of the United Nations, as agreed in January
2018 in Sochi.

We hope that the third list, on civil society
representatives, will not deviate from the objective
of creating a balanced, inclusive and trustworthy
constitutional committee, in accordance with the
decisions of the Congress of the Syrian National
Dialogue, held in Sochi, and resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, we encourage the Special Envoy to
continue to consult with the parties in a timely manner
in order to achieve a list that enjoys the broadest
possible consensus of all parties. As we recently stated,
Equatorial Guinea hopes that there will be no further
delays in establishing the constitutional committee and
that the deadlock in negotiations will not undermine the
Astana process. We encourage Special Envoy Pedersen
to continue exploring all opportunities to overcome the
obstacles on the path to establishing the committee. In
so doing, he will be able to convene its first meeting
without delay.

In the hopes that the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region,
scheduled for 12-14 March, will succeed in mobilizing
the $9 billion required for the United Nations
Humanitarian Response Plan to ease the suffering of
millions of Syrians who have endured the consequences
of the conflict since 2011, Equatorial Guinea will
remain fully committed to a political resolution to the
Syrian crisis, within the framework of resolution 2254
(2015).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

