Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I welcome
you, Mr. President, again to the Council today. I also
thank the Special Representative for his briefing today,
and add my voice of welcome to Foreign Minister
Trujillo Garcia, High Counsellor Archila and your
whole delegation.

The historic 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace offered
a new era of hope to Colombians longing for an end
to decades of violence and insecurity. The innovative
approaches taken by the Colombian Government and
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun
(FARC) to establish a peace accord framework has
demonstrated their joint commitment to ushering in
a new era of shared peace and prosperity. The United
States strongly supports that ongoing joint effort to
secure a lasting peace that the Colombian people
deserve. The Special Representative and the staff of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia are
key contributors to that process.

Despite ongoing challenges, progress has been
made in implementing the peace agreement. That
includes a commitment to reintegration by the
Colombian Government and the FARC. It includes
supporting rural populations in substituting illicit crops
and laying the groundwork for transitional justice. It
also includes coordination on security and social
welfare for ex-guerrillas and ensuring the protection of
civil society leaders.

Recent joint visits by the Government and FARC
representatives to 4 of the 24 territorial areas for
training and reintegration demonstrated both parties'
concerns over the future status of those sites and
to maintaining security and strengthening social
and economic conditions for those communities
in transition. Those positive steps are historic, but
Colombia and its international partners must remain
vigilant in addressing ongoing barriers to lasting
peace. For example, narco-traffickers and illegal armed
groups are seeking to derail the peace process to profit
from the resulting instability and chaos. In Colombia
and elsewhere, the illicit production and trafficking of
cocaine are linked to organized crime, illegal financial
flows and corruption. They pose a threat to public health
and safety in Colombia, throughout Latin America and
around the world.

President Duque Marquez and his Administration
have demonstrated their resolve to expand counter-
narcotics efforts. Thanks to President Duque's
aggressive eradication efforts, Colombian coca
cultivation and cocaine production decreased for the
first time since 2012. Colombia destroyed over 60 per
cent more coca in the first four months of 2019 than
during the same period in 2018, and in the first four
months of 2019 alone the Colombian Government
seized nearly 145 metric tons of cocaine.

The United States remains committed to working
with the Duque Administration to pursue a whole-of-
Government approach to counter-narcotics, rural
development and rural security with the shared goal of
reducing coca cultivation and cocaine production by
half by the end of 2023. Those efforts directly support
peace implementation. We are encouraged by the
Colombian Government's efforts to extend its presence
into rural conflict-affected areas, which will bring
much needed justice, economic support and security to
vulnerable populations.

The United States is deeply concerned by credible
reports of ongoing violence against human rights
defenders, members of the press and social leaders,
which members of the Council heard about first-hand
during our visit to Colombia last week. We renew our
call on the Government to redouble its efforts to protect
social leaders and members of vulnerable populations
across Colombia, and we reiterate our support for
Colombia's efforts to ensure that those leaders can
safely accomplish their vital work in support of a just
and lasting peace.

A transitional justice system that promotes peace
and meets victims' demands for the pursuit of truth
and justice is essential for Colombia's peace process.
We view the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as vital to
addressing war crimes and human rights abuses. It is
imperative that this system, so critical to a just and
durable peace, operate as intended to redress serious
conflict-related crimes, that it not be inappropriately
used by common criminals seeking to elude the regular
criminaljustice system, and that its operations take into
account, as appropriate, Colombia's international legal
obligations. A well-functioning Special Jurisdiction
for Peace will help ensure accountability for crimes
committed by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo and State actors and
provide justice for victims, including by providing
access to reparations.

As Colombia continues to implement its peace
plan, it is also demonstrating regional leadership
by recognizing interim President Juan Guaido as
Venezuela's legitimate leader and by supporting
more than 1.5 million Venezuelans fleeing the man-
made crisis in Venezuela. Colombia is supporting
that vulnerable population by granting temporary
residency and work permits and by facilitating access
to social services.

The Venezuelan people and regional leaders know
that the illegitimate Maduro regime is singularly
responsible for the chaos that has enveloped the country.
Maduro continues to undermine democratic institutions,
oppress democratic actors, carry out systematic and
violent repression of human rights, and engage in
rampant and widespread corruption. While visiting a
migrant centre in the border town of Cucuta on 14 April,
Secretary of State Pompeo and President Duque heard
personal stories of hardship from Venezuelans who had
fled their homeland owing to severe shortages of food,
medicine and basic consumer goods. To date, more than
4 million Venezuelans have fled their homeland owing
to Maduro's senseless cronyism and wanton violence.

The peace in Colombia provides a stark contrast to
the situation in Venezuela. After more than 50 years
of violence, the Colombian people have entered an
auspicious new chapter in which future generations
will no longer have to experience the hardships of
armed conflict. The United States stands firmly with
Colombia to further strengthen its peace gains.

