President Plevneliev: We ask you, Secretary
Kerry, to please extend our warm regards and special
thanks to President Obama for his extraordinary
leadership in bringing about, organizing and presiding
over today's historic event. We would also like to
extend our condolences to our friends and the people
of France on the murder of their citizen at the hands of
brutal terrorists.

Resolution 2178 (2014), of which Bulgaria was
a sponsor and which this highly respected body just
adopted, represents the international community's
decisive stance towards the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. The resolution further develops
the United Nations counter-terrorism framework and
highlights the need for strengthened legal measures at
both the national and international levels.

Foreign terrorist fighters pose a very serious
threat not only to their countries and regions, but
also regionally and globally. Therefore, determined
action is required. No country, including my own, is
immune, and international cooperation and exchange of
operative information, as prescribed by the resolution
just adopted, is more than necessary. Terrorist attacks
happen everywhere. The terrorist attack of July 2012
at the airport in Sarafovo is yet another example of
the spread of the recruitment of foreign fighters for
terrorism, and for committing acts of murder and brutal
violence. We have seen the ugly face of terrorism in my
country.

The foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon cannot
be attributed to any one religion, ethnicity or region.
In that regard, the Bulgarian religious community
has taken a firm and united position exemplified by a
declaration condemning in the strongest possible terms
the activities of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). That declaration was adopted by the Bulgarian
General Mufti and supported by the National Council
of Religious Communities in Bulgaria. I am so proud
to be President of a country where different religious
groups live peacefully together and where they have
acted immediately and decisively together.

Combating radicalization and extremism requires
urgent preventive measures, such as support for
institution-building, respect for human rights, social
inclusion and cohesion, and cooperation with regional
and global partners. With today's resolution, the
international community has provided for a longer-
term and strategic international response to this
phenomenon. As a result, all States must now ensure the
implementation of an appropriate legal and institutional
counter-terrorism architecture, at both the national and
global levels, and must ensure that it be systematically
strengthened and improved. The Bulgarian Government
will follow suit and will urgently propose national
legislative measures to that end.

