I would like to welcome you, Sir, to the Security Council today. I also thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and, of course, for the continued efforts he and his team are making on the ground. I also wish to thank our two civil-society briefers, whose statements were very interesting and passionate, for their work. Finally, it is always nice to hear from my good colleagues, the Deputy Permanent Representatives of Israel and the Observer State of Palestine. As we have heard, this is a fragile and worrisome period. I want to say, first, that we remain deeply concerned about the prospect of annexation. Not only would that be damaging to efforts to restart peace negotiations and run counter to international law, it would also compound the already fragile health and humanitarian situation. Preventing annexation and finding alternative ways for the parties to engage must be the top priority. I reiterate that the United Kingdom will not recognize any changes to the 1967 lines, except those agreed between both parties. Ultimately, we want to see both sides make meaningful steps towards a just, fair and agreed settlement. As my Prime Minister said to both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas earlier this month, we want to see Israelis and Palestinians return to the negotiating table. The United Kingdom offers its full support in fostering such dialogue. Now is the time for Israel to make clear that it will not take any unilateral steps towards annexation. Now is the time for both parties to resume cooperation, particularly in regard to security. And now is the time for the Palestinians to reach out to the United States and to Israel so that we can begin the journey back to negotiations. In creating the environment of trust needed for dialogue, we call on both parties to avoid further provocative rhetoric or actions. We call for accountability against incitement on both sides and for Israel to freeze all settlement activity, stop demolitions and actively prevent settler violence. The advancement of settlement plans, including in Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and Area E-1, is of particular concern. All settlements are illegal under international law. Settlement construction in those highly sensitive areas threatens to further undermine the viability of a future Palestinian State, with its capital in East Jerusalem. In instances where there have been accusations of excessive use of force by the Israeli authorities, as appears to be the case in the killing of the Eyad Falak in May, we expect full, transparent investigations. There must be serious reflection on what causes such use of force to be deemed necessary. Meanwhile, we saw a steady increase in indirect-fire attacks from Gaza into Israel from late May until early July. This shows the very real and unacceptable intent of militant Palestinian groups towards Israeli civilians. Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live in peace and security. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) remains a serious and significant threat in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. The cooperation among United Nations agencies, the Palestinian Authority and the Government of Israel during the first wave was welcomed, ensuring that essential medical supplies and staff were able to access Gaza and the West Bank. Faced with rising numbers of COVID-19 cases, we call on the parties to resume cooperation, while making joint efforts to protect equally both Israelis and Palestinians. I would like to finish by reiterating once again the United Kingdom's long- standing position on the Middle East peace process. We support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State based on 1967 lines with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement for refugees. And the United Kingdom stands ready to support that objective in any way that we can.
