Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Today's discussion
deals with an essential aspect oflong-term reconciliation
and thus, ultimately, of conflict prevention, which puts
it squarely within the competence not only of this body,
but also of other United Nations bodies. The Human
Rights Council in particular has done related work,
through its resolutions on the right to the truth. Indeed,
it has created a mandate for the promotion of truth and
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.

There is no doubt that the way we deal with the past
has a significant impact on how we shape the future. It
has been said that those who do not learn from history
are doomed to repeat it. But the question before us is a
more complex one. How do we make sure that there is
a history to learn from in the first place - a common
narrative that brings together those who have engaged
in a conflict? We are confronted time and again with
the difficulty of creating such a common narrative.

One prominent example is the outbreak of the
First World War, the seminal catastrophic event of the
twentieth century ,which you, Mr. President, mentioned
in yourremarksthis morning. The 100th commemoration
of its outbreak this year has already led to an enormous
production of research, articles, books and analysis and
also to the conclusion by all ofus that, after a full century
and enormous resources and brainpower dedicated to
the topic, we are still lacking a common narrative on
an event that has had far-reaching consequences that
are still with us today. A full century certainly is a very
long time, but we have seen conflicts where historic
events from several centuries ago have played a role,
sometimes a critical one, in the rhetoric and dynamic
leading to the outbreak of hostilities or the inability to
settle a conflict.

Reconciliation certainly is an essential element of
ensuring that a peace agreement leads to more than the
mere absence of armed conflict - or, to use your words,
Sir, to a permanent peace. Peace agreements should
always contain mechanisms that allow for the necessary
reconciliation efforts among the conflict parties, where
necessary with outside help. Such mechanisms should
be part and parcel of any peacebuilding effort. Those
efforts usually require a long-term commitment; they
always require time. Establishing a common narrative
can be a complex, painful and time-consuming
undertaking. Promoting such a narrative and ensuring
that it is processed and embraced can be the work of
generations.

History is written by humans and, as such, is the
product of interpretation and judgements of individuals.
It can therefore be argued, of course, that there is no
such thing as "the truth", but rather that truth is an
agreement on the interpretation of and the way of giving
meaning to historical events and facts. Only a historical
narrative agreed to by those who have been on opposing
sides in a conflict can therefore serve the purpose of
reconciliation and creating and ensuring a permanent
peace. Competing historical narratives can have quite
the opposite effect, and in fact be an important factor in
the recurrence of conflict.

One element of establishing such a joint narrative is
individual criminal accountability in conflict situations
where the most serious crimes under international
law have been committed. In ensuring that there is
no impunity for such crimes, we achieve two goals.
First, there can be no closure for those involved in a
conflict - as victims or as participants - unless
those who bear the largest share of responsibility for
such crimes are brought to account. An international
consensus has therefore emerged that there can be
no amnesty for those most serious crimes. Secondly,
there is no way a community traumatized by such
events can move on unless the story of what actually
happened has been told. So, for the victims of the
genocide in Srebrenica, it is as essential that those
who have criminal responsibility for that crime be held
accountable at the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia as it is that the story of the actual
events, immensely painful as they are, be told.

The Security Council has slowly and somewhat
reluctantly played a role in that respect, while only a
limited one. The International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the role the Council can play under its founding treaty,
the Rome Statute, give the Council the opportunity
to engage consistently and effectively in the effort to
ensure accountability. But in most cases so far, it has
passed on that opportunity.

Perhaps the starkest illustration of that fact is
the refusal of the Council to engage in a meaningful
discussion of accountability for the crimes committed
in Syria some three years into the conflict. Even though
a very significant number of States have formally asked
the Council to make use of its competence to refer the
situation to the ICC, it has not responded either by doing
so or by discussing alternative accountability options.

If individual criminal accountability is key, it is in
many cases not enough in and of itself. In particular, it
will not automatically lead to the creation of a historical
narrative that is embraced by all parties to a conflict.
A joint effort by those who were divided in conflict
to establish the facts, to ensure that the story is told,
to create that narrative is perhaps a more important
component in bringing the conflict to a solid end and
creating a permanent peace.

Often, such efforts take the form of truth and
reconciliation commissions. There are in fact examples
where the work of such commissions alone has been
very successful in bringing societies together, most
prominently perhaps in South Africa. This is also an
area where the United Nations can make a meaningful
contribution and has done so many times in the past
in Guatemala, El Salvador and Timor-Leste. The
United Nations can assist by offering the expertise and
experience it has, but the key element of success will
always be ownership by the parties - the willingness not
only to participate in such an effort, but also to promote
the joint narrative, to educate future generations and to
make sure that the narrative is embraced.

The most important lesson we have to draw
collectively from war is one that is reflected in the
Charter of the United Nations, repeated many times
since and stated many times before - that war is
evil, that it is a scourge and that it creates incredible
suffering, in particular among those who have no guilt
and bear no responsibility. The United Nations has
been a very successful Organization both in ending
conflicts and in creating peace, but we are as far as ever
from our goal of preventing armed conflict as such.
An essential element in this respect is outlawing war.
While the Charter achieved that goal, it did not create
criminal responsibility for individuals who violate this
law. This gap can be filled by all of us now by giving
the International Criminal Court jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression, and all States can contribute to
this goal by ratifying the Kampala amendments to this
effect.

