Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for calling a meeting on this very
important issue. I would like to express my gratitude
to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen O'Brien for
his briefing today. We must take his dire message
very seriously.

I join others in thanking all humanitarian workers
in these countries for their courage and dedication
under such difficult conditions.

I would like to begin with Yemen. On 22 February,
the Secretary-General announced that Yemen was one
of four countries that faced a devastating level of food
insecurity. Food insecurity and malnutrition in Yemen
were concerns even before the onset of the current
crisis in the summer of 2014, and Japan has continued
to prioritize funding to the World Food Programme and
the World Health Organization.

Mr. O'Brien has described the seriousness and
complexity of the situation and the circumstances on
the ground. Ongoing fighting decreases the volume of
commercial imports to Yemen, which already struggles
with food production, thereby increasing the price of
food. The fighting deepens the economic crisis, delays
the payment of salaries and makes it difficult for
ordinary people to buy basic necessities. The fighting
also prevents the United Nations and other humanitarian
actors from delivering assistance.

Japan is deeply concerned by reports that Hudaydah
will become the next battlefield after Mocha. Hudaydah
is the backbone of Yemen's economy. If Hudaydah, and
in particular its port, are severely damaged, economic
and food insecurity will worsen. It is deeply regrettable
that fighting, shelling and airstrikes are continuing.
The Security Council is united in calling for a political
solution, repeatedly underscoring that there is no
military solution. The parties must listen to the voices

of the Yemeni people and the international community
and seek a ceasefire and sustainable peace.

Japan strongly supports the United Nations
approach to the Yemen crisis, which begins with a
credible cessation of hostilities monitored by the
De-escalation and Coordination Committee and
follows with face-to-face consultations by the parties
with United Nations mediation. We see no serious
alternatives. Japan believes there is no disagreement
among P-S members in this regard. We must also take
very seriously the findings by the panel of experts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) that terrorist groups are actively exploiting
the changing political environment and governance
vacuums to recruit new members and stage new attacks.

Almost one year has passed since Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed announced a nation-wide cessation of
hostilities just before the launch of the Kuwait round
of talks. We are frustrated by slow progress in the
political process and the worsening fighting, but we
must continue to support Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed's
efforts. Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed and the United
Nations should be increasingly vocal and visible in
drawing the attention of the international community
to this issue. The Council should consider delivering
a strong, unified message to the parties supporting the
United Nations mediation role and urging the parties
to cease hostilities and allow unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access immediately.

In light of the very concerning situation in
South Sudan, Japan announced an approximately
$22.4-million contribution in January to United
Nations agencies for humanitarian and reconstruction
projects. We are considering further assistance in
response to worsening conditidions. Japan remains
deeply concerned by the continued access restrictions
for humanitarian actors. We urge President Kiir to
honour his statement to Parliament on 21 February and
his commitment to ensure unimpeded access. We need
concrete action by the South Sudanese leadership.

Finally, Japan is concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We must not repeat
the tragedy of 2011. If this situation is not addressed,
progress in the Somali State formation process could
be jeopardized. Japan has therefore pledged more than
$22 million in humanitarian and development assistance
to Somalia, part of which will provide urgent nutritional
assistance. We are also seriously considering further
actions in response to the calls by the Somali people, as
well as by the United Nations.

