Mr. Bermlidez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
thorough briefing.

I would like to express Uruguay's heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
Burkina Faso, Mali and Togo for the cowardly attacks
of 13 August in Ouagadougou and yesterday in
Douentza and Timbuktu. Such irreparable loss of life
is once again the painful, sad result of such despicable
attacks on innocent civilians and those who risk their
lives to help restore and strengthen peace in conflict
zones. Events such as the tragic experiences of the past
two days show that there that the Sahel still has a long,
hard road to travel before it reaches the peace it has
desired for so long.

Uruguay commends Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger for the significant step they
have taken towards achieving stability in the region.
Their initiative in establishing ajoint force ofthe Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is the result of their
laudable joint efforts to combat terrorism and establish
full State authority in their lands.

The terrorist threat in the Sahel region knows
no political borders. That is why we applaud the
G-5 Sahel countries' regional and multidimensional
approach to the challenges. The implementation of
the G-5 Sahel joint force is a clear example of national
ownership by countries facing those challenges. That
initiative demonstrates clear political will that ought
to be recognized internationally, as the proliferation of
terrorism in the Sahel region is a global problem that
affects the entire international community.

In that regard, we believe that the international
community must act as partners to support the national
efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries. Let us not forget
that the G-5 Sahel initiative was conceived originally
as an institutional and follow-up framework for the
drafting of development policies for the five member
countries. More recently, and in the face of the growing
threat of terrorism, radicalism and transnational
organized crime, it has needed to be supplemented
by the creation, this year, of a multinational force of
5,000 troops. Undoubtedly, the deployment of the
G-5 Sahel force will be another major stabilization
effort in the region, including the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and Operation Barkhane,

However, as the latest developments demonstrate,
the situations in Mali and Burkina Faso continue to
deteriorate. In Mali, since the signing of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in 2015, the country's
stability has certainly improved, but for several months
the efforts seem to have collapsed. We encourage the
Government, which is responsible for ensuring stability
in the country, to seek alternative solutions based on
lessons learned from efforts made to date. In Burkina
Faso, there was yet another terrorist attack, which
claimed the lives of many innocent civilians in an
attempt to destabilize the country and the region.

Uruguay stresses the importance of the G-5 Sahel
joint force in implementing measures to mitigate the
impact ofmilitary operations on the civilian population,
particularly women and children. It is also essential
to train troops on protecting the most vulnerable
populations - women and children.

Moreover, the implementation of the strategies of
the joint force of the G-5 Sahel should incorporate a
gender perspective and recognize women's important
role in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. Additionally, the countries of the
region have a fundamental responsibility to protect
and assist children who have been released by terrorist
organizations and organized transnational criminal
groups. Children who have been traumatized by being
torn from their families and communities, and who have
been robbed of their childhood and forced to live and
act in certain ways, often in the most abject conditions,
should be considered victims rather than perpetrators.
It is therefore necessary to work proactively to ensure
their effective reintegration into society.

In conclusion, I would like to encourage the G-5
Sahel countries and the international community to
continue fostering stability in the region, which is the
only way to achieve lasting results.

