Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General for Kosovo, for his impressive briefing and
continued leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. I would also like to
thank Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaci of Kosovo for their statements.

During the Council's last debate on Kosovo, held
on 29 August (see S/PV.7257), Rwanda welcomed the
peaceful, transparent and reorganized elections to
the Kosovo Assembly, held on 8 June following the
dissolution of the previous Assembly. But today we are
concerned about the current impasse over the election
of the President of the Assembly and the formation of
a Government, which may prevent the authorities from
taking measures needed to enhance security, foster
reconciliation and promote the economic well-being of
the people of Kosovo. We encourage all the political
parties to intensify their efforts to end this institutional
gridlock.

We note that during the period under review no
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
was organized through the facilitation of the European
Union (EU). However, we commend the EU for its
continued efforts to promote dialogue, including
holding technical and working-level meetings that
have led to agreements on crossing points, freedom
of movement, telecommunications and energy. In that
regard, since Rwanda believes in regional integration,
we welcome the progress made by both Belgrade and
Pristina towards their integration into Europe, and
we hope the challenges pointed out in the European
Commission's 2014 progress report for both countries
will soon be overcome.

Regarding the situation in northern Kosovo,
Rwanda welcomes the close cooperation between
both communities and the progress being made in
municipal governance, including the coordination and
harmonization of budgets between the North Mitrovica
municipality and the Mitrovica North Administrative
Office, and between the four Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo and the central
authorities. We also welcome other achievements, such
as the integration of former Serbian Ministry of Interior
police officers into the Kosovo police. In that context,
we call on all sides to build on that momentum and
resolve pending issues such as the construction in the
ethnically mixed area of Brdjani in North Mitrovica.

We note that the security situation in Kosovo has
generally remained calm and stable, despite deplorable
incidents such as those related to illegal logging
and those against cultural and religious heritage.
We commend the Kosovo police, supported by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the International Security Force in Kosovo, for their
continuing action in maintaining peace and security, as
well as their resolve in combating violent extremism
and the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters, as
demonstrated in their action against supporters of the
Islamic State. We would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the important role of the Kosovo Islamic
community, which has denounced the participation of
Kosovan Albanians in foreign conflicts, and we hope
that the draft law prohibiting Kosovar participation in
armed conflicts outside Kosovo will soon be adopted
by the Kosovo Assembly.

Rwanda is concerned at the continuing slow pace
of the process of voluntary return of displaced persons
to Kosovo. In that regard, we commend the Kosovo
authorities on the confidence-building measures that
have been undertaken with the aim of promoting
reconciliation among the communities, including
the integration of minority communities into public
institutions and the police. We nonetheless believe it
is important that all stakeholders continue to engage
with communities in identifying and eradicating all
obstacles to the return and safe settlement of displaced
persons.

In conclusion, Rwanda recognizes the commitment
of Belgrade and Pristina to the EU-facilitated dialogue,
as well as the progress they have made towards their
shared goal of European integration. We hope that
the deadlock in electing the President of the Kosovo
Assembly will soon be resolved and that both
communities will remain constructively engaged
in finding long-term stability, reconciliation and
prosperity for Kosovo and all its citizens.

