Ms. Loj: As Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), I would like to review the
Committee's activities since the Committee's last
report to the Council, in February 2006. I will inform
the Council about the Committee's nineteenth work
programme, for the current three-month period ending
30 June 2006.

Before I begin, I would like to thank the head of
the Committee's Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr.
Javier Ruperez, and his team, as well as the Secretariat
staff, for their valuable support.

Based on the recommendations from the
Council's comprehensive review of the CTC Executive
Directorate last December, the Committee decided to
focus its work for the first part of this year on three
areas, namely, on how to revise the reporting regime,
how to enhance dialogue with Member States in need
of technical assistance, and how to deepen the
Committee's relations with international, regional and
subregional organizations. I would like to give the
Council an update on the progress we have made on
those issues, and to explain what the Committee sees
as the main upcoming challenges.

First, with regard to the reporting regime, many
States have, on various occasions, raised the issue of
"reporting fatigue". The seemingly endless requests to
report to the Council on counter-terrorism - which, to
be fair, come mostly from the CTC - have led States
to ask what the purpose of reporting is. The point has
been made that the extensive requests to report have
taken away essential resources that could otherwise
have been spent on implementation. In that regard, the
Committee will also continue to discuss, in cooperation
with the 1540 and the 1267 Committees, how to
enhance cooperation, including with regard to
reporting. But let me point out that, while I do
understand those concerns, the many reports that the
CTC has received from States have created a solid

S/l'V.5446

 

foundation for the Committee's ability to advice and
assist States in their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). Without reports, therefore, we cannot do our
work.

That having been said, the Committee also
recognizes the need to look into revising the reporting
regime. As a first step, the Committee has decided to
base its discussions on a thorough analysis of
individual States' accomplishments in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). To that end,
the Committee has adopted an analytical tool - the so-
called preliminary implementation assessment - that
provides a systematic and transparent way to monitor
the extent to which States have implemented the
obligations and provisions laid down in resolution
1373 (2001). It is the Committee's hope that such a
systematic overview will deepen the Committee's
discussions on how best to advise and assist States in
implementation, including if States do not yet meet the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001).

That analytical tool is still being tested. However,
it is my hope that, once we have gained some
experience with it, the Committee can use that tool as a
basis for improving our dialogue with States on setting
priorities for their respective ways forward, including
areas where there are needs for assistance.

While the introduction of that tool should ease
the reporting burden on States, States will regularly
have to update the Committee on developments in their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In those
cases in which the Committee finds that the most
efficient way to get such information is through
reporting, then such reports will be solicited, but I can
assure the Council that the Committee will continue to
seek ways to ease the reporting burden on States and to
allow more resources to go towards enhancing
implementation.

Before I move on, I would also like to mention
that the Committee has again contacted all States
which are behind in their reporting to the Committee. I
hope that those States will take some comfort in the
Committee's updated working methods and that they
will re-establish dialogue with the Committee. I would
also urge States that might need assistance in preparing
the report to let us know. Without a report, it is not
possible for the Committee to identify priorities for
further implementation, including possible needs for
assistance, or to play a facilitating role in ensuring that
such needs are filled.

CTC's continuing visits to Member States, upon
their consent, remain an important tool in our work. We
continue to enhance our cooperation with the GS-led
Counter-Terrorism Action Group. Since I last reported
to the Council, CTED has visited the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. I would like to express the
Committee's gratitude to the Government in Skopje for
its hospitality and spirit of cooperation.

Also, the Committee has approved more country
visits, and CTED is currently working with the States
concerned regarding the preparations. I would like to
thank those Governments for welcoming us. It is the
Committee's hope and intention that those visits will
prove helpful to States that are already engaged in the
fight against terrorism. A key to success continues to
be thorough follow-up to the visits. During the past
months, the Committee has taken stock of the first
visits and discussed what more can be done to ensure
that the visits lead to concrete, measurable results.

I have already touched upon some aspects of the
Committee's ongoing work to facilitate technical
assistance. As I informed the Council at the last
briefing, the Committee has prepared policy guidance
and adopted CTED's implementation plan in that
regard. CTED, in turn, is now working on creating
results through fulfilling the implementation plan. The
Committee looks forward to hearing from CTED that
the efforts have led to concrete, measurable outcomes.
In the meantime, the Committee appreciates CTED's
outreach to potential donors to establish who would be
willing and interested in providing assistance, and in
which area.

Besides discussions with potential donors in New
York, the practice has also been established of CTED's
meeting with potential donors specifically in
connection with visits to States. I would like to
encourage all potential donors to engage with CTED
on those issues. The Committee will continue to
discuss what more can be done to strengthen
cooperation with donors, including through organizing
an informal meeting with donors and assistance
providers.

As I mentioned at the beginning of my briefing,
the Committee is also looking into how to strengthen
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations. First of all, the Committee

Sll'V.5446

 

has begun efforts to strengthen its relationship with
several African regional and subregional organizations,
as well as with the Caribbean Community. We have
also embarked on preparations for the next and fifth
special meeting of CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations. The goal is to ensure
that the meeting will be results-oriented.

Also, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Pacific Island Forum for inviting me to
participate in the recent meeting of its working group
on counter-terrorism, which took place in Auckland,
New Zealand, at the end of April. It was very
interesting for me to hear the participants explain the
successes and challenges they had encountered in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). I was impressed
to learn how much those States - many of them
among the smallest Members of the United Nations -
have accomplished in recent years in their fight against
terrorism. While many of those States are behind on
reporting to the Committee, that has certainly not led to
a halt in implementation. With the help of donors, the
region is now making a concerted effort to ensure that
most of the Pacific Island Forum members bring their
reporting to the Committee up to date before too long.
That type of regional cooperation is very fruitful and I
hope that other regions can be inspired by such
cooperation, but I would also like to stress the
corresponding commitment made on behalf of the
Committee to the Pacific States that, if they update on
reporting, the CTC will use that information to assist
them in identifying priorities in their implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and to facilitate assistance in
areas where we have mutually agreed that there are
such needs. The Committee counts on the cooperation
of potential donors to achieve those results.

The Committee is continuing its discussions on
how to take into account, in the course of its activities,
the fact that States must ensure that any measure taken
to combat terrorism complies with all their obligations
under international law, and that States should adopt
such measures in accordance with international law, in
particular human rights law, refugee law and
humanitarian law. I would like to inform the Council
that the Committee has now agreed on guidance for
CTED in that regard.

Before I conclude, let me take stock of the
challenges ahead for the Committee.

First of all, the Committee will spend some time
testing its newly-developed analytical tool, both in and
of itself and as a basis for enhanced dialogue with
States on implementation. The goal is twofold - first,
to ensure systematic, transparent and effective
monitoring of States' implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), leading to the targeted and prioritized
enhancement of States' implementation of the
obligations and provisions in the resolution; and
secondly, to ensure that requests for further reporting
will be targeted, with a view to easing the reporting
burden on States.

Secondly, the Committee will continue to discuss
how the visits to States can be more results-oriented,
including through the design of a thorough follow-up
process.

Thirdly, the Committee will continue its
discussions on how to ensure that we achieve concrete,
measurable results through the facilitation of
assistance, leading to results in enhanced
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Finally, the Committee will begin its analysis of
States' reporting on resolution 1624 (2005) in light of
the requirement to report to the Council within a year
of the adoption of that resolution - in other words, by
14 September 2006. I encourage all States that have not
yet submitted a report on their 1624 implementation to
do so as soon as possible in order to ensure that the
analysis provided to the Security Council is based on
as extensive reporting as possible.

The implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
remains crucial in the international community's fight
against terrorism. Developments since I reported last
have shown once again that the Committee's main task
remains vital and urgent. Support from and cooperation
with Member States remains invaluable. I would
therefore like to thank Member States for their
important contribution.

That concludes my statement in my capacity as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I
would now like to make the following statement in my
national capacity.

As members know, the Chairmen of the three
counter-terrorism committees rarely speak in their
national capacities at these briefings. I choose to do so
today to reiterate a point which is very important to
Denmark: the question of due process guarantees in the

S/l'V.5446

 

1267 Committee. Before I proceed, however, I would
like to fully associate Denmark with the statement of
the European Union to be delivered shortly by the
representative of Austria.

In the fight against terrorism we often get the
sense that we are walking on a razor's edge to strike
the right balance between preventive and swift action
against terrorists and adequate safeguards for the
individual, not least for those unjustly targeted. Getting
this balance right strengthens the legitimacy of the
sanctions regime and thereby, in the View of Denmark,
its efficiency.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
remains as important as ever in the international fight
against terrorism. But on various occasions States have
expressed concern that it does not meet fundamental
due process standards, thus indicating that the Council
may not be getting the razor's edge balance exactly
right. This issue demands the immediate attention of all
members of the Security Council.

In the view of Denmark, the Council could strike
a better balance by taking a close look at both its
listing and delisting procedures. Denmark has focused
particularly on delisting. We presented a proposal in
the 1267 Committee last year to establish an
independent review mechanism - an ombudsman -
to which individuals and entities on the Committee's
list would have direct access. When petitioned, or on
its own initiative, this mechanism would make
independent recommendations to the Committee for its
consideration. As is the case today, the Security
Council will maintain its prerogative to decide on any
delisting. At the same time, our proposal will provide
listed individuals and entities with the right to access
the mechanism directly, without a State as an
intermediary. It would also provide for a review
independent of the Committee.

Denmark very much looks for forward to
discussing this and other interesting proposals in the
1267 Committee shortly, and we are ready to engage
constructively in order to try to live up to the
Chairman's expressed wishes for early results.

