I would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for her briefing. Belgium is grateful for her determined efforts in seeking a political solution to the ongoing conflict in Libya. We witnessed several positive developments in recent weeks under the auspices of the United Nations. Those positive developments are a testament to the courage and determination of the Libyan people in the search for a united, stable and secure Libya for all Libyan people. I will quickly cover three points. First, Belgium wishes to commend the Libyan parties on the signing of the ceasefire agreement in Geneva on 23 October. The full and immediate implementation of that ceasefire agreement is now essential. We call on all actors, both inside and outside Libya, to play a constructive role towards a return to security and stability. All mercenaries and foreign fighters must now leave Libyan territory, as stipulated in the agreement. The arms embargo, which continues to be violated, must be fully respected, in accordance with Council resolutions. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the role of the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. The international community has a responsibility to oppose any attempt to reverse the progress made, including through the use of sanctions. The recent talks held by the Joint Military Commission in Ghadames and Sirte with a view to operationalizing the ceasefire agreement are positive steps forward. We encourage the participants to continue along that path and to make progress on the various elements of the agreement, including the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of militias. The resumption of oil production is a positive development and should benefit all Libyans. Secondly, on the political front, Belgium welcomes the convening of the first round of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis, as advocated by the Berlin Conference and resolution 2510 (2020). We welcome the agreement reached by participants on a road map towards credible, inclusive and democratic national elections, which are scheduled for 24 December 2021. We call for those efforts to continue to ensure that a Government of national unity is swiftly formed. It is vital that women and women's rights be taken into account in political processes in order to achieve sustainable and inclusive peace. In that regard, we welcome the positive role played by women participants in the Forum. Thirdly, as long as the security and basic human rights of the population are not guaranteed, there can be no democratic transition in Libya. We strongly condemn the assassination of lawyer Hanan Al-Barassi on 10 November, which showed that hostile forces continue to work against peace and stability in Libya. We therefore call for an independent, impartial and effective investigation and that the perpetrators be held accountable. The assassination of Ms. Al-Barassi is not an isolated case. It is a heinous example of the violence faced by women activists, such as Salwa Bughaighis and Seham Sergiwa, which serves to highlight the importance of our doing everything possible to deliver justice to the victims of those crimes. The International Criminal Court and the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya will play an important role in the fight against impunity in Libya, which is the basis for a process of national reconciliation. To conclude, I wish to reiterate Belgium's full support for the United Nations mediation efforts in Libya. I would also like to once again commend the courage and determination of all the United Nations Support Mission in Libya staff and the entire country team. If we are to maintain the momentum and take advantage of the recent positive developments, it is necessary now more than ever to urgently appoint a new Special Envoy and UNSMIL coordinator for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
