Mr. Strommen (Norway): I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his briefing, and to
reiterate Norway's support for the efforts of United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to implement
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework for Kosovo.

We are pleased to note that some progress has
been achieved, including in the areas of confidence-
building for minorities and of the small-scale return of
refugees. We welcome the successful return of a first
group of Kosovo Serbs in the municipality of Istok. We
look forward to the implementation of further returns.
However, much more remains to be done.

My Government is concerned about the low level
of voter registration among Kosovo Serbs. Intensified
efforts are clearly needed by all parties involved to
achieve elections that are perceived as legitimate and
representative for all communities in Kosovo.

We welcome recent statements by Yugoslav and
Serb leaders encouraging Kosovo Serbs to register as
voters in the November provincial elections. For its
part, the international community should facilitate this
progress by refraining from measures and actions that
unduly impinge upon Belgrade's authority and
influence among Kosovo Serbs. Convincing the
Kosovo Serbs and other minorities of the advantages of
voter registration seems hard enough. Convincing them
that they have something to gain from participating in
elections is even harder. The effort must be made. We
welcome the ongoing discussion on post-election
structures and talks, including consultations with
representatives of all ethnic communities.

The democratic authorities in Belgrade are
working systematically and with determination to settle
the accounts of the country's near past and bring
Yugoslavia back to normal international cooperation.
The extradition of Mr. Milosevic to The Hague is an
important step. Serbian authorities are pursuing
investigations of cases of suspected war crimes against
civilians in Kosovo. Serbian perpetrators are being
prosecuted. The engagement of Serbian Deputy Prime
Minister Covic as Yugoslav coordinator for Kosovo is
encouraging. We believe that UNMIK should avail
itself fully of this opportunity for constructive and
practical cooperation with the authorities in Belgrade.

The international community should acknowledge
that Yugoslavia has truly entered a post-Milosevic era.
Increased cooperation with the democratic forces in
Belgrade will not only improve the possibilities for
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) in a sustainable
manner in Kosovo, but also contribute to the
consolidation of the authorities in Belgrade against less
reform-oriented circles of Serbia. The way in which
resolution 1244 (1999) is implemented will have clear
implications for the whole region. Norway welcomes
the Framework Agreement signed on 13 August by
President Trajkovski and the heads of the four main
political parties in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. The Agreement represents a vital first step
in creating conditions for peace and stability in that
country. The international community must stand
united in giving firm and clear support to the
Framework Agreement.

We express our full support for the engagement of
the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in this process. Operation
Essential Harvest is a prerequisite for successful
implementation of the agreement. It is essential that the
ceasefire be observed. Norway strongly condemns all
acts of political violence. Such acts can only jeopardize
the continuation of the political process.
It is also important to recognize that confidence
and trust between the Albanian and Slav communities
in Macedonia is almost non-existent. Considerable
efforts must be made to address this situation. The onus
for action rests primarily with Macedonian authorities
and political leaders from the Albanian and Slav
Macedonian communities. However, the international
community can and should be supportive.

Lastly, I would like to underline the merits of
maintaining a regional perspective in the Security
Council dealings with Kosovo rather than a Kosovo
perspective on dealing with the Balkans. This implies
that we must carefully consider the potential impact
that the arrangements for Kosovo might have on
neighbouring States and on regional stability.

