Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I want to thank the delegation of
Malaysia for convening this open debate.

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, has repeatedly stressed that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction poses a threat to
international peace and security. The Council sent
a clear message in 2004 by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), which provides a response to the growing risk of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of,
and be used by, non-State actors. The resolution was a
milestone in for the first time putting all Member States
on an equal footing in the field of non-proliferation
and establishing common standards for the national
monitoring of sensitive technology exports. Since its
adoption, Argentina has joined the consensus in the
Security Council because it strengthens the capacity
of multilateral institutions and strengthens the United
Nations as the appropriate forum in responding to
challenges to international security.

Argentina submitted its first report on 26 October
2004, and subsequently updated it. The latest is
currently being drafted. We have demonstrated an
undeniable commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. To date, we are the only
Latin American country to have joined the five export-
control regimes, namely, the Australia Group, the
Zangger Committee, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile Technology
Control Regime. The Argentine Republic is convinced
that an effective system of export controls must be based
on four basic pillars. The first is a national system for
the issuance of transparent and standardized lisences.
The second is the effective implementation of existing
legislation applicable to export controls. The third is
promoting corporate awareness about the importance
of this system for industrial development and the safety
of international trade. And the fourth is close regional
cooperation.

With regard to our region, it is important to highlight
the unwavering commitment to non-proliferation by
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean,
which have been pioneers in establishing a zone free
of weapons of mass destruction. This year marks the
twenty-fithth anniversary of the Mendoza Declaration,
signed on 5 September 1991 by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, later also joined
by Bolivia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Uruguay. Through
that declaration, our countries committed themselves
to refrain from developing, producing, stockpiling,
transferring or using chemical and biological weapons.

Resolution 1540 (2004) has been an opportunity
to deepen cooperation among Latin American and
Caribbean countries in order that all the countries of
the region can access the necessary technology and
capacities to respond to current non-State threats.
Argentina provides assistance and training for the
identification of sensitive items both at the regional
and subregional level, as well as in the context of
South-South cooperation with African countries. Our
commitment to region is clear. Argentina will continue
offering assistance to countries that request it.

Argentina views the global review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) from its
traditional two-fold perspective. The first is respect for
the right to the development and peaceful use of advanced
technologies, while the second is the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction - whether nuclear,
chemical or biological - and their means of delivery
and related technologies. Argentina highlights the
sovereign right to the development of advanced and
sensitive nuclear technologies, such as chemical,
biological and pharmaceutical technologies, as well
as nanotechnologies, with Government and private
coordination, as an tool to achieve the development of
our industries.

At the same time, Argentina actively cooperates
with the efforts of the international community in
the field of disarmament with a view to achieving
a world free of weapons of mass destruction and to
further the principle of an absolute prohibition on their
development, possession, acquisition, transfer or use.
As a country strongly committed to non-proliferation
and elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
Argentina welcomes the comprehensive review process
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with a
view to establishing the foundation for continuing joint
efforts to address the risk of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, their Means of delivery
and related technologies.

