Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me take the opportunity to commend the
fashion in which the delegation of China has held the
presidency of the Security Council, and in particular to
thank Mr. Li Zhaoxing.

Let me also take the opportunity to commend and
thank the Permanent Representative of Botswana for the
excellent fashion in which his delegation led the work of
the Security Council last month, and in particular to point
out the excellent efforts and work of Mr. Legwaila Joseph
Legwaila.

If we are to judge the United Nations mission in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the commitment,
courage and character of the individuals involved, then it
must be ruled a success. The sacrifices that many have
made, including the ultimate sacrifice, of life, amply
support this conclusion, and we are not insensitive to it.
We wish once again to express our appreciation to all
those individuals and those nations that have volunteered
their young men and women sincerely to serve the cause
of humanity and peace in our country.

If we are to judge the United Nations mission in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of its
fulfilment of humanitarian goals, then the verdict is

 
unfortunately inconclusive. While we are truly thankful for
every single life that has been saved, we must be bitter
about all the lives that have not been reached to be rescued
and, most critically today, about all the lives that, after
three years of systematic human rights abuses, deprivation
and sieges, continue to be endangered and subject to the
whims of those who have proven their disregard for human
life.

It must be clear to all of us that we cannot hope to
keep a people alive indefinitely through delivery of food if
they are targeted for eradication by all means available,
from starvation and nutrient deprivation to sniping and
shelling. Similarly, food delivered free cannot be a
substitute for people's opportunities to earn their own food,
to raise their families, to pursue their professional goals,
and to see their society prosper.

Excuse us if we do not seem adequately grateful for
the food that we are given, but after three years of sieges
that the world Powers could have confronted and lifted by
now, we believe the members of the Council should be
thankful to us for, while our physical existence resembles
that of livestock held in pens, fed but none the less
surrounded and awaiting our fate, we in Sarajevo and
elsewhere within our nation have continued to be the true
believers in and the practitioners of the principles that
members here preach from the comforts of their unaffected
lifestyles.

We have had our commitments to tolerance,
coexistence, human rights and democracy tested, and we
have passed - not always without danger or setbacks, but
we have passed. On the other hand, each one of you
members of the Security Council must judge for yourself as
to whether the response of your countries, your
Governments, is consistent with the principles that you
promote. Clearly, as a union of nations, this Organization,
the United Nations, must be viewed as politically weaker,
legally violated and morally weakened by what has been
allowed to be waged upon our Republic.

UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
usurped. It has become a substitute for real peacemaking.
After three years of this imposed role, UNPROFOR, as this
substitute, must be judged a failure. Moreover, those behind
the strategy of usurping UNPROFOR for the purpose of
substituting it for peacemaking must be judged guilty also
of allowing aggression and genocide to continue, of
endangering international peace and security, and of
betraying their responsibilities to this institution, the United
Nations.

 

The betrayal of the League of Nations was
unprecedented. The dangers to the United Nations, on the
other hand, we cannot claim are unforeseen. The same
apocalyptic mistake repeated again in the twentieth
century could be judged only in the harshest of terms,
including selfishness, prejudice and demagoguery.

Unfortunately, it appears that we have still not
reached the bottom rung of Dante's Inferno in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. UNPROFOR's limited success in providing
humanitarian assistance is gradually sinking ever lower
and, as critically, UNPROFOR's mission is actually being
brought into contradiction with the overall efforts to bring
about peace within our country.

For this reason, we have requested that
UNPROFOR's mandate - and, in particular, its
implementation - be comprehensively reviewed. In the
performance of its humanitarian mission, UNPROFOR
must strive to ascend to the level of its mandate, as given
by the Security Council, in order to escape the downward
spiral in which it is now caught.

The three-year siege of Sarajevo has now become
the longest siege in modern history. It has become an
institution, one that is both lamented and, unfortunately,
tolerated by the Powers. T0 at least mitigate the
symptoms of this siege, the lifeline to Sarajevo, the "Blue
Route", must be taken under United Nations protection;
the Sarajevo airport access routes must be freed of illegal
Serbian roadblocks; and Sarajevo citizens must be
liberated from the snipers and those once again raining
shells upon them, who use human prey to promote the
goal of political intimidation.

This is not something new that we request of
UNPROFOR or something that requires fresh Security
Council action. The Security Council authority already
exists. All that is needed is the will to carry it out.

These are also essential steps for the efforts of
Mr. William Eagleton, the Secretary-General's Special
Coordinator for Sarajevo, to really move ahead with his
responsibilities for the rebuilding of Sarajevo.

Of course, the authority already also exists for the
siege of Sarajevo to be truly lifted. I say to the members
of the Council that "your tolerance, even
institutionalization, of this siege can no longer be
justified". The civilian populations of the Srebrenica,
Zepa, Gorazde and Bihac safe areas are systematically
deprived of the essentials of life by the besieging Serbian

 

forces. According to the United Nations own reports,
20 per cent of the population of Bihac is at risk of
starvation. Furthermore, while some food is allowed to
pass, the Serbians have resorted to selectively denying
certain less prominent essentials, such as vitamins, mineral
nutrients, medicines and even soap and toothpaste.

This is a strategy of committing genocide by the
pruning method. The Serbians hope to accomplish their
crime by cutting down snippets of human life not noticeable
to an increasingly disengaged international community until
the entire tree of human life in places such as Srebrenica
has been eradicated. We demand a response to this
dastardly practice of human pruning through a more
responsive and resolute plan - as has been already
authorized by the Council - which should include, of
course, the resort to air-drops and force if necessary.

Despite the numerous reminders citing the Geneva
Conventions and the calls upon the Serbian military and
political leadership to halt and reverse their practice of
"ethnic cleansing", these crimes continue, abated only by
the rapidly decreasing number of potential human
victims - as is, in fact, pointed out in the Secretary-
General's report of 22 March 1995. Efforts to date have not
been adequate, and a more effective strategy must be
devised to stop these crimes. That is the political, legal and
moral responsibility of this institution.

Once again according to the Secretary General's report
of 22 March 1995, the so-called Krajina Serbs continue to
violate our international border, as well as the status of the
United Nations Protected Areas within the Republic of
Croatia, by their direct involvement in the assault upon
Bihac. We request that modalities be established to stop
these violations of our territorial integrity and sovereignty,
emanating across our international border from areas
ostensibly under United Nations control. We support the
efforts of the Republic of Croatia to have these borders
sealed.

Our regret is further amplified by the fact that we are
deemed to be subject to an international arms embargo de
facto restricting our capacity for self-defence and making
us even more dependent upon the international community's
responsibility for preserving international peace and
security.

As already outlined in our letter to the Secretary-
General dated 28 March 1995, the recent Serbian
deployment of new anti-aircraft systems through much of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a direct

 

challenge to the United Nations and its mandate in our
Republic, and a threat to the individuals executing that
mandate. It is the most serious factor, causing the greatest
deterioration in the humanitarian, military and political
environment in our Republic over the last year. We
request that these illegal weapons within our borders be
removed, or neutralized.

We continue to believe that those most urgent issues
should be addressed immediately as the initial part of a
more comprehensive review. We remain of the firm View
that modalities and a time-frame must be established for
the review. Most importantly, the review should
incorporate the contributions of the Security Council, of
the troop contributors, of interested regional organizations
and Member States, of the Secretariat, and of the
Government of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The efforts and tactics of UNPROFOR must be
better coordinated with the strategy of the peace process
and with peacemaking. Unfortunately, UNPROFOR's
vulnerability - perceived or real - is manipulated by
the Serbians to undermine the peace effort. More
disconcerting, the tactics of UNPROFOR commanders are
too frequently not consistent with the dynamics that are
necessary to bring about forward momentum in pressing
the Pale Serbs to accept the international Contact Group
peace plan. Instead, UNPROFOR tactics are designed to
promote the status quo, but they also have the effect of
helping assure the Pale Serbs that they can freeze the
situation on the ground.

The United Nations mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it currently stands, can be only a
temporary substitute for a real, comprehensive and
durable peace in our country.

Confronted by a toothless international Contact
Group, unwilling Western Powers, a muzzled NATO and
UNPROFOR tactics promoting the status quo, it is no
wonder that the Pale Serbs believe that their reality of
conquest, "ethnic cleansing" and occupation on the
ground will prevail over the paper maps, documents and
words of the Contact Group peacemakers.

This is the plan of the Contact Group. We have not
fashioned it or trumpeted it, nor are we enthusiastic about
it. None the less, we have compromised, and accepted
this plan. We are sober about its mixed consequences and
the reality of the long struggle before us to reintegrate our
Republic and to bring a real peace to our people.

 

It also seems, unfortunately, that the Bosnians are
once again the truest of believers, the most committed to
this peace plan. While those that have fashioned this peace
plan shy away from any compulsion to press the Serbians
to accept the Contact Group peace plan, it is our own will,
sacrifices and capacity to defend our Republic that are the
most effective modalities for shaking the Pale and Belgrade
Serbs from their intransigence and convincing them to
accept even the minimum of compromise demanded of
them by the international community.

It is our country, our territorial integrity, our
sovereignty and the lives of our citizens that are at stake. It
is your Council's, Contact Group peace plan. We have the
unabridgeable right and responsibility to defend the former
and the sincere desire to realize the latter.

We have made our choices and have supported them
with words and deeds. Council members have also
expressed their choices with words. Now let them be true
to their words and follow through with the necessary deeds.

