Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you, Madam
President, on presiding over the Security Council in
this first month of 2012. I would also like to
specifically thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and my colleague
and friend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra for their briefings. I
also welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Kenya and Azerbaijan and the Minister of Defence of
Uganda.

After two decades of war, Somalia appears now
to be seeing signs of progress and hope, although we
realize that there is still a long road ahead. In recent
months, Somalia has made considerable strides in
political terms, including the signing, on 6 December
2011, of the road map and the adoption of the Garowe
principles by the Transitional Federal Government in
January 2012.

There have also been gains on the security front
following the strikes against the Al-Shabaab movement
in Mogadishu and other regions of Somalia. That
was the result of resistance by the Transitional Federal
Government and the robust measures taken by
neighbouring countries. It was also due to the ongoing
support of the international community.

However, despite those clearly important
achievements, considerable challenges remain to be
addressed. In political terms, we note the difficulties
with regard to the implementation of the road map and
the major delays in implementing several of its
provisions. In addition, increasing tensions between the
authorities of Puntland and Somaliland as well as other
so-called regional authorities could undermine what
has been achieved politically to date.

On behalf of my country, I should like to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Mahiga, for the successful meeting held
in Garoowe, which laid out a specific timetable for
ending the transition period. In the months ahead, we
will need to work to support the Somali authorities in
this critical transition period, and we will need to
effectively support the implementation of the road map
and the capacity-building process of the Federal
Government in Somalia.

We will also need to help strengthen initiatives
aimed at national reconciliation. In humanitarian terms,
and despite the halving of the risk of hunger in certain
regions, the situation in certain regions remains very
fragile and grave, and millions of Somalis are in a
precarious state in humanitarian terms. In that regard, I
welcome the serious and outstanding efforts made by
the United Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and non-governmental organizations,
which have supported the people of Somalia in dealing
with the varied challenges they face in terms of
security.

Despite the major strides made, the attack in
October in Mogadishu by elements of Al-Shabaab and
their attempt to retake some Somali cities makes clear
that the process is still fragile and that that movement
still poses a threat to the safety and security of the
region as a whole. Piracy and hostage-taking represent
yet another challenge that will need to be addressed
with unrelenting determination.

In the area of security, in more general terms I
should like to thank Djibouti for its decision to deploy
troops together with the Burundian and Ugandan
troops, who are working under very difficult political
and security conditions. That reinforcement comes at
the right time, and it could help the Transitional
Federal Government to gain greater control of the
situation. We believe that the increase in AMISOM's
troop strength to the level of 17,900 will have a major
impact on the ground, particularly given the sensitive
situation in the country. The international community
will need to provide sufficient and necessary support to
AMISOM. so that it can carry out its mission
appropriately.
The successes achieved in recent months are the
result of enhanced cooperation and coordination
between the Somali authorities and various actors and
organizations, including the League of Arab States, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we hope that this cooperation will continue and
be strengthened so that it can bolster the sincere will of
the Somali authorities to restore security and stability.

The people of Somalia have suffered for decades
from being forgotten. They are at the point of despair
with respect to international solidarity, and the
authorities are looking for assistance sufficient to face
the challenges, so that the people can have a normal
life, under stable conditions, in a sensitive and
extremely strategic region.

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish) Allow
me at the outset, Madam, to welcome you and to
congratulate you on your presiding over the Security
Council today. I wish also to thank you for having
convened this very important debate on an issue that
we have been dealing with on a continuing basis owing
to its dimensions and implications.

Mr. Lynn Pascoe's report was very detailed and
very serious, and we thank him for it. We also express
our gratitude for the statements made by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, and by the Ministers of
Kenya and Uganda, who have made important
contributions.

In his most recent report on Somalia
(S/2011/759), the Secretary-General draws our
attention to the fragility of the situation in the country
and stresses that we must consolidate the gains made
on various fronts. Thus, while keeping in mind the fact
that the restoration of security, political stability, the
rule of law and economic development are the primary
responsibility of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG), it is imperative that the international
community provide support in the strengthening of
State institutions.

In terms of security, the work and the presence of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is
crucial to the stabilization of Somalia. For that reason,
there is an urgent need to ensure that the Mission has at
its disposal the resources and equipment necessary to
fulfil its mandate and to improve the living conditions
of the contingents. In that regard, we welcome the
recommendations adopted by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union on 5 January last with
respect to future AMISOM. operations. As many
speakers have noted today, those are key elements in
the development of a comprehensive strategy in
Somalia that would promote coordination between
security and political requirements, with a view to
stabilizing the situation.

The Council has acknowledged the urgent need to
ensure predictable, reliable and timely resources to
help AMISOM. discharge its mandate. The Council
must therefore give careful consideration to the request
to authorize an increased number of troops for the
Mission as well as to other recommendations contained
in the African Union communique. As forces
authorized by the Council are being deployed, they
must also have the resources and equipment necessary
to fulfil their mandate in Mogadishu and beyond.

In order to consolidate the security and military
gains achieved, we must provide greater technical and
financial resources as well as training to the TFG
forces so that they are able to ensure the security of the
population. It is also crucial that there be a chain of
command within the militias associated with the TFG
and that they be truly subordinated to the TFG
authorities.

We cannot fail to recall that the humanitarian
situation remains very serious and that the fragility of
the situation requires sustained, coordinated efforts on
the part of the Organization and the international
community. We must ensure that emergency assistance
is increasingly linked to the establishment of
conditions conducive to ensuring food security and
long-term means of survival, so as to contribute to the
development of sustainable structures following the
crisis and to avert future emergencies.

In conclusion, I should like to acknowledge once
again the significant contribution made by the African
Union in the quest for peace in Somalia and to urge all
of the relevant players to continue to participate
constructively and comply with their obligations in the
implementation of the road map so as to make it
possible to comply with the timelines set in the context
of the finalization of the transition period by August
2012.

