Ms. Laj (Denmark): Like others, I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Rucker, for his very useful briefing. We welcome
him to his new and immensely challenging duties and
look forward to working with him at this crucial time
for the future of Kosovo. I would also like to thank the
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo, Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, for her
statement.

I associate myself fully with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

We are pleased to note that the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government have made significant
efforts to improve the implementation of standards
since the last report. Denmark would like to welcome
the commitment to move forward shown by the
Administration in Pristina. However, there are a
number of areas where further attention is needed, not
least within those of the rule of law and freedom of
movement. Security incidents, whether or not they are
ethnically motivated, undermine reconciliation and
threaten progress.

We welcome the concrete steps taken by the
Provisional Institutions to improve conditions for
Kosovo's minorities. However, it is clear that those
steps do not automatically improve relations between
the majority and the minorities. The leadership of the
Provisional Institutions needs to create confidence
among all of Kosovo's groups. That can be achieved
only by outreach and by showing a genuine willingness
to compromise.

We are very concerned about the step taken by
municipalities in northern Kosovo to end contacts with
the Provisional Institutions and to set up parallel
structures. Encouraging a spirit of non-cooperation is
not in anyone's best interest. We urge Belgrade to
encourage Kosovo Serb representatives to participate
constructively in the Provisional Institutions in
Pristina, and not least in the municipal bodies.

We all wish for a sustainable solution to Kosovo's
future. Non-cooperation, isolation and entrenched
positions will not lead to a better future. Flexibility and
compromise are prerequisites for a sustainable
solution. The primary beneficiaries will be all
Kosovars, regardless of ethnic group, the population of
the Republic of Serbia and, indeed, all the people of
the Western Balkans. Therefore, cooperation and
participation are in everyone's best interest.

My country views Kosovo as a key regional
issue. Denmark steadfastly supports UNMIK, the
UNMIK police and the Kosovo Force. We look forward
to a more peaceful and prosperous future, which the
peoples of the region deserve. That will entail close
regional cooperation towards the common integration
of these truly European countries into the Euro-
Atlantic institutions, where they rightfully belong.
However, the Euro-Atlantic perspectives depend upon
the implementation of standards and a sustainable
solution to Kosovo's future status.

