Mrs. Yade (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank South Africa and President Thabo
Mbeki for having organized this meeting on a subject
that is at the heart of the Security Council's mandate
and work.

In an age when the destinies of peoples and
nations are linked, peace and security on the African
continent are challenges we all share. The future of
Africa is also our future. Its successes or failures today
will be ours tomorrow. It is by working together that
we will meet the challenges of development, peace and
security.

Motivated by that powerful conviction, last
September President Sarkozy took the initiative to hold
a high-level Security Council meeting on the issue of
peace and security in Africa. Africa must find its
rightful place in globalization. Global affairs cannot be
addressed without Africa. There will be no successful
globalization without a strong Africa that is sure of
itself. But its efforts and successes must be supported

and backed up by the international community. France
therefore believes in a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and African Union.

Africa is a continent on the move. It is part of the
momentum in the world. Africa's youthful population,
vibrant and impatient, is sweeping it along and opening
it to the winds of modernity and democracy. Sustained
economic growth is encouraging remarkable successes
in many countries. Its active and growing role in
international bodies is bearing fruit in the settlement of
many conflicts.

Africa is a continent that is organizing itself. The
African Union, whose institutions and role continue to
develop in parallel to subregional organizations,
reflects its desire to take its future into its own hands.
The African Union is already taking on a substantial
role in international responses to crises.

But Africa is also a continent that continues to
face considerable challenges, beginning with those
related to poverty, health, climate change and access to
natural resources, especially water. Africa is
endeavouring to meet those challenges.

We are determined to help it through concrete
actions - with regard to food security, for example.
The riots caused by hunger are triggering a new
emergency, with catastrophic results. How can we
accept that people are dying of hunger in the twenty-
first century? We have seen in recent days the tragic
consequences of the sharp rise and volatility of prices
for basic foodstuffs, which have been hurting the most
vulnerable African populations for many months. Yet
food security is one of the conditions for peace,
stability and development in Africa.

The international community must mobilize
immediately to find solutions with the World Food
Programme as a matter of urgency and over the long
term, by placing agricultural development and land
management at the top of the international agenda.
Peace and development are not built with empty
stomachs. France and the European Union are
preparing proposals in that connection. The United
Nations must act to meet this new global challenge.
Like the African Union, the Organization should help
African countries to meet those challenges and should
do so in four areas.
First, the United Nations should take preventive
action in order to avert open crises. France supports the
Secretary-General's efforts to strengthen United
Nations efforts at preventive diplomacy. The early
warning system established by the African Union is an
important development for the continent in that regard.

The African Union is setting up its peace and
security architecture so as to be able to prevent and
address by itself the continent's crises. For its part, the
United Nations continues to improve its conflict-
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding capacities
through reform of the Secretariat and the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The relations
developing between the Security Council, on which the
United Nations Charter confers the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the African Union Peace and
Security Council are a good illustration of cooperation
between the two organizations.

The second objective is to respond to crises. To
meet those challenges, the United Nations Charter
confers on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Chapter VIII of the Charter also
provides for the role of regional organizations in that
respect. Institutional development is not an end in
itself, however. It is on the basis of results that
cooperation between our two organizations has to be
judged. In Darfur, for instance, acting in an original
way, the two organizations are deploying a hybrid
operation and conducting joint mediation. It is not
always an easy situation to manage. The deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is blocked at this time. It is imperative that the
Operation be able to discharge its mandate to help the
people of Darfur, who are the primary victims, and the
humanitarian operators who come to their aid.

Indeed, we are increasingly concerned by the rise
in the number of serious human rights violations
against women, through increased sexual violence, and
children in situations of armed conflict in particular.
The fight against impunity must be an essential
element of our action. States must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. Without resolute action
against impunity, there can be no peace or lasting
reconciliation.

Peace and national reconciliation processes must
also be supported until free elections, transparent and
open to all, can be held, as in C6te d'Ivoire. Such
security, humanitarian and political aspects go hand in

hand. They cannot advance without all the others, as
we are also seeing in the case of Somalia, where we
cannot hope to improve living conditions for a greatly
suffering population over the long term without
progress in the political process. That is the thrust of
our common efforts.

The third objective is to assist democratic change
and further respect for human rights. We must heed the
call of peoples and civil societies for the rule of law,
honest and transparent elections and the protection of
fundamental freedoms. We see the consequences for
stability and civil peace when overtures to democracy
come late. Such was the case in Kenya. It is the case
today in Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwean people must not
be deprived of its victory, which is the victory of
democracy.

The final objective is to build peace in countries
that have successfully completed a transition process. I
am thinking of the current efforts in Sierra Leone,
Liberia, Guinea-Bissau, the Central African Republic
and the Great Lakes region - Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - with
Governments democratically elected after a transition
process.

I would like to conclude by speaking of Europe's
commitment. France fully aligns itself with the
statement that will be made by Slovenia on behalf of
the European Union (EU). There will be no strong
Europe without a strong Africa. That is the full
meaning of the partnership reached between the
European Union and Africa in Lisbon in December.
The European Union is deeply committed to
strengthening African peacekeeping capacities, support
for African Union operations and the conduct of United
Nations-mandated operations in Africa, such as the
current EU-led peacekeeping operation in Chad and the
Central African Republic, which seeks to protect
people and facilitate humanitarian assistance in regions
neighbouring Darfur affected by that crisis. France,
during its upcoming presidency of the European Union,
will emphasize cooperative action in support of the
African peace and security architecture, and support
for the processes of stabilization and reconciliation.

France resolutely supports the ambition of Africa
and its peoples to build a continent of stability and
prosperity that takes a full part in the workings of the
world. We are fully involved in that effort under the
auspices of the United Nations, alongside the African
Union and with all Africa's partners.

