Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): It is with immense
delight and rekindled hope that my delegation welcomes the
inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation in Angola. I cannot but echo most
resoundingly the Secretary-General's observation that

"Never before has the country been so close to the
final resolution of its devastating conflict and to the
attainment of lasting peace". (S/J 997/304, para. 17)

The dramatic events of the past two weeks clearly
demonstrate that the people of Angola hold their destiny in
their own hands. Crucial steps which had remained glued
to the drawing boards and measures which had overstayed
their time on the list of things to do have, all of a sudden,
made a dramatic transformation and have been inscribed on
the list of achievements, real achievements. The
regularization of Mr. Savimbi's status, the swearing in of
UNITA deputies and the historic inauguration of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation have
given the people of Angola a firm grip on the reins of
peace, and raised our hopes that a new day is dawning in
that country - and all this in spite of the litany of past
disappointments and failed peace efforts.

Zimbabwe most heartily congratulates the people of
Angola on their remarkable steps forward in the peace
process. The personal presence of His Excellency the
President of Zimbabwe, Robert Gabriel Mugabe, at the
inauguration of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation in Luanda was an eloquent expression of my
country's, and indeed the subregion's, unwavering support
for the peace process in Angola, and of our abiding
goodwill towards the brotherly people of Angola. It is the
earnest hope of the people of the region that Angola's new
but achievement-studded calendar heralds a new breath of
the spirit of cooperation and mutual accommodation
which was the hallmark of the Lusaka accords.

In this regard, we call upon the people of Angola to
ride upon this tide of success, goodwill and great
expectations, and move expeditiously to conclude the
political, military and administrative assignments which
they have committed themselves to in order to make
lasting peace an irreversible reality in their country.

We look forward to more progress, inter alia in the
normalization of State administration throughout the entire
country, the completion of the formation of the united
armed forces and the national police, and the
demobilization of the remainder of UNITA's military
personnel.

As we look forward to the consolidation of peace in
Angola, we in southern Africa will continue to put our
full weight behind the efforts to promote that process.
Through its chairmanship of the Organization of African
Unity Ad Hoc Committee on Angola and the Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, Zimbabwe will continue
to use its good offices to widen the frontiers of peace.

I wish to conclude by stating that we welcome and
fully support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) to 30 June, as well
as to create a follow-up mission in the form of a United
Nations observer mission in Angola. It is also of crucial
importance that the international community undergird the
peace-building efforts that must now commence. These
should include the post-war reconstruction of the shattered
infrastructure and the resettlement of refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as meeting the
daunting challenge of landmine clearance.

We pay tribute to UNAVEM. III, to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, to the
troika of observers, to the Organization of African Unity
and to the countries of the subregion, for their collective
and cumulative contributions helped create the requisite
quantum leap in the Angola peace process.

