Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Klein for his very full and
comprehensive briefing.

The hour is late, and I will try to be as brief as I
can.

The Secretary-General's report, for which we are
extremely grateful, refers to significant operational
successes. Mr. Klein and his team deserve our
admiration and thanks for the commitment that has
been required to bring about those successes. I should
like to highlight a few ofthem.

The International Police Task Force (IPTF)
continues to make steady progress on recruiting and
training police and on reforming local structures to
reflect the single-chain-of-command style more
familiar in the rest of Europe.

As Mr. Klein has said, the establishment of the
State Border Service, which was officially launched on
6 June, was a very significant step forward in the face
of considerable local opposition. When Mr. Klein last
briefed us, in March, we learned that he had been
forced to impose the laws establishing the Border
Service after Parliament failed to pass the necessary
legislation. We have every confidence that the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), maintaining pressure where necessary,
will ensure that the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina implement the Border Service laws in
full.

The Secretary-General's report also makes
reference to the highly effective judicial system
assessment programme. It has now reported its
important, if disappointing, findings. It is now
important that an effective way is found to hand over
this work to another organization. It is for the Office of
the High Representative, as the central coordinating
agency in Bosnia, to propose a successor to UNMIBH
in the area of judicial assessment and reform. We
welcome the fact that UNMIBH representatives are
working together with representatives of the Office of
the High Representative to find the best home for this
work.

Mr. Klein expressed his preferences to us this
morning. I, in response, will express ours. Our own
view is that neither the Council of Europe nor the
United Nations Development Programme is an
appropriate successor agency for UNMIBH in this area.
We understand that the Office of the High
Representative will probably propose an Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe/Office of the
High Representative partnership. We have some doubts
as to the need to move the programme away from
UNMIBH, but we will of course consider carefully the
eventual proposal of the Office of the High
Representative.

I took careful note of Mr. Klein's macro-
objectives of greater integration with Europe, efforts to
promote democracy in Serbia and a more intensified
effort to track down war criminals. All these are
laudable, wide objectives that my delegation supports.

At the more micro level, although it is not really
micro, we welcome the fact that UNMIBH's
components have begun to prepare a strategic and
operational framework for fulfilling its core mandate
by December 2002. We welcome the focus this date
will bring to the operation. However, we should not
forget that an exit strategy must be tied to the
achievement of objectives.

We welcome the recognition in the Secretary-
General's report of the need continuously to review
progress, not least in order to ensure that resources are
deployed where they can be of most use.

It will also be important to look at our wider
successes. UNMIBH's exit strategy will need to be
carefully considered in the light of an overarching,
coordinated assessment of all the international
organization's mandates and objectives in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

