Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (Spoke in French): The headlines remind us of the urgency of the
protection of civilians. Recently in Idlib in Syria, more
than 160 people have been killed and 180,000 displaced,
including 80,000 children, while 83,000 people are
trapped in a confined area with no shelter but trees.

Twenty years of the protection of civilians in the
Council has brought significant progress on this issue,
and yet thousands of civilians on the ground are still
dying as a result of wars that too often are in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. According
to the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/373), in 2018
there were 28,000 victims in only six theatres on the
Council's agenda.

We therefore thank you, Madam President, for
your commitment to improving the effectiveness of
protection on the ground, in the framework of the
Council presidency. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico
Borello for their contribution. Today we must move
from principles to action. As Mr. Borello said, to do
that we must define concrete ways in which the Council
can be united in its work.

Belgium aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians. For my part I
would like to discuss three concrete approaches - first,
what peace operations can learn from the other actors'
practices on the ground; secondly, the importance
of concrete data for protection and thirdly, the
responsibility of each State to ensure that the most
serious crimes do not go unpunished.

First, owing to the complexity of current conflicts,
peace operations constantly face new challenges in
their efforts to protect civilians. We must find better
ways to overcome them. For example, could peace
operations collaborate more effectively with civil-
society organizations and learn from their experiences
in community engagement? In that context, it is a
positive that the mandate ofthe United Nations Mission
in South Sudan recognizes the importance of exploring
techniques for the non-armed protection of civilians,
including through community engagement. That could
serve as an inspiration for other mandates. We should
not forget that a lasting peace is built not between States
but between peoples and communities.

As the Secretary-General emphasizes, children
require special protection measures. Failure to assume
our responsibility to better protect children not only
harms girls and boys living in insecurity, it also
exacerbates the grievances between warring parties
and diminishes their ability to resolve their conflicts
peacefully. Peace operations have a key role to play in
deploying child protection advisers, integrating child
protection into missions and negotiating action plans
with armed groups.

Secondly, the Council must be better informed
about cases of serious violations of international law
and should make better use of the instruments available
to it for documenting and investigating such violations.
As the Secretary-General indicated in his report,
civilian casualty tracking deserves more attention, as
it is critical to supporting evidence-based advocacy,
identifying the factors behind attacks that result in
civilian casualties and preventing the recurrence of
violations. In the interests of improving prevention,
Belgium also supports the integration ofthe Framework
ofAnalysisforAtrocity Crimes, published by the United
Nations in 2014, into predeployment training for peace
operations, in order to enhance troops' early-warning
and atrocity-risk-assessment capacities.

Finally, we note that respect for international law
is first and foremost the responsibility of each State.
With regard to the most serious crimes, that means the
obligation to prosecute their perpetrators so that they
cannot escape justice wherever they are.

That is why we call on States tojoin the initiative to
develop a multilateral treaty on mutual legal assistance
and extradition for prosecuting perpetrators of the most
serious crimes in national courts. However, if progress
at the national level is too slow or even non-existent,
the Security Council must play its part and be more
proactive in holding perpetrators to account, including
by referring situations where the most serious crimes
may have been committed to the International
Criminal Court.

The Council also has a responsibility to respond
to the serious threat posed to civilians by explosive
devices, that is, landmines, explosive remnants of
war and improvised explosive devices. In the next
few months Belgium will start working on concrete
initiatives in this area.

