Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China's position on the question of Iraq has
been consistent. Iraq should continue to cooperate with
the United Nations in implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions in a comprehensive and earnest
manner. Meanwhile, the Council should proceed to
discuss, at an early date, the lifting of the oil embargo
against Iraq, on the basis of humanitarian considerations
and in the light of Iraq's implementation of the
resolutions, so as to truly and effectively ease the
humanitarian situation in Iraq and alleviate the suffering
inflicted on the Iraqi people by sanctions.

We are of the view that when we address the issues
left over from the Gulf crisis, the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the political independence of all countries in
the region, including Iraq, should be fully respected by
the international community. We have noted that this
element has been reaffirmed in a few places in the draft
resolution before us. We understand that the main purpose
of the mechanism proposed in the draft is the easing of
the humanitarian situation in Iraq and that this is merely
a temporary measure. Once the conditions are ripe, the
Security Council should start to consider easing or
removing the sanctions against Iraq. Based on this
understanding, the Chinese delegation will vote in favour
of this draft resolution.

But it must be pointed out that questions regarding
the channel of shipment for Iraqi oil exports and the
distribution of humanitarian funds to the three northern
Governorates of Iraq, as mentioned in the draft resolution,
are matters within the purview of Iraq's sovereignty to
which a proper solution should be found, in full
consultation with Iraq, to ensure the implementation of
the mechanism embodied in the draft resolution. While
certain modifications and qualifications have been made
in this regard, the Chinese delegation still has some
difficulties with the elements to which I have referred,
and therefore wishes to express its reservations on them.

