Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her briefing on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, over
a 90-day reporting period. It was an excellent report
and we listened closely. My statement today will focus
on three issues, namely, the security situation, the
transition to peacebuilding and, of course, sanctions.

First, Indonesia welcomes the relatively stable
security situation in Darfur, with the exception of
intermittent clashes in Jebel Marra, as confirmed by
the Secretary-General's latest report. We also welcome
the Sudanese Government's efforts to promote the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, with the support of the international
community. My delegation is encouraged by the signing
of a pre-negotiation agreement between the Sudanese
Government and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi faction and the Justice and Equality Movement
last month in Berlin.

Yet we also note with concern the presence of
Darfuri armed groups, particularly with regard to their
efforts to acquire financial and military capabilities.
It is high time to effectively cut those groups off
from their sources of financing. The international
community needs to apply strong pressure on parties
that continue to impede progress towards lasting peace
and opt for war.

Secondly, the improvement in the security situation
reinforces the transition concept endorsed in resolution
2429 (2018) and enables us to focus on peacebuilding
and development activities in Darfur. Capacity-
building must continue to be extended to the Sudan,
in line with the principles of national policies and
priorities. Resource mobilization is key to supporting
the transition to peacebuilding and development, while
also addressing the root causes of the conflict and
securing the continued implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace. My delegation sees a potential
role for the Peacebuilding Fund. We also welcome the
proposal to hold a pledging conference for Darfur to
ensure sufficient funds for the United Nations country
team. Over the past few weeks, I have repeatedly
stressed in my interventions that economic development
is a key factor for ensuring stability, growth and lasting
peace in countries. In that regard, the international
community should continue to render assistance to
ensure that sustaining peace is achieved in Darfur.

Thirdly, on the issue of sanctions, Indonesia has
maintained a consistent view regarding their efficacy.
Sanctions should be used as a last resort, with a clear,
transparent and measurable timetable. Sanctions
measures and applications must also be periodically
evaluated, including against the backdrop of the latest
situation on the ground. As I mentioned just now,
economic development should also be considered in the
context of sanctions efficacy. Indonesia stands ready to
contribute to that discussion.

I would like to conclude by commending the
critical work of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Indonesia has
demonstrated its commitment to contributing to peace
and stability in Darfur, including through its long-
standing contribution to UNAMID, which presently
amounts to 477 peacekeepers. My delegation believes
the improvement in security situation in Darfur paves
the way for UNAMID's eventual exit in 2020, in line
with resolution 2429 (2018).

