Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset, Mr. President, to thank
you and to congratulate you on the work that you and
your colleagues in the French delegation have done to
ensure the success of the work of the Security Council
this month, especially as regards transparency and your
excellent relationship with non-members of the
Council. I am saying this not merely as a traditional
expression of appreciation, but as a statement of facts
that have been noted by other speakers as well. We
hope that all other States, especially States members of
the Council, will follow your example in this regard.

I wish to express our appreciation also to Sir
Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his important statement and for his
valuable advice and serious-minded proposals. His
advice to the Council not to yield to hopelessness was
extremely valuable and ought to be followed. We also
thank the representative of Djibouti for his
comprehensive presentation.

Somalia has long been left on the sidelines and
neglected by the United Nations due to the erroneous
perception of certain States that they represented the
international community and could do whatever they
wished on its behalf. Action was taken inappropriately.
The situation in Somalia had been intolerable for a
very long time. That situation was rejected by the
international community as a whole, just as it had been
rejected by the Somali people themselves.

We hope that this meeting will represent a
concrete new beginning in the revival of the
international community's interest in Somalia and that
it will assist the Somali people in regaining unity,
stability and the achievement of development through
their territory.

The initiative of Mr. Omar Guelleh, the President
of Djibouti, could not have come at a better time. It
requires the full material and political support of the
international community if it is to achieve its
objectives- material support to enable Djibouti to
continue hosting the reconciliation Conference and
political support to bring pressure to bear on all Somali
parties to participate successfully in the Conference.

We should not stand aside wondering or
expressing doubt about the possibility of participation
or non-participation. All those who object to or display
scepticism at the possibility of the Djibouti initiative's
success will drop their objection and scepticism when
faced with the international community's determination
to support the initiative and ensure its successful
conclusion. We do not expect things to change
overnight, but with perseverance and determination we
will realize our desired objectives. Therefore, we
should not cease bringing pressure to bear on the
parties that object to the convening of the Conference
to participate in it and to work for its successful
conclusion.

My country's interest in and concern for Somalia
is not recent. It dates back to the beginning of the
crisis. We have invited the Somali faction leaders and
held conferences and meetings in Libya and in other
capitals and countries, all in the interest of national
reconciliation in Somalia. We have participated in and
supported, both materially and financially, all
conferences aimed at that same objective. We have
contributed to improving relations between the various
Somali factions and neighbouring countries, such as
Ethiopia. Our interest and concern for Somalia dates
back to the beginning of the crisis and is demonstrated
by the presence of the Libyan diplomatic mission,
which may be the only one remaining in Somalia, in
spite of deteriorating security conditions. My country
has declared its financial and political support for the
Djibouti President's initiative and continues to provide
humanitarian assistance to the Somali people.

My country's position vis-a-vis the crisis in
Somalia is based on the following objectives:
reunification of the territories and people of Somalia;
rejection of fragmentation; peace and stability in a
united and independent Somalia; dealing with all
representatives of the Somali factions and urging them
to come to the negotiating table to settle their
differences by peaceful means; and the rejection of
violence or any attempt to reach solutions militarily.
The United Nations should not let Somalia down; it
should return to Somalia in a forceful way.

We would also like to stress that the Security
Council is about to take practical measures to support
the initiative of the President of Djibouti, both
politically and materially, which should enable Somalia
to regain its normalcy.

