Mr. Mahbubani: Let me begin by commending
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, which
we believe is a very useful one to have, primarily
because there is no formal mechanism for handing over
the chairmanship of a Security Council committee. In
our case, for example, we do not know who the next
Chairman of the Liberia sanctions Committee will be.
So, the purpose of our remarks today is to try and help
the incoming Chairman do his work when he takes on
the chairmanship of the Committee. In doing so, let me
stress, as you have and as have Ambassador Kolby and
Ambassador Ryan, that I will be speaking in a personal
capacity and none other.

By way of background, there are at present only
three United Nations Member States that are subjected
to sanctions on the State itself. In the other cases, the
sanctions have either been lifted or suspended or have
been imposed on non-State actors. Those three States
are Iraq, Liberia and Somalia. Of course, the sanctions
on Iraq are a much biggerjob. The sanctions on Liberia
are a much smaller job. I admire the work that
Ambassador Kolby has done.

In our case, three measures were imposed on
Liberia: the expansion of the 1992 arms embargo by
resolution 1343 (2001) of 7 March 2001; the May 2001
embargo on the direct and indirect import of all rough
diamonds from Liberia; and a travel ban on senior
Liberian Government members, senior military officers
and their spouses, and individuals providing financial
and military support to rebel groups in the region, as
designated by the sanctions Committee. All three
measures were extended for another year in May 2002
by resolution 1408 (2002).

Allow me to comment briefly on the question of
the performance of the Committee. Basically, as we
said to the Council in formal consultations, we have
good news and bad news. The good news is that we
have probably succeeded in achieving the objective
described in paragraph 3 of resolution 1343 (2001),
which "Stresses that the demands in paragraph 2 above
are intended to lead to further progress in the peace
process in Sierra Leone". As we all know, the good
news is that the peace process in Sierra Leone has gone
well, especially since President Kabbah declared the
end of the war in January this year and since Sierra
Leone also successfully completed its elections in May
this year.

The bad news is that the three Panel of Experts
reports have documented continued violations of the
sanctions by the Government of Liberia and by other
groups, including the Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD). That creates, I
suppose, a dilemma for the Council next year in terms
of weighing the political considerations of the goals
achieved against the legal considerations of the
continuing violations. That is the challenge that the
Council will face next year.

Turning to the Committee's work for next year,
we have tried to document the lessons that we have
learned. We have come up with seven lessons, which
we would like to share with the Council.

The first lesson is that it is very important for any
Chairman of a sanctions committee to visit the region.
There is absolutely no substitute for first-hand, direct
contact with the country on which sanctions have been
imposed and with the other countries in the region. In
that regard, I must say that we had a very useful visit in
April 2001, and I congratulate the Secretariat on the
remarkable work they did in organizing our visit. For
me, going to the region was an eye-opener. When I
arrived there, I explained to all the Liberians that we
met that the Security Council had imposed some very
smart sanctions: an arms embargo, a diamond embargo
and the travel ban. Yet I found, as I will discuss later,
that the sanctions also had a psychological impact on
the population as a whole. That is something that one
can discover only by going to the region oneself. It is
something to which we should pay attention.

The second lesson we learned is that it is
important to have a comprehensive policy for any
sanctions arrangement. Sanctions alone cannot be the
sole policy of the Council. Frankly, in the case of
Liberia, that is one problem that we constantly had: not
knowing exactly where the sanctions fitted into the
overall policy of the Council. But that problem has
been solved by Ambassador Aguilar Zinser. I want to
congratulate him and the Mexican delegation on having
succeeded in persuading the Council to adopt, on 13
December 2002, the presidential statement contained in
document S/PRST/2002/36. We think that it is a very
important complement to the work being done on
sanctions in Liberia.

The third lesson we have learned is that it is
extremely important for a sanctions committee to be
provided with adequate resources. Here, the problem
that any sanctions committee has - because I am sure
that this applies to others, too - is that we clearly do
not have the resources to monitor whether or not the
sanctions are being respected. In the case of the Liberia
Sanctions Committee, we had to rely upon the ad hoc
Panel of Experts that was set up. But the problem with
those panels of experts is that they work on what I call
a stop-start basis. They are suddenly jump-started, they
work for three months, they come up with a report and
then they stop their work. Then there is a gap. When
we need more information, we jump-start them again,
they work for a few months and then they stop again.
That process of stopping and starting creates problems,
because what happens, for example, is that you lose
some of the expertise. We lost the chairman of our
Panel of Experts and, in due course, we also lost one of
the experts, the Interpol expert.

So information is lost when the panels are
disbanded. That is why we have recommended that an
early decision be made next year to set up this Panel
because the more time that it is given, the better work
it does. I want to stress for the record that, despite the
fact that they have to work under unsatisfactory
conditions, it is remarkable what valuable and
insightful reports those panels have presented to the
Council.

The fourth lesson we learned was about the
difficulties in the implementation of sanctions. I will
talk briefly about the arms and diamonds embargoes
and the travel ban. In the case of the arms embargo, I
think we all know - and it is documented in the most
recent report of the Panel of Experts - that the arms
embargo is being visibly flouted both by the
Government of Liberia and by Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD). Indeed, the
latest period report states that, between June and
August 2002, more than 200 tons of weapons and
ammunition arrived in Liberia. In the same report, it
was also mentioned in paragraph 7 that the Panel had
observed that arms also continued to reach LURD
rebels through neighbouring countries. So, clearly, the
arms embargo is not functioning as it should and
something has to be done by the Council in that regard.

Also, not enough attention is being given by the
Council to the implementation of the provisions of
paragraph 4 of resolution 1343 (2001), which demands
that all States in the region prevent armed groups from
using their territory to prepare and launch attacks on
neighbouring countries.

Let me also raise one specific problem that arises

from the procedures used by the Panel of Experts. The
fundamental method they use is "naming and
shaming". They name the countries involved and they
hope that that will prevent the countries from violating
the arms embargo. But sometimes, in some cases, the
countries have come back and said that they need more
information, or have asked if they can explain what
happened. Then we arrive at a practical problem,
because when the Panel's mandate has expired, the
Panel has been disbanded and there is no mechanism
available within the Secretariat to deal with responses
from Member States or individuals who dispute the
allegations contained in the Panel's reports or to deal
with requests from Member States and individuals
named in those reports who seek further information on
those allegations.

Here, I want to endorse the point made by
Ambassador Ryan that the Council has to address the
problem of continuity on this issue and clearly retain
the expertise to deal with complaints from Member
States. One specific suggestion I would have is, for
example, if indeed the Panel of Experts is set up again,
we should at least retain one of the experts to respond
to queries from Member States, if they raise questions
about the reports of the Panel of Experts.

Secondly, on the diamonds embargo, there clearly
is also evidence that it has not been working very well.
There is a reverse trend of Liberian diamonds being
smuggled out of Liberia and sold as diamonds to
neighbouring countries. I also want to mention that,
despite the explicit call in the resolution for Liberia to
set up a diamonds certification system, the technical
assistance for that has not been forthcoming. In
addition, one problem that will also need to be
addressed is the fact that the diamond embargoes
imposed by the Council and the international control
regime set up by the Kimberly Process may not
necessarily be working in harmony and there is a need
to harmonize those two tracks also.

Thirdly, clearly, of all the sanctions imposed on
Liberia, the most effective measure was the travel ban.
That is what clearly hurt the Government of Liberia
more than anything else. It is also in a way the most
controversial, because there is no fixed criteria for the
listing and de-listing of names on the travel-ban list.
Consequently, individuals are usually proposed for the
travel-ban list through the provision of information by
some members of a sanctions Committee, and the other
members of the Committee generally agree to the
inclusion or deletion of names on the basis of trust.

But, because there are no clear rules for listing or
de-listing, situations arise where a name that ought to
be put on the list is withheld because of the objection
of a single member, or a name that could be deleted is
retained for the same reason. I think there needs to be a
more transparent process in the Committee for the
designation or deletion of names from the travel-ban
list. It is very difficult, frankly, when one is chairman
of such a committee to be confronted with an
individual who writes you a long passionate letter
explaining why he should be removed from the list, and
you have to reply to him saying, sorry, we cannot agree
to this, when you can give him no reasons for this.

The other problem we had with the travel-ban list
is that we often had skimpy information on the
individuals on the travel-ban list and countries have
complained that they could not impose the travel ban
when they have been given just the name and
designation, without passport numbers and so forth. We
hope that that will also be addressed in the future.

Let me turn now to the fifth lesson we learned,
which is the unintended consequences of sanctions. As
I mentioned earlier, the sanctions that were imposed on
Liberia were intended to be smart sanctions and were
not intended to have any kind of adverse impact on the
population of Liberia. But, as I hinted earlier, they have
had a psychological impact on the population, and the
sad truth is that at about the same time that the
sanctions were imposed on Liberia, the humanitarian
situation in Liberia worsened. The most recent report
of the Panel of Experts makes it very clear that the
humanitarian crisis in Liberia is not a result of the
sanctions that were imposed. That is very clearly
established by the most recent report of the Panel of
Experts. But, at the same time, it also makes it clear
that Liberia is facing a serious humanitarian crisis and
that humanitarian assistance to Liberia has decreased.
That is something that clearly has to be addressed.

Of course, the Government of Liberia has taken
advantage of this humanitarian crisis to wage a
successful propaganda campaign in Liberia to convince
the Liberian population that the humanitarian problems
that they face are due to United Nations sanctions.
There is one thing the Council can do better next year,
and that is to fight that propaganda battle and convince
the Liberian population that their problems are not due
to the sanctions imposed on them.

The sixth lesson that we learned has to do with
one of the instructions given to us when the Committee
was set up and contained in paragraph 14 (c) of
resolution 1343 (2001), which states that we should, as

a Committee:

"promulgate expeditiously such guidelines as
may be necessary to facilitate the implementation
of the measures imposed by paragraphs 5 to 7
above."

Unfortunately, after two years, we have not been able
to agree on the guidelines for the Committee. The good
news is that that did not deter the work of the
Committee. We managed to get our work done, despite
the absence of guidelines. But that situation is clearly
unsatisfactory and it is something that will hopefully
be remedied in due course. But, as we all know, a
similar problem has also been holding up the work in
the Working Group on sanctions. We hope that that
Working Group on sanctions will find the solution to
the problem of establishing clear guidelines.

The seventh and final lesson, which ties into the
point of our institutional memory, is about support. We
want, at this point, to thank the Secretariat for the
tremendous support they give us, in particular to
Loraine Rickard-Martin, James Sutterlin and Armie
Decepida, without whom, frankly, our sanctions
Committee could not have worked. They did a
tremendous job, and we want to thank them for it. But
as we leave, we want to encourage them to work harder
with our successors and to continue to provide them
good advice, because, frankly, the sanctions Committee
relies a great deal on the Secretariat for its work.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Jagdish
Koonjul, Chairman of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
