Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The
Jewish people are a patient people. Throughout 3,000
years of civilization, foreign conquest, exile and return,
Jerusalem has remained their spiritual home. For nearly
70 years, the city of Jerusalem has been the capital of
the State of Israel, despite many attempts by others to
deny that reality. The American people are less patient.
In 1948, the United States was the first nation to
recognize the independent State of Israel. In 1995, the
United States Congress declared that Jerusalem should
be recognized as the capital ofIsrael and that the United
States Embassy should be located there.

Former United States Presidents Clinton, Bush
and Obama all agreed with that position, but they did
not act. They delayed, in the hope that a peace process
would produce results, but those results were never
attained. For 22 years, the American people have
overwhelmingly supported that position, and they have
waited - and waited. This week, President Trump
finally made the decision to no longer deny the will of
the American people. It is important to be clear about
what the President's decision specifically means.

The President has announced that the United States
recognizes the obvious; that Jerusalem is the capital
of Israel. He has also instructed the State Department
to begin the process of relocating the United States
Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. That is what the
President has done; and the following is what he has
not done. The United States has not taken a position
on boundaries or borders. The specific dimensions of
sovereignty over Jerusalem are still to be decided by
the Israelis and the Palestinians through negotiations.
The United States has not advocated changing any
of the arrangements at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The President specifically called for
maintaining the status quo at the holy sites. Finally,
and critically, the United States is not pre-determining
final-status issues. We remain committed to achieving
a lasting peace agreement. We support a two-State
solution, if agreed by the parties. Those are the facts
of what has been said and done this week. There are
a few more points that are central to the discussion of
this issue.

Israel, like all nations, has the right to determine its
capital city. Jerusalem is the home of Israel's Parliament,
its President, its Prime Minister, its Supreme Court and
many of its ministries. It is basic common sense that
foreign embassies be located there. In almost every
country in the world, the United States Embassy is
located in the host country's capital city. Israel should be
no different. The United States took that step in the full
knowledge that it would raise questions and concerns.
Our actions are intended to help advance the cause for

peace. We must recognize that peace is advanced - not
set back - when all parties are honest with each other.
Our actions reflected an honest assessment of reality.

I understand the concerns that Security Council
members have in calling this meeting. Change is hard,
but we should never doubt what the truth can do. We
should never doubt that peace can happen when we face
the truth, believe in the human spirit and encourage
each other. To those who have good-faith concerns
about the future of peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians, let me again assure them that the
President and the current Administration of the United
States remain committed to the peace process. To those
who do not act in good faith, including any person,
leader, country or terrorist group that uses this week's
decision as a pretext for violence: they are only showing
themselves to be unfit partners of peace.

Finally, I will not let this moment pass without a
comment about the United Nations itself. For many
years, the United Nations has outrageously been of the
world's foremost centres of hostility towards Israel.
The United Nations has done much more damage to
the prospects for peace in the Middle East than it has
advanced those prospects. We will not be a party to that.
The United States no longer stands by when Israel is
unfairly attacked in the United Nations, and the United
States will not be lectured by countries that lack any
credibility when it comes to treating both Israelis and
Palestinians fairly. It is no coincidence that the historic
peace agreements between Egypt and Israel and between
Jordan and Israel were both signed on the White House
lawn. If and when there is a historic peace agreement
between Israelis and Palestinians, it is likely that that
will also be signed on the White House lawn. Why is
that? It is because the United States has credibility with
both sides. Israel will never be, and should never be,
bullied into an agreement by the United Nations, or any
collection of countries that have proven their disregard
for Israel's security.

To my Palestinian brothers and sisters, I can tell
them with complete confidence that the United States
is deeply committed to achieving a peace agreement
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. We have
demonstrated that commitment over many years and
with the investment of large quantities of financial
resources and diplomatic energy. Sadly, peace between
the two sides has not been achieved, but we will not
give up. Our hand remains extended to them. We are
more committed today to Israeli-Palestinian peace than
we have ever been, and we believe that we might be
closer to that goal than ever before.

Both Israelis and Palestinians have very real
stories to tell; painful stories of challenges, distrust
and destruction. But this conflict is not just about the
past. It must not be about all of those painful stories.
It must be about future generations. Palestinian and
Israeli children both deserve a future of peace; neither
one deserves it more or less than the other. When those
children have grown up, they should be able to look
back to this time as one when the parties genuinely
negotiated for their sake. Those Palestinian and Israeli
children deserve to have hope for a brighter and more
peaceful future.

Our wish and prayer is that this is the time when
both sides stop thinking about their present needs
and start thinking about future generations. I urge all
countries in the Security Council and in the Middle
East to temper their statements and actions in the days
ahead. Peace remains achievable. We must all do our
parts to achieve it.

