The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I thank Mr. Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Special Representative of
the European Union, for his presence and his briefing
to the Council. I welcome the contribution of the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the work
of our Council.

The European perspective, which has for many
years been offered to all States of the Western Balkans,
is not an empty promise. The liberalization of visas for
all Bosnian citizens, which took place at the end of
2010 thanks to the efforts of political leaders, is
evidence of this.

However, in spite of this hand extended by the
European Union and of all the progress made over the
past 15 years, the political situation in the country is
seriously deteriorating. First of all, the lack of a
Government is delaying reforms that would enable
progress towards the European path. We therefore call
on all Bosnian leaders to make the necessary
compromises to form a Government.

Moreover, France is concerned by the questioning
of the judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and of the authority of the High Representative. We
warn the Republika Srpska against any initiative that
would contravene the Dayton Peace Agreement and
threaten the stability of the country. We call on the
Republika Srpska to respect the peace accords, which
are the foundation for the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. More generally, the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina must return to dialogue, overcome their
divisions and work towards creating a State.

France reaffirms its full support for the High
Representative, the guarantor of the peace accords on
behalf of the international community. We support his
work, his dialogue with the Bosnian political
representatives and any decision he may take to ensure
respect for the institutions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.

