Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like to start by
thanking the Senegalese delegation for convening this
meeting. We are equally grateful to the briefers for
their insightful presentations.

Considering the importance that we place on
strengthening United Nations cooperation with regional,
subregional and intergovernmental organizations in
order to more effectively address current conflicts and
humanitarian crises, we welcome this timely gathering,
which we hope will contribute to improving cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

As the OIC Assistant Secretary General highlighted
in his statement, the goals and objectives of OIC and the
United Nations are broadly similar. Both organizations
are devoted to the cause of international peace, security

and development and share common challenges in all
domains of human endeavours. The interactions between
the United Nations, its organs and specialized agencies
with OIC, as portrayed by the United Nations Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Miroslav
Jenca, reveal great potential for development. We
think further efforts should be undertaken in order to
strengthen those interactions.

Unfortunately, in the past decade we have witnessed
the exponential rise of terrorist attacks around the world,
which have been perpetrated by a growing number
of violent extremist groups that advocate a brand of
radical extremism that, contrary to their claims, has
nothing to do with Islam, which is a religion that
preaches peace and understanding among humankind.
As a fundamental part of the efforts to reverse that
trend, it is vital first and foremost to end the conflicts
in Palestine, Syria, Libya, Iraq, Somalia, Afghanistan,
Yemen and elsewhere, which are examples of how
foreign interference, oppressive Governments and
disenfranchised segments of the population strengthen
groups like Da'esh, Al-Qaeda and others, which are at
the forefront of international radical extremism.

In order to effectively fight and defeat terrorism
and its radical extremist ideology, political processes
must be based on inclusivity, including with respect
to ethnic and religious groups. In the aforementioned
conflicts, one of the main sources of discontent and
infighting has been the disenfranchisement of certain
social or religious groups, which has created a space
and platform for radicalism and extremism. In that
regard, we praise the work of OIC in delegitimizing
terrorist ideologies by developing counter-narratives
to extremist ideologies and propaganda by elevating
religious voices that support tolerance and non-violence.

The Republic of Angola, which is constitutionally
consecrated as a secular State, separates church and State
while also recognizing and respecting different religious
values, protecting all creeds and places of worship as
long as they act in accordance with the Constitution and
the laws of the Republic. Currently, we are witnessing
in certain quarters a tendency to politicize religion
and use it to justify war and subjugation. As such, we
strongly encourage OIC and other organizations to
focus more attention on developing strategies to undo
this dangerous intertwining ofreligion and politics, play
a more decisive role in countering the deep fracture that
the Islamic world is now experiencing, in particular
between Sunnis and Shi'as, and protecting religious
minorities. Given multicultural and multiconfessional
composition of many Muslim countries, it is crucial to
promote interfaith dialogue, tolerance and pluralism,
allow all segments of society to practice their faith as
they wish, and avoid the use of religious ideas as a tool
for power struggles.

In conclusion, we would like to commend OIC
and the League of Arab States for their efforts aimed
at implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and at mediating ongoing conflicts
in the Middle East. We believe that due to ethnic
and religious differences, as well as regional power
struggles, OIC and the League of Arab States must
seek to address the root causes of discontent and curb
radical and extremist groups such as Da'esh from
spreading hatred, fear and destruction. We further
encourage OIC to continue working with the United
Nations in addressing the factors that lead to radical
extremism and the spread of terrorism in the Islamic
world and beyond.

