Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China

would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. China
welcomes the presence of His Excellency Mr. Nikolie,
President of the Republic of Serbia, and the statement
that he made. We also listened attentively to the
statement made by Ms. Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands its legitimate
concerns on the question ofKosovo. China acknowledges
the positive efforts of Serbia in the search for a political
solution to the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) constitutes the legal foundation for the solution to
the question of Kosovo. China supports the efforts of the
concerned parties to search for an appropriate solution,
acceptable to all, through dialogue and negotiations,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Currently, the overall situation in Kosovo remains
calm. Underlying complex questions, however, remain
and defy efforts to finding a solution. China hopes
that all parties will continue to search for a political
solution, engage in high-level political dialogue, settle
their differences through practical and constructive
dialogue, implement the agreements reached so far,
build upon progress, increase mutual trust and seek
rapprochement so that a lasting and appropriate solution
can be found gradually to the question of Kosovo.

The achievement of national reconciliation is
essential to resolving the Kosovo question. The parties
concerned should endeavour to improve the well-being
of the people, strengthen protection for the rights and
benefits of all communities in Kosovo, refrain from
any rhetoric or action that might escalate tensions,
and safeguard peace, stability and development in the
Balkan region.

The Security Council should continue to follow
the question of Kosovo and persist in efforts to find
an appropriate solution. China appreciates the work
done by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership
of Special Representative Tanin. China supports
the constructive cooperation of UNMIK with all
the parties in accordance with its mandate. China
hopes that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, and the Kosovo Force will further
their coordination and gradually improve the situation
in Kosovo, thus playing a constructive role in finally
resolving the question.

