Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin
by congratulating the delegation of France on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. I also
congratulate the delegation of Ethiopia for its leadership
last month. Likewise, we welcome the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore, whose years
of work at the helm of that extraordinary mission
were guided by firm commitment and dedication to
strengthen the stability and the development of the
Haitian people.

Haiti occupies a special place in the minds of
Venezuelans. Both nations are united by deep historical,
political and cultural ties that stem from the struggle for
independence. Haiti and the Haitian revolution served
as an inspiration to our nineteenth-century patriots and
to the Liberator, Simon Bolivar, who, 200 years ago,
was supported by President Alexandre Petion and the
Haitians in the heat of our war of independence. Our
country is fully committed to the social development
of a free and sovereign Haiti. Since the beginning
of our Bolivarian revolution, with the presidency of
Commander Hugo Chavez Frias, our cooperation with
Haiti has expanded and deepened in an extraordinary
way, and that cooperation is built on the principles of
solidarity and social justice. A deep sense of solidarity
motivates Venezuela's aid to Haiti. We recognize the
remarkable efforts made by Haiti in recent years to
promote peace, stability and development. Despite
the progress achieved, serious challenges remain
as a result of prolonged crises and numerous natural
disasters, which have had a negative impact on the
political, economic and social life of that brotherly
country and require the sustained cooperation of the
international community.

The colonial Powers made Haiti pay dearly for its
freedom and independence. Throughout the nineteenth
century, the Haitian people were forced to pay exorbitant
sums to the former colonial Power. Moreover, the entire
twentieth century was marked by military interventions
and brutal dictatorships. Without a doubt, all of that
has negatively affected the stability of the country. It is
necessary to remember those events as the root causes
of the instability throughout the history of that brotherly
country in order to understand why the Haitian people
have sunk into a deep crisis of political instability and
a dramatic situation of poverty and social injustice.

The fight against poverty and for social justice in
Haiti, the poorest country in our America, still requires
solidarity and direct support for stable assistance
mechanisms, in addition to cooperation, in order to
address the challenges and structural problems in that
country. For example, according to data from the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
between 2014 and 2016, more than 5 million Haitians,
equivalent to 47 per cent of the population, were
undernourished. It is for that reason that cooperation
must be focused on the social-development agenda,
within the framework of the Sustainable Development
Goals, in particular those dealing with the eradication
of poverty and the reduction of inequalities, with
emphasis on the consequences of the disasters caused
by climate change in the Caribbean.

In recent years, Haiti has experienced the effects of
natural disasters, which have had a devastating effect
on its population and its economic and institutional
structure. The aftermath of the January 2010 earthquake
and the passage of Hurricane Matthew in 2016 continue
to be felt and have aggravated even further the overall
situation in the country, particularly in the humanitarian
sector. In that regard, and as we have done in similar
disasters in the recent past, Venezuela heeded the
request of the Haitian authorities to provide immediate
and ongoing assistance to help overcome the difficulties.
That is the essence of solidarity and cooperation among
brotherly nations. For that reason, we will continue
to provide support, through the PetroCaribe Energy
Cooperation Agreement and the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America, for all initiatives and
projects prioritized by the Haitian authorities in the
areas of social development, humanitarian assistance,
construction, rehabilitation and the maintenance of
infrastructure and education, which have had a positive
impact on the people. It is worth mentioning that since
the beginning of the Bolivarian Revolution, Venezuela's
cooperationwith Haiti has beenaimedat empoweringthe
Haitian State through the strengthening of institutions,
as demonstrated by the fact that all funds given by
Venezuela for cooperation to Haiti are administered
by the authorities of that Caribbean nation. Likewise,
since 2005, within the framework of the PetroCaribe
Energy Cooperation Agreement, our country continues
to provide 100 per cent of the country's fuel-supply
needs and 20 per cent of the country's electricity
production, as well as various initiatives and projects
prioritized by the Haitian Government, which, in recent
years, have had a positive impact on the reconstruction
efforts in Port-au-Prince and on the economic and
social development of that sister nation.

We remain concerned about the impact of the
outbreak and spread of cholera in Haiti since 2010.
We commend the courage of the United Nations in
recognizing its responsibility for the initial spread
of the virus and in demonstrating its commitment
to providing direct assistance to the victims of the
epidemic. That is why it is necessary to strengthen
stable mechanisms of cooperation so as to be able to put
together a timely and effective response, with a view
to strengthening Haiti's national plan for eliminating
cholera by 2022, and in order to contribute to a
transition from emergency humanitarian interventions
to development programmes in the country. In that
regard, we strongly support the new approach of the
United Nations to combat the spread of cholera. In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 71/161,
Venezuela made a financial contribution to the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. That contribution was intended to support the
Secretary-General's initiative to continue to address
both immediate and long-term needs in dealing with
the cholera epidemic in that sister Caribbean nation.

Now that the work of MINUSTAH has concluded,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
which will succeed it with new functions, will be focused
on supporting the Haitian National Police, promoting
the rule of law and strengthening the promotion and
protection of human rights. We believe that the United
Nations should continue to support the Haitian people
and work in close coordination with the Haitian
Government on the basis of its national priorities and
in strict adherence to the principles of the sovereignty,
independence and self-determination of that country.
In the process of strengthening institutions, we should
support the possibility of creating a professional armed
force with the mandate to safeguard the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
that nation.

Venezuela recognizes and wants to pay tribute to
the performance of MINUSTAH and its entire staff,
civilian and military, as well as the troops contributed
by various Latin American nations, in particular Brazil,
Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Peru and Guatemala. In
that regard, Venezuela supports the initiative of the
Government of President Jovenel Moise to promote the
process of national dialogue and constitutional reform,
as well as his initiative to address a number ofimportant
issues facing the country through the establishment
of several presidential commissions composed of
representatives of various national sectors. We consider
it vital to continue with the strategic development plan
for Haitian National Police for the period 2017-2021.

In conclusion, our country will continue to be a
part of regional efforts within the framework of the
Bolivarian Alternative for the Peoples of Our America
and the PetroCaribe Energy Cooperation Agreement,
and within the framework of United Nations cooperation
with the Haitian people, with a view to helping that
country overcome the economic and social problems
that have for decades affected the brotherly Haitian
people in the land of Pe'tion. Today more than ever,
such cooperation is necessary in order to contribute to
political stability and strengthened institutions in that
Caribbean nation.

