Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We associate ourselves with
the message of condolences extended by the Chairman of
the African Group on the untimely death of Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye.

In 1990, world leaders assembled at the United
Nations and made a joint commitment to give every child
a secure and happy childhood, including children in armed
conflict. Article 38 of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child is explicit in this regard. Yet, almost a decade after
the World Summit for Children, the reality is much
different.

Today, too many children are carrying guns instead of
books, playing amidst the debris of bombs instead of toys.
Many children continue to bear the scars of landmines.
Disturbing images of children in armed conflict narrating
their painful experiences in total humiliation and trauma
continue to beam into our homes. One need not listen to
or read these stories in full. More often than not, the sad
and fearful expressions of these children tell it all. It is a
story of immense suffering; a story of starvation,
malnutrition, abduction, rape, HIV/AIDS, children killing
other children and children assuming parenthood to care
for younger siblings who have been orphaned.

Armed conflict has adverse international
repercussions and brings devastation and loss of life. But
there are many who continue to profit from it and
children are always the losers. They are the victims, and
they are the easy targets. Indeed, causes of armed conflict
vary from region to region, but we cannot meaningfully
discuss this issue without taking into account the source
of conflict, for taking such an uncharted course will be
tantamount to perpetuating the very problem we seek to
address.

International arms merchants and the protagonists
who themselves ruthlessly fight for the control of natural
resources are all part of the problem. This narrow
economic interest leads to wide social strife. These are
just some of the causes which the Council needs to recall
in mapping out effective ways and means to address the
situation of children in armed conflict.

The appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General was a timely development. But unless
he is given all the necessary assistance to carry out his
important mandate, his efforts will be futile. Furthermore,
the scope of the situation of children in armed conflict
should go beyond the cessation of hostilities. Traumatized
children, and especially orphans, must be given special
attention. In this regard, cooperation between the Special
Representative and the funds, programmes and agencies
of the United Nations system are therefore essential. The
multiplicity of humanitarian actors must not and cannot
affect the effectiveness of humanitarian intervention.
What is crucial is coordination of purpose.

The reintegration of child soldiers into society and
their involvement in education and vocational training will
not only pave the way for employment but, more
importantly, will enable them to make informed decisions
and choices in all aspects of life.

Whenever there is a suffering child, there is an
agonized woman. It is therefore important that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and

 

Armed Conflict maintain contacts with the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. That
Committee has played an important role in bringing the
situation of children in armed conflict to the fore, a
situation which cannot be totally divorced from the situation
of women in armed conflict. The special situation of the
girl child in times of war must be given serious
consideration.

For many of the ongoing conflicts, the deterioration of
the situation and its impact on children have been
exacerbated by inaction or delayed action. It is our View
that with the improved early-warning capabilities of the
United Nations, early follow-up action is imperative if we
are to protect children. In this respect, compliance of all
parties concerned with the Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the Additional Protocols of 1977 is essential. Of particular
importance is the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child of 1989.

Efforts must be increased in identifying sources of
private arms flows into areas of actual or potential conflict.
In addressing the humanitarian needs of children in armed
conflict, we must not neglect political action. It is of utmost
importance that the Council work with regional mechanisms
for conflict resolution in order to reinforce action.

Humanitarian assistance cannot stop a conflict; it only
address as the impact of the conflict on the victims. But the
two are complementary, and one must not be used as an
excuse for inaction at the expense of the other.

Let us all heed the call for children, first made in the
Declaration and Plan of Action of the World Summit for
Children.

