Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany) (interpretation from French): Germany considers that the time has come

 

for the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to fulfil
all of its functions. That is why we voted in favour of
today's Security Council resolution on Haiti.
On this occasion, my Government would like to
express its gratitude to the States participating in the
Multinational Force, which, so far has opened the way for
the return of the elected President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide,
for the restoration of the legitimate Government of Haiti
and for the re-establishment of a stable and secure
environment in that country. The Multinational Force and
the United Nations Mission in Haiti must together provide
the guarantee that the critical transitional phase, which
coincides with the holding of legislative elections, will also
be a success.

We have already witnessed a perceptible improvement
in the situation in Haiti. Haitians now enjoy fundamental
rights - in particular, the rights of freedom of expression,
assembly and association - to a greater extent than ever
before. It is essential to maintain a stable and secure
environment in Haiti in order to further consolidate its
democratic structures, and we hope that the soon-to-be-held
legislative elections will strengthen the progress already
achieved.

While there is now no danger hovering over the
Haitian Government, there are none the less elements of
concern that we must, unfortunately, take into account: the
numerous criminal acts often perpetrated by members of the
old regime; the increasing number of uncontrolled weapons;
the insufficiency and continued ineffectiveness of the law-
and-order forces; and the lack of judicial authorities to
initiate penal proceedings. The Haitian Government, with
the assistance of the United Nations Mission in Haiti and
the international community, must urgently focus all its
attention on these concerns.

In the final analysis, we must realize that the efforts
to stabilize Haiti will depend in very large part on its socio-
economic development, and we see some encouraging signs
in this regard. None the less, a great deal remains to be
done, and we are counting on the Government of Haiti to
address these matters vigorously. The international
community, the United Nations system and the Member
States must make a large contribution to that effort in order
for the Haitian Government to succeed. Hence, my
Government stands ready to participate in the economic
reconstruction of Haiti.

