The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sumaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
inauguration on 20 May of Iraq's constitutionally
elected Government and congratulates the people
of Iraq on this milestone in their country's
political transition.

"The Council is particularly encouraged by
the fact that the Government is representative of
Iraq's many diverse communities and expresses
its hope that the Ministers of Defence, Interior
and National Security Affairs will be appointed
as soon as possible. The Security Council
encourages the new Government to work
tirelessly to promote national reconciliation
through dialogue and inclusion and to build an

atmosphere in which sectarianism is rejected. The
Security Council, at the same time, urges all
Iraqis to participate in the political process
peacefully, demanding that those who continue to
use violence lay down their arms. The Council
wholly condemns acts of terrorism in Iraq,
including recent horrific attacks on civilians and
religions sites aimed callously at provoking
intercommunal tensions.

"The Security Council underlines the high
expectations in the new Government to deliver
improvements in security and stability, in human
rights and the rule of law, in the provision of
essential services, and in economic progress and
prosperity. The Council urges the Government to
work effectively and energetically to this end.
The Council also strongly urges all States and
relevant international organizations to continue
and enhance their help to Iraq's sovereign
Government at this crucial time. The Council
notes the particular role of Iraq's neighbours and
calls on them to conform to relevant Security
Council resolutions and to examine how they can
reinforce their contribution. In this context, the
Council also looks forward to the continued
efforts of the League of Arab States, including
the forthcoming conference in Baghdad, in
support of the political process the Council has
endorsed.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified
Iraq, as a responsible member of the international
community, in which there is stability, prosperity
and full respect for human rights and the rule of
law. The Security Council also reaffirms the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq."

This statement will be issued as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2006/24.

The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item
on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

