Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
This my delegation's first speech at a formal meeting of the
Security Council since becoming a non-permanent member
of the Council for the period 1996 to 1997. I thank all
those representatives who have addressed words of
welcome to the new members of the Council.

I wish also to put on record Chile's particular pleasure
and complete confidence at seeing you, Sir, guiding the
delicate work of the Security Council this month; we have
already said this in an informal setting, but wished to
reiterate it most emphatically in today's formal meeting.
Before becoming a member of the Council we were able to
witness the outstanding presidency of the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation and his delegation
last month.

I welcome the presence here of the representative of
Georgia and I thank him for his comments today.

We wish to express our complete support for the
resolution the Council has just adopted.

We are grateful too for the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia,
which is before the Council today.

We believe that, as other delegations have noted, it is
deeply disturbing to note that despite the efforts made in
recent years the peace process remains bogged down: as the
Secretary-General says in his report, it is "at an impasse"
(S/I996/5, para. 40). We regret even more that the situation
on the ground remains tense and unstable, that ethnic
killings and human rights violations by Abkhazia
continue - the Council condemns these in paragraph 7 of
the resolution it has just adopted - and that displaced
persons and refugees continue to endure hardship. We
condemn also incidents related to restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). Unreserved respect for the
laudable work of the "Blue Helmets", for their safety and
for their freedom of movement must be preserved under
all circumstances.

As we express our concern today at the humanitarian
situation and at the situation of refugees, we echo the
concern expressed by the Government of Georgia last
September during the fiftieth session of the General
Assembly, when it warned that the harsh conditions
endured by more than 300,000 displaced persons scattered
throughout the territory of Abkhazia - apart from
constituting a heavy burden upon the entire country -
are a factor for instability that blocks the consolidation of
the peace process.

Thus, aware of the delicate situation in this regard
faced by the Republic of Georgia, we wish to express our
firm support for the activities of the Special Envoy and
his resident Deputy, and for the initiatives of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Ayala Lasso, as
well as for the cooperation in this regard of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which is developing a programme specifically to
deal with these urgent tasks.

We acknowledge and are grateful for the important
work carried out in recent years by the United Nations
and by the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS);
this has made it possible to contain the conflict, which
could otherwise have had even more serious consequences
for the entire region. We wish also to stress the special
responsibility of the Russian Federation in the matter
before the Council today, and to express special thanks
for the persistent efforts that country has been making in
the search for a solution acceptable to the parties.

Despite the pending problems, we believe that, as
the Secretary-General indicates in his report, there are
some factors that could give reason for hope and that
should enable the parties to overcome the present
deadlock in the negotiations between Georgia and
Abkhazia. In that connection, President Shevardnadze has
offered Abkhazia a broad political status and its own
Constitution compatible with that of the Federal State, in
which what he calls the "Republic of Abkhazia" would
have its parliament, supreme court, national anthem, state
emblem and other symbols. We believe that these factors
should be most seriously considered by the Abkhaz party
with a view to making progress in the peace process. We
hail the willingness of the Government of Georgia to
undertake dialogue at all levels and indeed to engage in
bilateral negotiations.

 

Likewise, we are confident that, at meetings to be held
in the coming days by the Special Envoy and his resident
Deputy with the authorities of the Russian Federation and
their colleagues to review the situation and consider how to
move forward in the political process, new light will be cast
on how to overcome the present stagnation in the peace
process.

For all those reasons, the delegation of Chile voted in
favour of the draft resolution extending the mandate of
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia for a period of
six months, until 12 July 1996.

I wish to thank all United Nations personnel for their
outstanding work, and to convey to the Secretary-General
our wish that he be so kind as to transmit to the people on
the ground the gratitude of my delegation and of the many
others who have also expressed such gratitude.

Although the Security Council meets far away from
the scene of the events we are discussing today, and
although we are not subject to the difficulties faced by the
people in the field, I believe it is important that the
personnel of the United Nations - civilian and military -
should be aware of our solidarity with them and
understanding of the difficult tasks and living conditions
that they have to face.
