Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): On
behalf of Canada, I would like to thank France for
having organized this important debate, for which we
are grateful.
(spoke in English)

This open debate on Children in Armed Conflict
provides an important opportunity, one year after the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1612 (2005),

to advance implementation of the resolution. To fulfil
our obligations to protect girls and boys in war-torn
and post-conflict societies requires the collaboration of
the entire international community. The Security
Council has a pivotal role to play in ensuring that the
commitments made are fulfilled.

Canada encourages the continued commitment of
States to the Security Council resolutions on children
in armed conflict. We call on Member States to
continue their support for the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and
encourage those that have not done so to ratify the
Protocol. Canada calls on the international community
to support the work of the International Criminal Court
as it continues to seek to bring to justice those who
perpetrate serious international crimes, including those
committed against children. The transfer of Thomas
Lubanga from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to The Hague for trial is an important step in
combating impunity.

In the past, a lack of accurate and verifiable
information concerning atrocities being committed was
too often an excuse for inaction. Resolution 1612
(2005) recognized this deficit. It represents an
important step towards carrying out effective measures
against the use of child soldiers, and has set in motion
a groundbreaking effort to coordinate the collection of
information on violations and violators in specific
countries and ensure their accountability.

We must work together to ensure that the
mechanism is operational, that it is inclusive and
coordinated among the different actors involved and
that it is accountable. The goal of monitoring and
reporting activities is not to collect information for
periodic reports, but to stop violations of the rights of
children, to get timely action in cases where violations
have been committed and to end impunity.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
highlights in several places the Security Council's deep
concern over the lack of progress in the
implementation of previous resolutions. The new
mechanisms were adopted to bridge the gap between
international norms and the grim reality faced by too
many children caught in armed conflicts. Canada
welcomes the creation of the Security Council Working
Group as an opportunity to translate the commitment of
the Council into the development of more effective
strategies in specific situations. We call on the United
Nations to make maximum use of its national action
plans to create incentives, as well as punitive measures,
with time-bound, progressive targets and measurable
results. This alternative approach should make the
employment of progressively more robust measures
viable.

(spoke in French)

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on children in armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and encourage the Working Group
to respond with concrete recommendations for action.
Canada encourages the Council to apply targeted and
graduated measures as mandated in resolution 1612
(2005) against parties to conflict who continue to
commit atrocities against children. As an incentive for
compliance with Security Council resolutions and
increased public accountability and transparency, we
would also ask the Council to use all tools at its
disposal, including the mandating of peacekeeping
missions and the continued naming of violators, even if
that is not on the Security Council agenda.

Canada welcomes the naming of a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, and applauds her recent visits to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
Northern Uganda is a good example of a situation that is
not on the Security Council's agenda but where there are
grave abuses against children and, more generally,
against civilians. Canada also continues to call upon the
Security Council to put this situation on its agenda.
Moreover, we encourage the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to continue her work aimed at
ending the recruitment and abduction of children by the
Lord's Resistance Army and at working with Uganda in
an effort to bring about lasting improvement in the
situation of children and civilians in this region. Canada
once again urges the Security Council to consider
measures to deal with the ongoing abuses and the
deplorable humanitarian situation in northern Uganda.

For Canada, the implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) should not be limited to the urgent task of
halting the grave violations against children in ongoing
armed conflicts. It is also a test of the Security
Council's willingness and its capacity to translate the
worthy objectives of resolutions on the subject into
practical action. For these same challenges - those of
effective monitoring and reporting, of consistent
follow-up in peacekeeping mandates, of the adoption

of country-specific resolutions, of the employment of
targeted measures in the face of ongoing violations -
are equally relevant to the broader protection of
civilians and women, peace and security agendas.

