Mr. Keita (Mali) (spoke in French): Because of
the lateness of the hour, I shall abridge my statement.

My delegation welcomes the Council's decision
to give peacekeeping operations clear, credible and
achievable mandates. As more than ever the new
millennium should focus on the human person, the
Security Council should make visible and easily
understood a capacity to act so as to provide both
deterrence and security.

I commend the approach in the Brahimi Report,
which represents a milestone in this process that will
indeed make the United Nations a credible force for
peace. I also commend the work of the Group chaired
by Ambassador Ward on the results that it achieved
after intense negotiations. In this regard, we welcome
the consensus that led to the adoption of the resolution
on this issue. This consensus confirms once again the
Council's commitment to peacekeeping.

My delegation encourages the development of
global, integrated strategies to attack the root causes of
conflicts, and particularly their economic, political and
social dimensions. We welcome the initiative to more
frequently deploy fact-finding missions to areas of
tension as a quick means of preventing crises. At the
same time, we believe that conflict-prevention
measures should be undertaken in accordance with the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.

My delegation supports the principle of rapid
deployment when the Council decides to take such
action. In this regard, we encourage the Secretary-
General, when planning and preparing for a
peacekeeping operation, to take all necessary steps to
facilitate such deployment.

Moreover, my delegation welcomes the
strengthening of the existing system of consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries. Cooperation between the Council and
regional organizations should be strengthened. In this
connection, I welcome the partnership that has been
established between the Council and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in my
region.

We believe that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes should be financed on the
same basis as peacekeeping operations. It is essential to
give peacekeeping forces training in human rights and
in the habits and customs of the country where they are
to serve.

We reaffirm the important role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution and peace-building.
In this regard, we call for the complete implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000.

Finally, Mali attaches special significance to the
resolution that the Council has just adopted and calls
for its strict implementation.

