Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): In this
month, the last month of the year 1996, let me express
our appreciation for the fashion in which you, Sir, have
handled the workings of the Security Council, obviously
under quite demanding circumstances.

At the same time, let me also take the opportunity to
express our appreciation for the work of His Excellency
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia for the most able
fashion in which he handled his tasks as President of the
Council last month.

We received the draft resolution before the Council
only late yesterday and, as a consequence, although we
have forwarded the draft to our Presidency for its review,
I have not received specific instructions nor could I
reasonably anticipate any specific instructions on the
matter. Therefore, my comments on the draft are based on
the following principles.

 

First of all, I am here to represent, with fidelity and
integrity, all of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in particular,
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. I
take this responsibility most seriously. Secondly, the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement is still the foundation of the
peace process and our stated positions are guided by this
Agreement. Finally, and most critically, the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as adopted under the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement, is the most basic foundation for our
expressed Views.

On the basis of these criteria, I would like to express
our general satisfaction with the draft resolution before the
Council and to reaffirm that our Government has expressed
support for the commitments outlined generally therein.
Because of the length and detail of the draft before us, I
will not go through it issue by issue. Instead, I would only
like to highlight a few key issues that deserve special
comment or attention.

Let me start by thanking the Member States,
organizations and individuals behind the civilian, economic
and military implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
efforts are noteworthy and, in the overwhelming number of
instances, deserve our thanks and praise. The results of the
combined efforts of the international implementers, on the
one hand, and of the signatories on the other are,
unfortunately, not reflective of the efforts, or of the best
wishes of our friends, or of the longing of all the Bosnian
people, nor necessarily of the terms of the Dayton/Paris
Agreement.

In particular, we must highlight the following. First,
although economic recovery and reconstruction have moved
forward, the general and explicit promises of assistance
remain too frequently unrealized. Our country is in such
need of rebuilding that any unkept promise is both
pragmatically and symbolically painful.

At the same time, in agreement with the draft
resolution, we are - at least some of the members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina are - in favour of
assistance being conditioned on fulfilment of the obligations
contained in the Peace Agreement. In fact, we call for
conditionality as a tool to compel compliance and
implementation. However, failure by some authorities
within Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot excuse the
international community from neglecting its promises to all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

You, the sponsors of and implementers of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement, can see the facts on the ground
well enough to know who deserves your condemnation
and challenge, and who, on the other hand, deserves your
support - especially now, more than ever before. None
of us deserves generalizations. We understand that the
language in this draft resolution supports precise
identification of those who are in compliance and those
who are not, and that assistance will be distributed
accordingly - also, of course, taking need into
consideration.

Secondly, progress is being made in the
establishment of the new institutions of the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the
accommodation of the old institutions. Unfortunately,
significantly less progress - some might argue even no
real progress - has been achieved on the elements of the
Peace Agreement that constitute the reintegration of the
country and the real basis for real peace.

I am certain that the Council would agree with me
that we cannot substitute superficiality for substance, and
that would be exactly the case if more effort - sincere
effort - was not made to ensure freedom of movement,
freedom of the media, democracy, respect for human
rights and, most critically, the return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes. A house with a roof,
but without walls or a foundation, is either a mirage or a
moment of suspended animation just before collapse.

Recently, under the sponsorship of the Office of the
High Representative and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a gathering
of numerous refugee and minority organizations
representing individuals of all ethnic backgrounds -
Bosnian Muslims, Serbs, Croats and others - met under
the newly coined title Coalition for Return. They have
developed a comprehensive agenda to promote the
realization of their universally accepted right of return to
their homes. I was honoured to be requested by the
Coalition to represent their views in relevant international
forums.

In this context as well, we welcome the calls in the
draft resolution before us for return of refugees and for
the opportunity of refugees to choose their destination
upon return. However, I am certain that refugees of all
ethnic backgrounds do not believe that they, in fact, have
a choice as long as they cannot in actuality return to their
homes of origin. We would understand the language
promoting return to homes of origin or to homes of
choice to be, in fact, based upon the principle of first
securing the real opportunity to return to one's home of

 

origin. Otherwise, such language could be misappropriated
to deny a real choice and actually to further rather than
reduce the consequences of "ethnic cleansing".

T hirdly, I would like to bring to the Council's
attention our full support for the call under the terms of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement for regional arms control and
military stabilization. We believe this to be a cornerstone
for peace and security in our region. One point: in order to
make the already agreed upon arrangements truly effective,
transparency and credible reporting are absolutely decisive.
We believe that effective inspections are essential and that
public reporting of compliance or non-compliance is
absolutely determinative under the terms of the Peace
Agreement.

Fourthly, we welcome the continuing role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in supervising the forthcoming municipal elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There appears to be full
agreement by all to this role. We can now only strive for
prompt execution of these elections and for all, including
the relevant international actors, to promote the standard of
free and fair elections called for by the terms of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.

Fifthly, I would like to mention an issue with respect
to which there does not appear to be consensus between all
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This Security
Council draft, numerous other resolutions and presidential
statements, as well as the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement,
call for full cooperation and compliance with the Tribunal
and its orders.

As the latest report of the Tribunal outlines, the level
of cooperation and compliance varies substantially from
country to country in the region, as well as between the
relevant authorities within Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Unfortunately, while the orders and demands of the
Tribunal are clear, and their priority under international law
is Without doubt, the authorities of the Republika Srpska
take the view that their local constitution rejects
compliance.

I was a direct negotiator and signatory of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, and there is no doubt that
full compliance is mandated not only by international
law - by this very Council, the Peace Agreement and the
aforementioned Paris and London Conferences - but also,
most relevantly, by our new Constitution, adopted in
Dayton and Paris by all the parties. I certainly would not
have agreed to and signed the Peace Agreement
otherwise.

That is also the reason why I have no doubt, as the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
expressing this position without reservation before this
Council. The legal and constitutional requirement for
compliance with the Tribunal applies to all equally, and
our central Government has already acted in full
consistency with this principle by surrendering to the
Tribunal all indicted persons who are under our control,
regardless of whether they are Serbs, Croats or Bosnian
Muslims.

Some have, inadvertently or otherwise, buttressed -
that is, given moral support - to the position of the non-
compliant by arguing that somehow the Tribunal is not
impartial. The argument seems to be based solely upon
numbers, because the largest number of indicted
individuals are ethnically Serbs while the smallest number
are Bosnian Muslims.

First, this is not an issue of ethnicity or collective
ethnic guilt. We reject group guilt. This is an issue of
individual and State authority responsibility for the
heinous crimes committed.

Secondly, even the numerical argument does not add
up. Actually, because of the full compliance of the central
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the lack of
cooperation by others, ironically, more Bosnian Muslims
have been surrendered to the Tribunal than members of
any other ethnic group. For us, all of our citizens,
regardless of ethnic background or religion, deserve our
protection. At the same time, all those individuals who
committed crimes must be held accountable, also
regardless of ethnic background or religion. This is a
matter of our future, of reconciliation and of the rule of
law.

Finally, we did find offensive the implicit or explicit
suggestion that the Tribunal should exhibit impartiality
by, in future, indicting the same number of people from
each ethnic background. That truly would be a perversion
of justice that would transform the Tribunal into a
political court designed to serve the political expediency
of some, or refashion history and ignore the essential
foundation of individual responsibility.

I am certain that most will agree that the issue is not
about the integrity of the Tribunal and its judges, who
come from all corners of the world and all backgrounds,

 

but is more about the support that the Tribunal is receiving
from the very United Nations organs that gave it initial life.
It is on this latter, general, issue that I should like to
conclude. On 3 December 1996 the Tribunal judges, from
Italy to Egypt and the United States, acting unanimously,
expressed their great dismay at not being given adequate
support for their repeated demands to compel compliance
with the Tribunal's orders, and their growing sense that the
Tribunal is, perhaps, being marginalized. Indeed, it is most
unfortunate that the Tribunal judges cannot escape this
sinking feeling. It would be worse if their fears proved true.
In this context, we should like to endorse the position,
enunciated in the draft resolution, that the primary
responsibility for the Peace Agreement lies with the parties.
It is also true that the international community, in particular
the most influential sponsors of the Peace Agreement, have
a most decisive role - I emphasize the word "decisive" -
in certain key aspects of the Peace Agreement. Some
signatories, having failed in their commitment to the Peace
Agreement, especially as it relates to full cooperation with
the Tribunal, are waiting to see if these sponsors of the
Peace Agreement will abandon the Agreement or, at least,
just this element of the Agreement. Either way, this would
be a disastrous position, bringing the peace process to
decisive failure.

Clearly, the parties ultimately must be responsible for
their future - our future. Nonetheless, the valuable work
of the Security Council, the Contact Group, various
international factors on the ground and the Tribunal remain
essential, inescapable factors for peace. The role of the
international community in support of the peace process
remains unavoidable, although, of course, we all hope that
it will gradually decrease.

I should like to make one final point regarding the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.
The Tribunal's contribution to peace is, as we have said,
critical and decisive. However, the Tribunal is the court of
all of us - it is your court. It is meant to deliver justice
for Bosnian victims. But these are victims of violations of
the most basic standards of international humanitarian law.
By extension, we are all victims of these violations of
international humanitarian law. If we do not support the
Tribunal sincerely and effectively, it will be a further
injustice against all of us, as well as against the Bosnian
victims.

