Mr. Mendoza Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to begin by thanking you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening today's
debate, as well as for responsibility and seriousness you
have shown in taking over the leadership of the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We should not
omit to mention the major work that Japan has done
in this area, and we appreciate the update to the note
contained in the annex to S/2017/507, compiled in the
latest version of the Green Book. We also appreciate
the briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of
the Security Council Report, and all of his work and
collaboration with States both within and outside the
Council over the years. We wish him every success in
his future projects.

The transparency of our decision-making processes
and the accountability of our representatives to the
people they represent are derived from the increasingly
solid principles of the bodies in our Organization,
whichever they are, and the updated note 507 constitutes
an important step forward in terms of strengthening
the transparency of the Security Council's work. In that
regard, we are pleased to see the progress that has been
made, such as the inclusion of new measures designed
to improve the Council's efficiency and manage its time
better; more interactive and focused consultations; and
fostering the practice of providing States with more
detailed, substantive reports on informal consultations.

Another very important topic is the affirmation
that any member of the Security Council can act
as a penholder or co-penholder. We call for greater
participation by the 10 non-permanent members in this
regard, as well as formalized consultations among all
members of the Council when making decisions on the
distribution of these responsibilities. We also believe
it is important to establish procedures for informal
consultations, including allowing sufficient time for
the consideration of proposals and establishing silence
procedures whereby any member of the Council may
request that the silence period be extended or, failing
that, may break the silence when deemed necessary. We
believe that such procedures would help to democratize
these processes. Similarly, we should encourage the
practice of enabling members to postpone the adoption
of decisions or the outcomes of open debates in order
to take into consideration the contributions of those
participating in the debates.

Where open debates are concerned, we should
ensure that they can be used as platforms for other
stakeholders who can make positive contributions to
them. We hope that will encourage the participation
of representatives of civil society, especially women,
who can provide perspectives on their experiences
and rights. We believe the Council should also show
greater interest in contributions from those who have
a legitimate interest in its decisions or are affected
by them.

We would like to emphasize once again the
importance of improving relations, communication
and cooperation between the General Assembly and
other relevant bodies and the Council, with the goal of
working jointly to preserve and maintain international
peace and security. It is a positive that progress has been
made in the Council's relations with regional bodies,
for example by establishing annual consultations with
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Such practices should be
institutionalized, as should regular consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries.

We urge that appointments of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies be made with greater transparency
and timeliness, and that the new members of the
Council be consulted about them.

Lastly, we would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, speaking
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, of which we are a member, by
reiterating the need to define limits to the use of the
veto, such as prohibiting its use for issues of genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and large-scale
violations of human rights, as well as on those related
to the responsibility to protect, as stipulated in the ACT
code of conduct.

My delegation reaffirms its conviction that the
working methods represent a fundamental part of the
process of comprehensively reforming the Security
Council. Proper implementation of the agreed
measures, which so far has not been comprehensive,
and the inclusion of new measures to improve working
methods will help to make the Council's actions
more effective and will improve its transparency and
accountability. We believe that substantive reform of
the Security Council's working methods will enable
us to help remove the obstacles that so often hinder its
effectiveness and its relations with other bodies.

