Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First and foremost, I would like to echo
those who have thanked Mr. Ian Martin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the
information presented in his briefing. We are grateful
to him for his efforts and the efforts deployed by the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN).

We would also like to congratulate the Nepalese
people on the first session of the Constituent Assembly,
held on 20 May, and the decision to abolish the
monarchy, in a peaceful manner, in favour of a
democratic federal republic in Nepal. We believe that
that constitutes a milestone in Nepal's history. We are
pleased to see the Seven-Party Alliance, which came
into being on 27 May and has helped eradicate a
number of obstacles impeding the establishment of a
new government. We hope that the parties will be able
to reach agreement shortly on the distribution of the
various portfolios and that the new government will be
set up as soon as possible.

In spite of the partial successes achieved by the
Nepalese people, further impetus should be given to
the peace agreements reached between the Nepalese
parties. We are concerned by the information contained
in the Secretary-General's report concerning the
deteriorating security situation in certain regions, in
particular the upsurge in crime carried out by armed
groups, abductions, blackmail, the emergence of new
armed groups and renewed protest campaigns and
demands by certain marginalized groups. All of that
stands in the way of the political process. We therefore
invite the new government, which we hope will assume
its functions as soon as possible, to further strengthen
State institutions on the basis of the rule of law.

We also hope to see the security situation
improve, an end put to impunity and the rights of
marginalized groups protected in accordance with the
new constitution in order to bolster national
reconciliation. Furthermore, we believe that the
establishment of a single national army with a single
commander-in-chief and the ongoing efforts for the
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants are
key factors for stability and peace for the State, as they
will contribute towards development and prosperity for
the Nepalese people.

At this juncture, the provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement must be fully
respected, as must the provisions of other recent
agreements, in particular with regard to the
reintegration of combatants, their rehabilitation, the
management of arms, the demobilization of minors and
the response to the concerns of marginalized groups.
That must all be done in close cooperation and
coordination with the United Nations, in accordance
with paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General's report.

We set great store by the work carried out by the
Nepal Country Team and support its strategy, which is
based on providing development aid to Nepal in order
to build peace through the reform of the State, ensuring
its recovery and preventing the emergence of conflict,
thus assisting in the process of national reconciliation.
That will largely hinge upon the resolve of the
Nepalese people themselves.

Finally, we approve the recommendations issued
by the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMIN in accordance with the request made by the
Nepalese Government, and underscore the importance
of maintaining a United Nations presence in support of
the political process and its actions to support the
peace process.

