Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and your
presence, Mr. Minister, here among us at this Security
Council briefing. We thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings, which have
provided us with a comprehensive and detailed picture
of the situation ofmissing persons in armed conflict. At
the same time, we wish to acknowledge their particular
contribution in this area, which the ICRC itself has
called a hidden tragedy.

It is clearly an ongoing and significant problem,
where, despite the difficulty in having exact figures
for the number of missing persons in armed conflict,
the data available reflect a situation described by the
Secretary-General as alarming, amounting to several
tens of thousands of cases.

Although such efforts are compounded by extreme
situations on the ground, which make it difficult to
search for missing civilians and other protected persons,
it is possible to take preventive measures in this context,
such as proper registration, exchange of information and
avoiding actions that violate international obligations
under the Geneva Conventions.
We understand that the situation of a person
missing in armed conflict has two dimensions: on the
one hand, that of the victim and, on the other hand,
the concern and distress of their close relatives. The
latter is enshrined in international humanitarian law,
which establishes the right of family members to know
the fate ofa missing person and provides for the return
of their remains. That can also be seen as a matter of
human rights.

The positive aspects of that are the value of healing
open wounds and easing tensions, not only of the family
but of society as a whole, with a view to subsequently
allowing for accountability and reconciliation. We
recognize that this situation is particularly sensitive
in the case of missing children given their extreme
vulnerability and helplessness. We believe that
there must be specific State and international action
to deal with such cases, including their protection
and identification.

We are convinced that focusing on and considering
this situation will help to establish appropriate
mechanisms to promote good practices, the exchange
of experiences and modern technology, and voluntary
funding with a view to providing an immediate and
collaborative response capacity so as to find and
identify missing persons.

In that regard, in addition to acknowledging the
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other international and regional organizations and
mechanisms, we recognize the work of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, based in The Hague.
However, on this occasion, we would like to welcome
and commend the initiative and leadership of Kuwait
on this topic and the excellent work of your delegation,
Mr. President, which has enabled us to adopt the
important resolution 2474 (2019) on the issue this
morning and which we were pleased to co-sponsor.

