Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I, too, would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I
would also like to thank the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. David Stephen, for his
comprehensive briefing. My delegation welcomes
Prime Minister Ali Khalif Galaydh, who is
participating in today's meeting. We are grateful for his
important statement.

The most recent reviews of the situation in
Somalia, including the report of the Secretary-General,
enable us to draw the conclusion that, while some
improvements have been made, there are still many
hurdles ahead. The international media have reported
that another tragic incident took place in southern
Mogadishu on Tuesday. A truck hired by the
International Committee of the Red Cross was attacked
at a checkpoint controlled by militia loyal to
Mogadishu faction leader Usman Hasan Ali Ato. It has
been reported that one of the truck's security guards
was killed and that two were wounded. We would be
grateful to the Secretariat for providing all the
information available with regard to these reports.

We are seriously concerned about the continuing
instability in Somalia and its negative impact on the
security and humanitarian situation and the well-being
of the civilian population. The possible links of some
warlords to international terrorist networks are also
cause for very serious concern. We are convinced that
political dialogue is the only way to achieve a lasting
settlement of the conflict in Somalia. In this regard, we
believe that the continuation of the Arta process
remains the most valuable option in the search for
peace and reconciliation in Somalia. We urge the
Somali people to continue down this difficult path and
to embrace this opportunity for peace.

I would like to stress the importance of the widest
possible participation of the representatives of all parts
of Somali society in the efforts to rehabilitate the
country. In this regard, we welcome the commitment of
the Transitional National Government and of other
Somali leaders to engage in a dialogue without
preconditions in the interests of the people of Somalia.
It is important that the momentum that has been
achieved be maintained and that the parties
demonstrate their commitment and the flexibility
needed to continue the process of national
reconciliation.

We firmly believe that the solution of the Somali
question is in the hands of the Somalis themselves. It is
essential that warlords and faction leaders desist from
obstructing and undermining the efforts to achieve
peace. It would be absolutely unacceptable to allow the
success of reconciliation to depend on the whims of
warlords. We therefore need to define the steps to be
taken by the Security Council and other international
actors to prevent the destabilizing impact of warlords
and faction leaders.

International support for Somalia is also of
critical importance. A key role for the international
community at this stage is to support the peace process,
the establishment of the rule of law and the creation of
impartial national, political and judicial institutions in
Somalia. In this connection, we support the Secretary-
General's proposal related to a relevant framework
for inter-Somali negotiations, in particular the
establishment of the National Commission for
Reconciliation and Property Settlement.

We also support resuming periodic ambassadorial
meetings on Somalia in New York and the work of the
Standing Committee on Somalia in Addis Ababa. We
believe that the proposal on setting up a Committee of
Friends of Somalia is a helpful one in terms of
sustaining that effort. We are of the view that
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the League of
Arab States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) are essential for guaranteeing the
effective participation of the international community
in the efforts to resolve the conflict in Somalia. We
believe that the Security Council should study carefully
the observations regarding the deployment of a peace-
building office in Somalia, contained in the Secretary-
General's latest report.

My delegation fully shares the Secretary-
General's security assessment and would like to
emphasize that ensuring the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel is a major precondition for
effective United Nations activities in this area.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that today's
meeting of the Security Council, as well as the recent
consultations on Somalia, will demonstrate that there
are no forgotten items on the Security Council agenda,
and we hope that the Council will help make a real
breakthrough in the Somali issue.

