The Secretary-General: I thank the United States
presidency for convening today's important meeting.

We are all aware that large-scale human rights
violations cause terrible suffering and undermine
prospects for sustainable peace and reconciliation.
Healing these wounds is always a difficult and painful
process, yet that responsibility grows with each new
instance of mass killings or mass displacement, and
sexual violence.

Prevention is an essential means of reducing
human suffering, building stable and prosperous
societies, and enabling people to reach their full
potential - and upholding human rights is a crucial
element in prevention. International cooperation
for prevention, and particularly for translating early
warning into early action, depends on trust between
Member States and in their relations with the
United Nations.

The Security Council has a major role to play.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations is clear
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the Council
"[i]n order to ensure prompt and effective action". 1
address the Council in that spirit. The issue today is not
that human rights violations undermine every aspect of
our shared values and common work, but rather how the
United Nations responds.

(spoke in French)

I would like to draw the Council's attention to three
points in order to better focus our discussion:

First, the quest for peace is what should
guide us along a continuum from prevention and
conflict resolution to peacebuilding and sustainable
development. Peace is a tireless undertaking, to which
all United Nations agencies and bodies must work, in
accordance with their mandates and responsibilities.

Secondly, peace, security, human rights and
sustainable development are mutually reinforcing.
The Charter of the United Nations, which we are all
dutybound to defend, has played a fundamental role
in that regard in that it links these three pillars. When
the United Nations tries to deal with them in isolation,
it often fails in the mission entrusted to it by Member
States and peoples. Several reform processes have
shown that the fragmentation of our action is one of
our major weaknesses. Together, we must return to the
letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations
to prevent armed conflicts and achieve a lasting
peace for development. Hence the need to effectively
protect all human, civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights.

Thirdly, the United Nations must consider human
rights in a coherent and rational manner. It is the
primary responsibility of Member States to integrate
the promotion and protection of human rights into their
national policies. But close cooperation between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and all relevant bodies of the United
Nations, including the Security Council, enhances
the general awareness of potential crisis situations
and our collective capacity to address them. Member
States expect the Secretariat to present appropriate
information and options, while respecting the
mandates and the principle of independence. I am
ready to promote a more confident relationship and
improve communication with the Council emphasising
coherence, frankness and transparency.

Human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and
security, and their inclusion in the deliberations and
decisions of the Security Council is of great importance.
The unity of the Council is crucial in order to effectively
address the most flagrant violations of human rights,
and in particular to prevent mass atrocities. I call on
the Council to spare no effort to put an end to the
intolerable sufferings of the Syrian people. Failure in
that task would be a tragedy to shame us all.

(spoke in English)

There is growing awareness of the ways in which
rights violations signal threats to security and how
rights upheld can contribute to peace. Recent experience
offers many examples. United Nations peace operations
have been progressively authorized with robust human
rights and protection of civilians mandates. Indeed,
15 Security Council-mandated peace operations
include a human rights element. Systematic monitoring
and reporting of human rights violations has given
a voice to victims and advanced the fight against
impunity. Moreover, these efforts offer important
warning signals to societies that also highlight the
Council's determination to prevent further abuses. To
advance this work, I encourage close cooperation with
my Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

Human rights work contributes to missions'
efforts to protect civilians under threat, and the
missions' engagement with host States on human
rights issues has helped build capacities and even, in
some circumstances, preserve democratic space. The
Council has also taken decisive action to prosecute
alleged perpetrators of the most brutal crimes by
establishing the international criminal tribunals for
Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere, and by
referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
Accountability for such crimes is an important element
in achieving reconciliation, and over the longer term
building resilient societies and judicial institutions.

Other key initiatives of the Council include
advancing the protection of children in armed conflict
and action against sexual-based violence in armed
conflict. The Council has also put the human rights of
women and children high on its agenda as a valuable
input to its peace efforts. I remain deeply committed
to that agenda and will spare no efforts to step up
the work and support of the Secretariat. Protecting
young generations from conflict-situations is one of
the best investments we can make towards achieving
sustainable peace.

Despite all these efforts, millions of people still
need to be protected from crises, and far more time
and resources continue to be spent responding to crises
than to preventing them. If we are to truly address
today's challenges, we must make prevention our
priority, tackle the root causes of conflict, help build
and strengthen institutions, and react earlier and more
effectively to address human rights concerns. That is
the lesson learned from so many conflicts, and what I
remain staunchly committed to that agenda.

Our world is facing unprecedented peace and
security challenges that result from a lack of prevention
and from insufficient implementation of human rights
obligations, including social and economic rights. The
consequences for people and States, and indeed for
humankind, are being felt by tens of millions and by
entire regions. Ensuring improved and less politicized
action on human rights is a critical part of meeting
this challenge, as is achieving urgent progress on the
Sustainable Development Goals.

Allow me to suggest a theoretical test. If the most
acute human rights and development concerns were
immediately resolved, how many situations would still
be threats to peace and security and remain on the
Council's agenda? I have set in motion various reforms of
the Secretariat that will enable us to play our role better,
in keeping with the mandates and trust the Member
States place in us. The resolutions on sustaining peace
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
cause for hope; progress on human rights aspects would
further complement these advances.

In the months to come, I hope that Member States
will engage through the General Assembly and the
Security Council to support my reform proposals and
strengthen them with their own.

