Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to thank the
Russian presidency for organizing today's open debate
on such an important issue. We also appreciate the
thoughtful concept note shared by your delegation to
inform the debate (S/2016/867, annex).

Our multipolar world is more free and vibrant, yet
more chaotic and turbulent. New and complex conflicts
are emerging, while older and unresolved disputes
continue to fester. The international order established
after the Second World War is falling apart. But a new
order has yet to emerge. At a time when confrontation
has returned between the major Powers, traditional
challenges have not diminished in scope or intensity.
Poverty remains widespread. Violations of human
rights are rampant. Situations of foreign occupation
persist. Violent extremism and terrorism have assumed
dangerous new forms. The global refugee crisis, as we
all know, has reached unprecedented levels.

We believe that one ofthe tragic ironies of our age is
that we are witnessing unprecedented human suffering
at a time when spectacular advances in human progress
are being made possible by the technological and
scientific breakthroughs of our era. The United Nations
remains an indispensable organization for facilitating
these opportunities and addressing the complex
challenges of our times. But it faces an imposing task
in simultaneously dealing with all those challenges and
opportunities. Enhanced cooperation with regional and
subregional intergovernmental organizations could
help the United Nations succeed.

We agree with the observation in the concept note
that the United Nations derives its legitimacy from its
universal membership and comprehensive activities,
while regional organizations, by their very nature,
often have a better understanding of the situation
on the ground. There is therefore great scope for
cooperation between them. That is why Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations elaborates the
role of regional arrangements in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Article 52 of the Charter not only urges Member
States to

"make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through such regional arrangements
or by such regional agencies before referring them
to the Security Council",

it also urges the Security Council to "encourage
the... pacific settlement oflocal disputes through such
regional arrangements". The role and utility of regional
organizations in the peaceful settlement oflocal disputes
is therefore amply acknowledged and entrenched.
Operating in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
regional organizations play a positive role in addressing
many diverse challenges, especially the economic and
social dimensions of such challenges. Closer political
interaction among regional countries can also serve to
address the security dimensions of these challenges.
However, as we know, cooperation among members
is an essential factor for the success of regional
arrangements. With relatively smaller memberships,
regional arrangements can usually yield speedier and
mutually productive cooperation.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
offers the promise of mutually beneficial regional
cooperation. With its current membership and
observers, the organization represents half the world's
population. SCO plays a useful role in promoting
cooperative and collective security in the Eurasian
region, especially in countering terrorism, separatism
and extremism, as well as in fighting drugs and crime.
Since 2010, SCO has also been cooperating regularly
with the United Nations in the fields of prevention
and resolution of conflicts, anti-terrorism through
its Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure, and countering
transnational crime and illegal drugs.

In June, my country signed a memorandum with
SCO, paving the way for our full membership of the
organization. Pakistan hopes to benefit from this
membership, as we firmly believe in the value of finding
regional solutions to regional problems and conflicts.
We call for enhanced dialogue and cooperation between
the United Nations and SCO, as both organizations
share the same purposes and principles.

While Pakistan is not a member of either the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) or the
Commonwealth ofIndependent States (CIS), we believe
that each regional organization is unique and for that
reason offers different capabilities. In this regard,
we see value in cooperation among various regional
organizations as well. For example, with overlapping
memberships, there could be enhanced cooperation
among SCO, CSTO and CIS. SCO, for example, could
also benefit from cooperation with other regional
organizations such as the the Gulf Cooperation Council
and the Economic Cooperation Organization.
The One Belt, One Road project, launched by
President Xi Jinping of China, is a significant example
of ways in which cross-regional cooperation can be
promoted in an inclusive and practical way. The China-
Pakistan Economic Corridor is a major component of
that Visionary and ambitious enterprise.

Finally, let me say that the United Nations provides
the umbrella under which regional organizations can
promote cooperation with each other in advancing
the objectives of peace, stability and prosperity. The
principles of the Charter of the United Nations remain
the foundation on which nations of different regions
can conduct their mutual relations and cooperation
across regions in our interdependent world.

