Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by welcoming the presence of Mr. Harold
Caballeros, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala,
among us this morning.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the
United States of America and my country, Uruguay. I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Guatemala, for organizing this debate
to discuss the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/678) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, and thanks
him for his comprehensive briefing and for his efforts
as the highest representative of the United Nations in
Haiti.

The Group of Friends recognizes the important
political and institutional achievements in Haiti
since the previous report (S/2012/128), including
the ratification by the Parliament of a new Prime
Minister, the installation of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the publication of the constitutional
amendments, which includes, among other provisions,
the establishment of a Permanent Electoral Council,
of a Constitutional Council and a quota of 30 per cent
representation by women in Government.

The effective establishment of the country's
Permanent Electoral Council will constitute another
major milestone in the process of consolidating
democracy in Haiti, which is necessary for the timely,
transparent, fair and credible holding of the overdue
partial legislative, municipal and local elections. Haitian
democracy will be strengthened by that achievement.

We call on all the relevant political stakeholders
in Haiti to continue to work cooperatively towards the
consolidation of democratic institutions and the rule of
law and, above all, to meet the needs and aspirations of
the Haitian people.

The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti remained relatively stable since the
previous report. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
continue to draw down its post-earthquake surge and
to adapt its configuration without undermining the
security and stability of Haiti. The Group also takes
note of MINUSTAH's development of a conditions-
based consolidation plan, and expresses its interest in
closely following the plan's development and analyzing
its eventual recommendations.

The Group of Friends welcomes the continued
commitment by the Government of Haiti to strengthening
the rule of law and to make further progress in reforming
the security sector. In that regard, the Group would like
to emphasize the critical role that the Haitian National
Police (HNP) plays in Haiti's security and stability, as
well as to underscore the importance of completing the
ongoing strengthening, professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police in order for it to assume
full responsibility for Haiti's security. In that regard, the
Group expresses its satisfaction with the establishment

of the 2012-2016 Haitian National Police Development
Plan, presented by MINUSTAH and the HNP.

The Group ofFriends ofHaiti recognizes the critical
role of MINUSTAH in ensuring stability and security
in Haiti and commends the Mission for continuing to
assist the Government of Haiti to ensure a secure and
stable environment.

The Group of Friends expresses its grave concern
regarding the allegations of cases of serious misconduct
by some MINUSTAH personnel, which have negatively
affected public support for the Mission and may be
undermining its work. The Group of Friends expects
all United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct and urges all actors involved to
assume their responsibilities in order to prevent such
cases, investigate the allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.

The Group acknowledges with satisfaction the
important progress in the reduction of the number
of internally displaced persons in Haiti. However,
it would like to stress that Haiti continues to face
significant humanitarian challenges, particularly
with regard to women and children, including the
more than 390,000 internally displaced persons who
still depend on assistance for their basic survival, the
ongoing cholera epidemic and the country's extreme
vulnerability to natural disasters. The Group of Friends
notes the continuing work by the Government of Haiti,
MINUSTAH and others to protect vulnerable groups,
but notes with equal concern the need to improve the
response of the criminaljustice sector to claims of rape
and of serious crimes against children. We therefore
urgently call for increased efforts to prevent and
respond to violence against women and children.

Those challenges remind us of the importance
of sustaining cooperation between the international
community and the Government of Haiti to meet the
needs of the Haitian people. In that regard, the Group
of Friends acknowledges the efforts of the donor
community and calls upon them to fulfil without
delay the pledges made. The Group welcomes the
establishment of the aid coordination mechanism
developed by the Government of Haiti, which succeeds
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
development and stability are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore stress the need to
significantly address unemployment and the delivery
of basic social services. At the same time, the Group
stresses that there can be no genuine stability or
sustainable development in Haiti without strengthening
democratic institutions and a credible democratic
process. In that context, the Group emphasizes the
importance of promoting the rule of law through the
strengthening of Haitian institutions and further
reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH to support
the Haitian State in the areas of good governance,
extending State authority and promoting and protecting
human rights, in accordance with its mandate.

Finally, owing to the significant challenges that
Haiti still faces and the critical support that MINUSTAH
is providing, the Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
need to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH for one
year to enable the Mission to continue to discharge
its responsibilities according to the reconfiguration
presented by the Secretary-General. In that regard, the
Group has just submitted for the Council's consideration
a new draft resolution regarding MINUSTAH's mandate
and capacities.

The Group of Friends of Haiti would like to express
its support and recognition to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts
to support Haiti's recovery and stability. We wish the
people of Haiti brighter days ahead. The Group of
Friends is committed to that cause and will certainly
continue its efforts to support their aspirations for
improved welfare, working with the Permanent Mission
of Haiti and the Haitian authorities to that end.

