Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important debate. I also express our sincere
appreciation to High Commissioner Pillay, Under-
Secretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
excellent briefings.

The protection of civilians is a fundamental
responsibility of the international community and a
core function of the Security Council in safeguarding
international peace and security. Over the years, the
Council has taken significant steps to implement its
commitment. Peacekeeping operations with a mandate
to protect have been one of its most effective tools.

Resolution 1894 (2009) ensures that United Nations
peacekeeping missions have protection mandates, where
appropriate, and that such protection activities should
be given priority. In 2013, a new mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the strengthened mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo represented
noteworthy achievements in that regard.

The protection of civilians lies at the core of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan's peacekeeping
mandate, where armed clashes have taken a heavy toll
on civilians.

Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. In the case of Syria,
murder, torture, rape, arbitrary detention and other
inhumane acts are widespread. More than 130,000
people have been killed, a great number of which are
civilians. The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, with almost half of the population in need
of humanitarian assistance.

Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to
highlight the following points.
First, it is essential that the Council enhance efforts
to provide clear, achievable protection mandates based
on a realistic assessment and adequate resources. We
should also bear in mind that success or failure in the
protection of civilians is the most tangible barometer of
a successful mission.

Secondly, we must ensure that protection mandates
are effectively implemented. In developing mission
strategies, a coordinated response from the mission and
all of the relevant stakeholders is essential. Protection
activities must be given priority in decisions on the use
of available capacities and resources. I welcome that
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689)
includes an assessment of concrete measures taken
by peacekeeping missions. We commend the role of
the missions in supporting political dialogue in Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia, providing physical protection in
South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and building a protective environment in Mali and in
Haiti.

Thirdly, the rising challenges of unregulated small
arms and the indiscriminate use ofweapons in populated
areas have also been noted in the report ofthe Secretary-
General. My delegation is deeply concerned about the
devastating impact on civilians. Resolution 2117 (2013),
on small arms and light weapons, adopted last year, also
recognizes that the illicit transfer and misuse of small
arms and light weapons fuel conflict and the impact on
civilians. We must intensify consideration of that issue
through discussions with greater focus.
F ourthly, I would like to reaffirm that accountability
is key to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Those who commit war crimes, crimes against humanity
and other violations of international law must be held
accountable. Accountability requires verification.
There should be investigation and documentation of
allegations of all violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law.

We recognize the significant contribution of
international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions, and we reiterate our full support to them.

While the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
other international tribunals play a crucial role, the
Council must do its part, including by referring relevant
situations to the ICC.

Before concluding, I should like to pay tribute to
the United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers who are working hard to protect civilians
around the world.

My delegation also strongly supports presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/3, which was adopted earlier.

