Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation would like to
welcome my good friend, Ambassador Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, with
whom we look forward to working closely in moving
the peace process in Syria forward. We wish once again
to reaffirm our full support and cooperation for him and
his team. We would also like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen for his briefing to the Council today, having
taken note of his various visits and meetings with all
parties concerned since he took office on 7 January.

Indonesia calls on all parties to support the Special
Envoy's efforts in facilitating a peaceful solution to
the Syrian crisis within the framework of the Geneva
process and resolution 2254 (2015). We also believe
that it is essential that the Security Council strongly
signal to all parties our full backing of the efforts of the
Special Envoy.

We have noted with thanks Mr. Pedersen's
insights, in particular, the progress vis-a-vis the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Rukban, the
release of detainees and the relative calm in several
areas. Nevertheless, the situation is still precarious,
particularly in terms of, inter alia, the continued threat
of terrorism by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the issue of internally displaced persons. We would like
to highlight several points.

First, Indonesia believes that it is critical that we
ensure our support and commitment to establishing
an inclusive and credible political process in Syria,
including the setting up of a constitutional committee
that meets the legitimate aspirations ofthe Syrian people.
This is indeed key to establishing a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political solution that is facilitated by the
United Nations, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).

The establishment of a constitutional committee
is not an easy task, but it is indeed doable. We note
that the Astana guarantors presented a third list to the
Special Envoy in Geneva on 18 December 2018. We
call on the Special Envoy to continue his engagement
and consultations with the Syrian Government and the
guarantors, bearing in mind that the necessity of having
the first meeting of the constitutional committee in
Geneva is greater than ever. All parties' commitment
and consistency in making progress in this process is
critical, as it would open the door towards efforts that
could further the political process. And on this journey
of finding a lasting political solution, the international
community must always bear in mind that it is the
Syrian people who will decide their own future.

Secondly, my delegation strongly believes that a
truly genuine dialogue is crucial to the success of the
peace process, as it is the most important foundation for
building trust and confidence. To that end, Indonesia
sincerely hopes that the dialogue among all relevant
stakeholders will continue, with a view to contributing
to a credible and sustainable solution to the conflict.
In the short run, dialogue is also critical to moving the
process forward by helping to build consensus and curb
the violence and hostilities that continue to imperil the
prospects ofpeace.

Thirdly, and as the Security Council has said for
many years, all sides must cease hostilities and avoid
resorting to force. This is fundamental for progress
to be made on the political front. In that regard, we
again call on all parties to respect the current ceasefire
agreements. We believe that it is important to reiterate
the important role of ceasefire agreements in facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, which saves
civilian lives and thereby promotes the cause of peace
and reconciliation.

I wish to make clear that we have no option but
to pursue a political solution in Syria in the spirit of
resolution 2254 (2015). In addition, we all know how
devastating the humanitarian situation in the country
is. Having heard Special Envoy Pedersen's briefing just
now on the precarious situation with regard to plight
of civilians, displaced persons, refugees and poverty,
we can safely say that, unless we achieve the objective
of a political solution, the humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate. In Indonesia's view, that is
an option we cannot afford to entertain. We reaffirm
our national commitment to a comprehensive solution
within the prism of full respect for Syria's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and within the context of the
United Nations-facilitated political process.

Finally, we urge all parties to support Ambassador
Pedersen in his very important task of moving the
political process forward and leading the way to a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. We have listened
carefully to the five goals that Ambassador Pedersen
laid out. We believe that they could form a valuable
road map for the achievement of a durable solution.
We naturally welcome the five goals, since the number
five has always been important for us. We commend
Ambassador Pedersen's efforts to continue engaging
with all parties, including civil society actors, women
and young people.

In conclusion, we would like to imagine a
prosperous, stable and peaceful Syria arising in the
near future, where children can roam and play freely in
the streets of the Syrian Republic. We hope that Special
Envoy Pedersen can bend history in the direction that
the people of Syria expect and could ultimately accept.

