Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
In the view of my delegation, resolution 1574 (2004),
which the Security Council has adopted unanimously,
is both timely and appropriate, given the current
circumstances in the Sudan. It is a well balanced text,
and cohesively addresses itself both to the Naivasha
negotiations in the framework of the north-south peace
process and to the Abuja negotiations on the Darfur
conflict. The delegation of Spain particularly welcomes
the fact that this time the Security Council has been
able to speak with a single voice on an issue that, as we
know, touches upon sensitive matters. That is
undoubtedly a demonstration of the fact that the
Council's commitment to the African continent - and
in this case to the Sudan - is often sufficiently strong
to bring together different approaches to the subject
with a view to maximum efficiency in our efforts.

The resolution essentially focuses on the
Naivasha peace process and includes strong Council
support for the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) as the mediator in
the negotiating process. That is a new indication of the
advantages of a regional approach to conflict
resolution.

We are pleased that the parties - the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM) -have today
signed a solemn declaration on the conclusion of the
IGAD peace process, which commits them to signing a
comprehensive peace agreement before 31 December
2004. The resolution we have adopted expresses the
Council's determined support for the efforts that should
soon lead to an overall final agreement. It also pledges
the backing of the Council and of the entire
international community for the implementation of the
agreement by the parties and for the re-establishment
of a peaceful, unified and prosperous nation in the
Sudan.

The resolution also addresses the conflict in
Darfur with the necessary thoroughness, which is a
matter that continues to be of great concern for us. We
agree with the Secretary-General that the signing of a
comprehensive peace agreement between the north and
the south will certainly have positive effects on the
resolution of other ongoing conflicts in the Sudan, in
particular that in Darfur. We also hope that it will make
it possible to prevent the emergence of new tensions in
the country. The resolution should prompt us to
continue to urge the parties - both the Government of
the Sudan and the rebel groups - to comply with the
commitments called for in resolutions 1556 (2004) and
1564 (2004) and to reach and fully and effectively
implement comprehensive agreements as soon as
possible in the Abuja negotiations being carried out
under the auspices of the African Union.

The situation in Darfur continues to be tragic.
According to reports received by Security Council, it
has even deteriorated in recent weeks. The
international community continues to await a more
responsible response by the parties involved, first from
the Government of the Sudan but also from the rebel
groups. Violations of the ceasefire agreement, attacks
against the civilian population, new violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law,
attempts to forcibly return internally displaced persons
and the widespread climate of impunity must be ended
without any excuse or precondition. All those practices
are unacceptable and demonstrate that there is very
little will on the part of all those involved to truly
resolve the problem. If necessary, the Council must be
prepared to take additional measures to oblige the
parties to honour their commitments if they do not do
so willingly. The resolution we have just adopted also
reflects that message with sufficient clarity.

The holding of this extraordinary meeting of the
Security Council in Nairobi, on the initiative of the
United States presidency of the Council, is a new,
tangible demonstration of the interest that not only the
Sudan but also the entire African continent have
aroused in the Council. This meeting has provided us
with a unique opportunity to inject final and very
necessary momentum into the Naivasha peace process,
the signing of a comprehensive peace agreement and
the beginning of national reconciliation in the Sudan.
We trust that the hopes that have emerged from the
decisions reached today will not be in vain. We owe
that, above all, to the peoples of the Sudan and to the
region as a whole.

