Mr. Radomski (Poland): We have received the
news of the sudden and completely untimely passing
of Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue with
deep sadness and disbelief. On behalf of Poland,
our Permanent Representative, Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, and our entire delegation, let me express
our heartfelt condolences to the family of Ambassador
Tanoh-Boutchoue and the entire team of the Cote
d'Ivoire Mission. We will remember Bernard as a great
diplomat and a cordial friend and colleague. He served
Cote d'Ivoire with grace, wisdom and dignity. We will
miss him deeply.

Inow turn to the topic of today's discussion. Iwould
like to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Oscar
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and
Her Excellency Ms. Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I would also
like to thank our briefer, Mr. Jean Arnault, for a very
informative briefing.

With parliamentary elections completed and the
presidential elections just around the corner, we are
approaching a decisive point in the Colombian peace
process, which has been an undeniable success for that
country's society, the Colombian authorities as well
as for the United Nations community. Poland fully
supports the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and commends every effort made by the people
involved in the process - from the former guerillas
now establishing farms in Pondores to the brave police
officers on the streets of Medellin to the officials
in Bogota.

The legislative elections that took place on 11 March
were Colombia's most peaceful in over 50 years.
Voting and political participation reached new heights
in virtually every department, showing the visible
positive impact of the disarmament of over 90 per cent
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Eje'rcito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In addition, the
Ej ercito de Liberacion Nacional has upheld a temporary
unilateral ceasefire with the Government. Thanks to
the Peace Agreement, 10 seats in Congress will now be
taken by the representatives of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) political party.
FARC's political transition should soon bear fruit.

Unfortunately, despite the fact that less than a
year has elapsed since the disarmament of FARC-EP,
there is growing mistrust on the part of ex-combatants
that the Government will fail to completely fulfil its
commitments to them. We should be aware that the
positive momentum may be gradually fading away.

While awaiting appropriate legislative action, no
land has been transferred to the collective agricultural
projects. More than 600 FARC-EP members remain in
prison due to bureaucratic delays in the implementation
of the amnesty law. Development programmes
and productive projects in the countryside should
be approved, implemented and funded in a more
coordinated way and without further delays. We
reiterate the need to adopt a national reintegration
plan linking reintegration to development. We strongly
believe that the landmark decree enabling access to
land ownership to former combatants will offer after
its adoption the strongest incentive for a majority of
former FARC-EP members, vastly helping them in the
process of reintegration.

We welcome the recent progress made in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, in particular
the setting up of the special transitional justice
courts and the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition. Police and military casualties
have dropped, and the number of internal internally
displaced persons has fallen significantly. At the same
time, homicide rates remain largely unchanged, and
violence in former FARC-EP strongholds increased
dramatically in the first months of 2018.
It is also worrying that the cultivation of illicit
crops is steadily increasing. Many families have
joined the crop substitution process, but little progress
has been made in strengthening local markets for
alternative products or in rural road construction. We
cannot ignore the lack of coordination between the crop
substitution programme and the Government's forced
eradication efforts. Those issues are undermining trust
between the Government and local communities.

As we have stated before, current reintegration
efforts lack a gender perspective and comprehensive
initiatives made especially for FARC-EP women.
Durable peace can be achieved only when all
people - women and men - are equally and in a
meaningful way involved in the peace process.

In conclusion, Poland supports the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, which continues to
play a vital role in supporting the Peace Agreement. We
also commend the role of the United Nations country
team and every United Nations agency for being
present on the ground. We note in particular the role of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, which aims
at bringing an end to the suffering of Colombians as
a result of the widespread presence of landmines and
explosive remnants of war.

We believe that the stakes for peace in Columbia
are higher than ever. Poland strongly supports the
Colombian Government's efforts to make the peace
process a success.

