Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
convey our gratitude for the holding of this debate and
especiallywelcomeyourparticipationinandcontribution
to the debate, Mr. Prime Minister. We are also grateful

for the presence of other high-level authorities, and we
welcome the briefings by Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Fatimata Toure, Director of Groupe de recherche,
d'etude et de formation femme-action. In particular,
we would like to highlight the vision and leadership
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres at the helm of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

As a country, Peru is committed to those
operations. We have contributed troops since 1958, and
we currently have a presence in six countries, including
an engineering unit in the Central African Republic.
We believe that the Blue Helmets are essential to
the protection of civilians and advancing transitions
leading towards achieving sustainable peace in the 15
countries in which they are currently deployed. We pay
special tribute to the soldiers ofmore than 110 countries
committed to that noble mission.

We believe that the current discussion is
important inasmuch as it relates to the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in circumstances in which
they must respond to increasingly complex mandates,
including in situations in which there is really no peace
to maintain. In that regard, we must first consider that
the cost of peacekeeping is typically nominal compared
to the costs associated with war and its destruction, and
that successfully maintaining peace requires a firm and
supportive international consensus that begins in the
Security Council and must be translated into concrete
operational capacities. That requires mandates with
precise goals, coherent strategies and sufficient
financial and logistic resources, which in turn means
that their mandates, and the international community's
general approach to peacekeeping operations must be
periodically reviewed and updated by the Council. In
that vein, we would like to highlight four points.

First, it is necessary to clearly define the goals
and functions of troop-contributing countries so
as to increase the effectiveness of operations. The
Organization must be able to raise the standards of its
peacekeeping operations as they relate to emergency
situations and specific needs. To that end, fluid
dialogue relating to policy and operational dimensions
needs to be maintained among the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. Specifically,
as set out in resolution 2378 (2017), we believe that
it is necessary to move forward in establishing rapid
deployment mechanisms, training troops and using
modern technology and specialized capacities. The
increase in women's participation and leadership is also
an important development.

Secondly, it is crucial to adapt peacekeeping
operations strategies to their contexts on a case-by-
case basis. The Organization must clearly determine
the viability and validity of a given mandate based
on developments on the ground. In that regard, we
underscore that two conditions - the consent and
cooperation of the host State, and the existence of a
real political process - must first be met. In addition
to that, the Organization must provide an adequate
assessment of the risks associated with and the causes
underlying the conflict. It is also desirable to generate
synergies with countries bordering the country hosting
the mission so as to prevent cross-border trafficking
that sometimes fuel the conflict.

Moreover, peacekeeping operations must be able
to depend upon capacities involving intelligence and
exercising influence upon their interlocutors on the
ground. The use of general and specific sanctions has
proven to be effective, but in certain cases it can be
complemented with other measures involving political
pressures. It is important to explore the best forms of
complementarity involving military forces or regional
coalitions in order to determine the best course of
action. Such participation should be complemented
financially by the Organization.

Thirdly, it is necessary to ensure the security
of peacekeeping operations. The number of Blue
Helmets who have recently lost their lives in the line
of duty is unacceptable. Together with the Secretariat,
Peru considers that to be a priority issue that must
be addressed by the immediate implementation of a
plan of action covering training and early warning.
In line with the report authored by former United
Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, and the Brahimi
report (S/2000/809), we believe that it is essential to
analyse the environment to which a given unit will be
sent, and to provide it with the corresponding resources
and training. Its credibility and, ultimately, ability to
fulfil its mandate depend on that. In that connection,
we commend the important work of the Secretary-
General in preventing and firmly and decisively
addressing all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations.

Lastly, it is necessary to align peacekeeping
operations with peacebuilding efforts with the general
goal and the process of achieving sustainable peace,
aimed at ensuring the orderly transition to stable
and safe environments, respect for human rights and
sustainable development. It is therefore important that
the Council maintain close cooperation with troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, as well as the
Peacebuilding Commission. Peacekeeping operations
must do the same on the ground, while working with
various national stakeholders and the United Nations
country team.

We would like to conclude by recalling the words
of former Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar
upon receiving the first Nobel Peace Prize on behalf
of peacekeeping operations. He said then that they
symbolize the international community's will to bring
about peace and represent the impartial and practical
manifestation of that will.

