Mr. Delattre (France): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for the organization
of this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for your work over the past
year as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues.

I would also like to sincerely thank Ms. Karin
Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, for her very informative briefing and for the
high quality of the work she has accomplished with
her team, as well as Mr. James Cockayne, Director of
the Centre for Policy Research at the United Nations
University. I am very grateful to them both for the
clarity and quality of their proposals, which make a
very useful contribution to our exchanges.

Finally, I welcome the participation of a very large
number of Member States in the debate on this topic, to
which France, which organized the first debate in 1994
(S/PV.3484), is very committed. I welcome especially
the presence among us today of two Ministers for
Foreign Affairs.

With the annual debate on the Security Council's
report to the General Assembly, this open debate is
an important moment of reflection on our working
methods, which we are conducting with all the Member
States of the United Nations, who have entrusted
our Council with the primary and distinguished
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I have listened carefully to the
intervention of our South African colleague, who was
speaking on behalf of the non-permanent members of
the Council. I broadly agree with his approach and my
statement is intended to demonstrate that this debate
should not pit the permanent members of the Council
against the non-permanent members.

France fully shares both the concern for efficiency
and the desire to reform the Council and its working
methods that the representative of South Africa
expressed. I will not go into detail on our position, but I
would like to point out that France is very committed to
the reform of the Security Council in order to broaden
its membership and thereby strengthen its legitimacy
and effectiveness. It has also made proposals with
Mexico for the voluntary and collective suspension
of the use of the veto of permanent members in cases
involving mass atrocities.

In the immediate future, we are fully prepared
to work with all members of this Council to continue
and conclude the work that Kuwait has initiated to
supplement the note by the President (S/2017/507, annex) known as note 507, which originated in a 2006
document (S/2006/507, annex) that Japan took the
excellent initiative to revise twice, in 2010 (S/2010/507, annex) and 2017, for which I again congratulate the
Japanese Ambassador.

In that endeavour, we are guided by three key
principles: effectiveness, transparency and inclusivity.
The proposals on the table will certainly enable us to
make progress in that direction, particularly by better
integrating the members we will elect on Friday, the
troop-contributing countries and the other Member
States. We will work with all members to reach the
necessary compromises.

But the work of collating, clarifying and codifying
procedures and good practices must not be carried out
at the expense of flexibility, which remains a guarantee
of effectiveness and responsiveness, particularly in
matters ofwar and peace, where human lives are at stake.
In that respect, the principle of freedom for any member
State of the Council to present a text at any time on any
subject must absolutely be preserved, as it ensures that
the Council will be responsive and that the majority of
its members will always strive to reach a consensus.
Any ex ante or automatic allocation of penholders
would be detrimental to the effectiveness of the
Council. Similarly, the allocation of the chairmanships
of sanctions committees to non-permanent members, in
addition to allowing regular rotation, which is useful, is
mainly intended to avoid possible deadlocks in conflict
situations, which unfortunately are not lacking.

We must also be careful that our attention to the
adoption of new methods does not make us forget
that we must first properly implement the agreed
recommendations. France is actively striving to do
so with all its partners in and outside the Council.
With my German colleagues - Mr. Heusgen and
Mr. Schulz - whom I warmly thank for giving me
their speaking time for this debate, we have tried to be
exemplary during our joint presidency of the Council
by presenting our programmes and the outcome of
our work to all States Members of the United Nations;
by involving civil society stakeholders, particularly
women, in our meetings; by doing our best to prepare
our missions in Mali and Burkina Faso; and by
encouraging speakers and Council members to be
more concise, but especially to be more focused and
interactive in their statements.

As penholders on several issues, a responsibility
which we take very seriously, France has always
ensured the participation of host States and troop-
contributing countries, as well as the chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country configuration,
where appropriate - as we did with Morocco in
the case of the Central African Republic - and has
always facilitated informal meetings with Member
States to strengthen our joint analysis of the issues. In
conducting discussions on the texts, we have always
tried to give everyone enough negotiating time and to
find the necessary compromises to ensure the Council's
adoption of such texts, which has almost always
been unanimous.

Finally, beyond our current and future working
methods, our priority must be to ensure the effectiveness
of the Council's action in our daily practice. We
therefore strongly encourage the collaboration of the
Council with regional organizations and we have called
for meetings with the African Union, the European
Union and this month, for the first time, with the
League of Arab States.

We also favour the organization of interactive
dialogues or Arria Formula meetings, which
significantly contribute to informing the Council on
important issues and preparing the work on future
texts. Further efforts are needed to streamline the ever-
increasing programme of work in order to release time
for crisis response, strategic reflection and substantive
dialogue. We must be able to collectively disengage the
autopilot in order to try in good faith to find points of
convergence, which are necessary for any agreement.
That is at the heart of our responsibilities.

However, we must avoid excessive public meetings
to the detriment of work on Council decisions. After
five years in the Council, I regret to say that we
are spending more and more time in the Chamber
presenting our respective positions and less and less
time in the consultation room deciding on joint action.
Naturally, public meetings are very important and have
the advantage of being transparent, but they tend to
polarize positions at the expense of the consensus we
seek in order to effectively make decisions and bring
our influence to bear. We must therefore together seek
the right balance.

The five-year trend is quite clear. We now spend
three times more time in public meetings than in
consultations, while - even if not to the same
extent - we negotiate and adopt fewer texts. That trend
is unfortunately exacerbated by the current geopolitical
polarization and by an erosion of confidence in the
multilateral method and should be a cause for joint
reflection. But I am confident, by nature and conviction,
that this debate and our collective determination will
enable us to pull ourselves together so that, amid
increasing crises and threats, the Council can prioritize
its mission of conflict prevention and resolution. The
Council can count on the firm resolve of France in
that connection.

