Mr. Satoh (Japan): I, too, want to express my
disappointment at the way this meeting was arranged.
It is very disappointing that, although we are one of the
major contributors, we have to speak in the absence of
the future President and others. I hope you will
consider this again, Mr. President, although I do not
want to spend too much time on this.

First of all, on behalf of the Government of
Japan, I would like to congratulate Mr. Xanana
Gusmao on his recent election as the first President of
independent East Timor. I would also like to pay
tribute to Mr. Mari Alkatiri, who has been serving as
the Chief Minister of the Transitional Government of
East Timor and who, with independence, will continue
to assume important duties for nation-building in East
Timor. Furthermore, I would like to extend once again
our congratulations on the successful presidential
election held in East Timor on 14 April. The
international community, including the observation
team dispatched by the Government of Japan, assessed
the election as having been held in a free and fair
manner. The success of the presidential election,
following the Constituent Assembly elections held in
August last year, is further testimony to the firm
commitment of the people of East Timor to democracy.

In his congratulatory message to President-elect
Gusmao, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi expressed
the hope that Mr. Gusmao, in solidarity with the
Government and people of East Timor, would tackle
the tasks required to build a self-reliant nation. Prime
Minister Koizumi also expressed the intention of the
Government of Japan to continue to extend to East
Timor as much support as possible.

This coming Monday, Prime Minister Koizumi
will visit East Timor. That visit is aimed at conveying
directly to the leaders and the people of East Timor the
Japanese people's message of congratulations and their
determination to assist East Timor. The Prime Minister
is looking forward to meeting Mr. Gusmao and Mr.
Alkatiri in Dili and to discussing with them the future
of East Timor as well as the political stability and
economic development of the Asia-Pacific region.

The Government of Japan has been making
efforts to play a leading role within the international
community in supporting East Timor. Indeed, it is
already the largest donor in terms of actual
disbursements. The Japanese Government has already
extended $120 million for reconstruction and
development as well as for humanitarian assistance on
the basis of our pledge to provide, over three years,
$130 million to this end - a pledge we made at the
first donor conference we hosted in Tokyo in December
1999.

In addition, an engineering group of 680 troops,
including female members of Japan's Self-Defence
Forces, has completed its deployment in East Timor
this month to participate in the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. They will engage in the
construction and repair of roads and bridges, which are
also expected to contribute to the reconstruction and
development of East Timor.

What the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has achieved
in East Timor is a success story of which the United
Nations should be proud. We cannot overemphasize the
important role UNTAET has played over the past two
and a half years in assisting East Timor's progress
towards independence. I would therefore like to
express the Japanese Government's admiration and
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to
the other members of UNTAET for their leadership and
dedicated efforts throughout this period.

I also welcome the report on East Timor which
Secretary-General Kofi Annan submitted to the
Security Council on 17 April. The Government of
Japan supports the plan described in the report
concerning the mandate, structure and timetable of a
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). The Japanese Government also supports
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Security Council adopt a resolution giving a mandate
to UNMISET for its initial period of one year.

It is clear to everyone that after independence
East Timor will face a number of difficult challenges.
With this recognition, I would like to point out that it is
important for the leadership of East Timor to lead their
country in solidarity; that it is important for the people
of East Timor to participate in the efforts for nation-
building, taking on their country's development as a

matter of their own responsibility; and that it is
important for the international community to continue
its support for East Timor. I would like to emphasize in
particular that the support of the international
community and the development of good cooperative
relations between East Timor and neighbouring
countries are indispensable for the stability and
prosperity of East Timor.

The Government of Japan, for its part, is
determined to spare no effort to continue to play an

important role in the international efforts to support
East Timor.

