Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): We learned with deep concern of the decision of
the Iraqi leadership on 31 October to halt cooperation with
the United Nations Special Commission. That decision is
unacceptable. It has jeopardized the search of recent months
for a solution to the Iraqi problem. That step runs counter
to the agreements between the Secretary-General and the
Iraqi side that Baghdad would rescind its decision of 5
August and that the Security Council would conduct a
comprehensive review of the Iraqi situation. Those
agreements opened the way to the lifting of sanctions on
Iraq.

Following upon Iraq's decision of 31 October,
Russia immediately informed the Iraqi leadership of its
position. We are engaging in active diplomatic efforts to
promote a settlement of the problem, in the belief that
only the resumption of the constructive cooperation of
Iraq with the United Nations will make possible a
comprehensive review and the prospect of lifting the oil
embargo.

The way to overcome this new crisis lies, we
believe, exclusively in political and diplomatic efforts
alongside the active role of the Secretary-General. Any
attempt to resolve the problem by force would have
highly unpredictable and dangerous consequences, both
for the United Nations ability to continue to monitor
proscribed military activity in Iraq and for peace and
stability in the region and in the Middle East as a whole.

We are pleased to note that the draft resolution
before us seeks precisely a political solution to the Iraqi
problem and contains no language that could be arbitrarily
interpreted as some kind of permission to use force. The
draft resolution makes it clear that the Security Council,
in accordance with its primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, will remain actively seized of the situation.

Without in any way attempting to justify Iraq's
actions, I wish to stress the exceptional importance of
total clarity with regard to the Security Council's
intentions to implement its own resolutions. The draft
resolution clearly reaffirms the Council's intention to take
a decision on the current sanctions in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 687 (1991). This
naturally refers to action under paragraph 22 of that
resolution regarding the lifting of the oil embargo once
Iraq meets its disarmament obligations. The same
understanding was stated in the letter sent on 30 October
by the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-
General in support of his idea of a comprehensive review.
That concept is reaffirmed in the draft resolution. We
hope that, in the light of all this, Baghdad will again
assess the emerging situation and rescind its decision of
31 October.

With this in mind, as well as the fact that the
sponsors incorporated a number of amendments reflecting
our principled approach to the situation, the Russian

 

delegations joins the consensus and will support the draft
resolution.

