Mr. Liden (Sweden): First, let me express my
strong concern for the deplorable situation of millions
of men, women and children in Somalia who have, for
such a long time, endured violent conflict and
hardship. I urge all parties within Somalia to respect
human rights and humanitarian law and to allow
humanitarian access.
During the past year, we have witnessed a steady
wave of refugees from Somalia trying to cross the Gulf
of Aden to Yemen. It is a dangerous and often lethal
passage, and yet, so far more than 19,000 Somalis have
risked this journey. Hundreds of thousands have fled
over land. Over the past year, we have also seen an
unprecedented increase in piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Not only have the number of attacks and the
number of people engaged in piracy increased, but the
attacks have also become more daring. We condemn
those acts.

We all know the background: 17 years of armed
conflict in Somalia with no end in sight, no functioning
Government capable of protecting its citizens or
upholding law, and no investments in agriculture or
other forms of livelihood for the population. At this
stage, a comprehensive approach making use of a wide
range of means, including a naval force with an
adequate mandate to protect humanitarian deliveries
and fend off piracy, is necessary to address the
situation. Consequently, Sweden has, pending a
parliamentary decision, announced its intention to
contribute a navy unit to the European Union-led
Operation Atalanta, primarily to protect and escort
vessels of the World Food Programme. The European
Union (EU) naval operation and other similar
operations are important first steps, but we need to
reflect further and aim at long-term conflict resolution.

We also need to address the root causes of the
intolerable practices of piracy, smuggling and
trafficking. We need to support the Somalis in
recreating a functioning society that can uphold the
rule of law and respect human rights, where young
Somalis will have true opportunities that are more
attractive than the prospect of becoming criminals or
refugees. The alternative could entrench Somalia as a
recruiting ground and safe haven for criminality and
terrorism.

Sweden would like to reaffirm its strong support
for the political process under the Djibouti Agreement,
led by the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
and Special Representative Ould-Abdallah. That is now
the only constructive way forward. It is a process that
is owned by the Somali parties and builds on their
commitment and responsibility for their own State. It is
a process that must become more inclusive and must
take firmer root on the ground. The international
community must find constructive ways to support that
process, including support for increased security and
development.

During the past 17 years, many attempts to
resolve the crises in Somalia have been carried out and
have failed. External involvement has not always been
constructive. Hence, the international community must
tread carefully and ensure that its actions and the
mandates given by the Security Council are in line with
and in support of the ongoing efforts to build an
inclusive peace in Somalia.

