Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her twelfth report and
her briefing. I would like to reaffirm France's support
for the Prosecutor and the International Criminal
Court as a whole, and also to commend her on her
successful implementation of resolution 1970 (2011),
which referred the situation in Libya to the Court. The
resolution also reflects the Council's support of an
institution with the most important of missions - to
ensure that the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community, as the preamble to the Rome
Statute has it, do not go unpunished.

Thanks to the reports, we are pleased to note the
efforts made by the Office of the Prosecutor, working
closely with the Libyan judicial authorities. Once
again, we are well aware that insecurity and instability
make the task of conducting ongoing and future
investigations a particularly delicate one. The security
threats must be carefully evaluated in order to decide
whether investigations on the ground are possible. In
view of the fact that the security conditions required
for conducting investigations on the ground cannot
always be met, France backs the Office's efforts to do
so remotely to the extent possible. In that regard, we
fully support initiatives and programmes designed to
facilitate the collection of evidence and testimony via
secure channels.

There can be no question that much remains to
be done to end impunity in Libya. That is why we
believe it is more essential than ever to ensure that the
Council continues to support the Court and mediation
under the auspices of the United Nations, including by
Mr. Martin Kobler, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We also offer our full support to
the Presidential Council, led by Mr. Fayez Al-Sarraj, in
order to help him deal with the challenges he is facing.

Besides those general comments, I would like to
make three more specific ones.

First, France recalls that the Office's ability to
conduct investigations requires the full cooperation
of all stakeholders. And for that cooperation to be
effective, it must take an integrated approach and
function at various levels, giving priority to the
principle of complementarity.

Secondly, France supports the assertion in
paragraphs 13 and 14 ofthe report that close cooperation
with the Libyan authorities is essential to conducting
investigations securely, as mandated by Rome Statute
of the Court and by the Council. The memorandum of
understanding of November 2013, on the sharing of
responsibilities with the Libyan authorities, provides
a framework for that. Similarly, we welcome the
valuable document transmission and operational
support provided by the Office of the Prosecutor
General of Libya, which is also working in particularly
difficult conditions. We are pleased that the meetings
that took place in October explored new opportunities
for mutual support.

With regard to the adoption of resolution 2291
(2016), of 13 June, which extended the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
15 December, France notes the appeal of the Office of
the Prosecutor for all parties to cooperate and ensure
the security of United Nations and associated personnel
to also apply to officials of the International Criminal
Court who are leading investigations in Libya.

Furthermore, as recalled in the report, the Security
Council, in paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011),
urged all States and concerned regional and other
international organizations to cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor. France therefore considers
it crucial to strengthen cooperation with all States,
whether or not they are parties to the Rome Statute,
so that requests made by the Office be responded to
in the most efficient and timely manner. This required
collaboration with the States of the region and beyond
is all the more essential in the case of highly complex
and transnational investigations, which require a
coordinated strategy. The cooperation of the Jordanian
and Tunisian authorities is particularly appreciated in
this regard.

Our second comment concerns the elements of
the report relating to ongoing investigations. France
considers it crucial that Mr. SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi be
delivered promptly to the Court, pursuant to the request
of its judges. France urges Libya to do everything it can
to honour this obligation and put an end to the breach it
is committing. Furthermore, in the case brought against
Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, France notes that the Office,
pending the full report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya on the trial proceedings before a
national court, continues to believe that no new facts
cripple the evidence on which the Pre-Trial Chamber I
relied to declare the inadmissibility of the case before
the Court. Finally, France notes the Office's intention to
file applications for additional arrest warrants shortly.

Thirdly and finally, France would like to review the
future plans outlined by the Office of the Prosecutor
in the report. We note the Office's wish to make
Libya a priority in 2017 and significantly expand its
investigations into crimes committed in Libya since
2011, including crimes alleged committed in Libya by
Da'esh, Ansar Al-Sharia and other terrorist groups.

What we see in Libya shows how the absence
of justice breeds violence and makes reconciliation
more difficult. This is reality that we must keep in
mind. It forces us all to find ways to arrive at concrete
responses. France, which cooperates with the Court
without reservation, considers that this requirement
can be met only with the Court's effective functioning
and the support of the Security Council in the event of
non-cooperation.

