Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I would first like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Indonesia's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to thank you for organizing this
important debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We also want to thank the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their very informative briefings
this morning. As a top troop- and police-contributing
country (TCC/PCC), Rwanda considers this topic
to be critically important to our collective effort to
support the implementation of the Security Council's
mandates on the protection of civilians. I assure you,
Mr. President, of our delegation's full commitment to
this important topic.

Today's open debate comes at a significant time,
as we mark the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict as an
item on the Security Council's agenda. The protection
of civilians remains an important element in the
Council's mandates and is included in the mandates
of eight of 14 peacekeeping missions. This is therefore
a fitting moment for us to reflect on and recommit to
the protection of civilian children, women and men in
every conflict. As the Secretary-General's 2018 report
on this subject (S/2018/462) states, in the absence of any
possibility of preventing armed conflict, strengthening
the protection of civilians becomes an imperative.
Saving the lives of innocent civilians should be a
primary obligation of the peacekeeping missions that
have protection-of-civilian mandates.

While we are also marking the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, we must
reckon with the fact that they have not been able to
provide the desired protection to civilians in armed
conflict, as armed groups have consistently violated
the Conventions and their Protocols Additional. In that
context, the role that troops and police have in enhancing
the physical protection of civilian populations, while
also contributing to a secure environment conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance and to
ensuring political settlements, has become of central
importance for all peacekeeping missions.

In May 2015, exactly seven years ago, the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians were adopted
by a group of Member States, including several TCCs
and PCCs. The Principles are practical and specific
guidelines for all peacekeeping stakeholders on the
effective and efficient delivery of the protection of
civilians. They specifically address the performance,
accountability and capabilities required for the
effective protection of civilians. Having said that,
we acknowledge that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with host nations. However,
we cannot close our eyes to the limited capabilities
of nations hosting United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The role of United Nations peacekeeping
in the protection of civilians should therefore aim to
bridge the capability gap in the effective protection of
civilians, while building the capacity of host countries
and facilitating solutions to conflicts.

Peacekeeping's ability to deliver the protection
of civilians effectively calls for clear mandates. The
protection of civilians in all peacekeeping missions
is also greatly influenced by the quality of missions'
command and leadership as well as oftheir training and
appropriate equipment. Between 2013 and 2018, more
peacekeepers were killed in acts of armed violence
than in any other period in the past 70 years of the
United Nations. That fact vividly reflects the threats
that peacekeepers are facing today. It also suggests the
importance of well-designed training, equipment and
sophisticated situational-awareness mechanisms that
are tailored to specific mission challenges and threats.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of
women at all levels of peacekeeping. The evidence
shows that having women in meaningful roles increases
the effectiveness of peacekeeping and improves
missions' ability to protect civilians. Rwanda is proud
to be a top contributor of female police to peacekeeping
missions. Recruiting women in peacekeeping helps to
reduce the chances of conflict and of confrontations in
communities. It provides a greater sense of security to
local populations, including women and children. In that
regard, we are giving practical support to the ambition
of the United Nations to increase the percentage of
deployed female peacekeepers.

In conclusion, we believe that we now fully
appreciate the central role and value of peacekeeping
missions with protection-of-civilians mandates.
We know what is at stake when we fall short of our
expectations and responsibilities and what it will take
to make peacekeeping effective now and in the future.

