Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): I am delighted to say how pleased we are to see
you, Sir, as President of the Council for this month. We are
aware of how committed France is to the cause of peace in
the Middle East and we know that the work of the Council
will be well directed thanks to your wisdom and
experience.

I also wish to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, for the exemplary
way in which he conducted the proceedings of the Council
for the month of April.

In spite of its participation in the peace process in the
Middle East, Israel is continuing its expansionist policies
and its policy of procrastination. Contrary to all legality and
the law it continues to defy the resolutions of the United
Nations and its Charter. The Government of Israel has
decided to confiscate 53 hectares in east Jerusalem in order
to build new settlements there. It seems that these
confiscation measures were preceded by similar measures
and will be followed by others unless this situation is
brought to an end.

Israel's confiscation of these Arab lands constitutes
a danger to the peace process and dispels confidence in
Israel's commitment to the negotiations. This is all the
more so since it runs counter to the principles on the
basis of which the peace conference was held in Madrid.

At this delicate point in history, Israel must decide
once and for all whether it wishes to respect the basis and
inviolable principles of established international law. For
this reason, we wish to emphasize the following areas of
concern. First, the Holy City of Jerusalem is of vital
importance given the religious, emotional and cultural
values of civilization it has represented for Palestinians,
Arabs, Muslims and Christians throughout the world and
over the ages. Second, we also wish to emphasize the
importance of the question of Jerusalem to the peace
process and of the implementation of the United Nations
resolutions that prohibit a change in the status of the city
of Jerusalem, which is an integral part of the Arab
territories that have been occupied since 1967. In this
respect, a number of resolutions have been adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly that confirm
this reality. In its resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271
(1969), 298 (1971) and 476 (1980), the Security Council
has made it clear that legislative and administrative
measures taken by Israel with a view to confiscating land
and property and modifying the legal status of Jerusalem
are null and void. In resolution 478 (1980), it also
emphasized that it did not recognize what has been called
the "basic law" on Jerusalem and called on States that
had established diplomatic missions in Jerusalem to
withdraw them from the Holy City. Third, Israeli
settlements are unlawful according to the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. Fourth, Israel
must respect its international commitments with regard to
the peace process and the Holy City of Jerusalem. Fifth,
the Security Council must condemn Israeli practices and
policies aimed at annexing Arab territories, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem. Similarly, Israel must end any
arbitrary actions which threaten the peace process and
peace and security in the region and the world at large.

The responsibility of the Security Council as regards
the maintenance of peace is not confined to the adoption
of resolutions; these resolutions should also be
implemented. On many occasions, we have warned
against a failure by the Council to honour its obligations.
This would lead Israel to believe that it could shirk its
responsibilities as a Member of this Organization and that
 

it could continue its policies and acts of aggression with
impunity. The proof of this can be seen in Israel's recent
actions and its continued occupation of the Arab territories
it first seized in 1967.

To those who consider the question from a purely
materialistic standpoint, I would say that Jerusalem is one
matter on which there can be no compromise in terms of
land because Jerusalem is central to the Arab world and the
Palestinian cause. We will never accept any measure that
violates the Holy City or that affects individuals and land.
The Israelis are harassing Palestinians to try and force them
to leave the city, which if they did, would alter the
demographic and social structure of the Holy City of
Jerusalem. We emphasize the fact that excavation work is
endangering the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the holy places of
Christians and Muslims in the city of Jerusalem. The
international community must not forget that Israeli
settlements are illegitimate, unlawful and an obstacle to the
peace process. These settlements are a time bomb and pose
a grave danger not only to the peace process but also to the
stability of the region as a whole. The problem in Jerusalem
at the moment is not circumstantial. We are all familiar
with what has caused it. It is high time that international
law was respected and that international resolutions on this
issue were implemented. The indulgence shown towards
Israel must end in view of its defiance and its negative
approach to finding a solution, even in the framework of
the peace process that begin in Madrid in 1991.

In this context, Lebanon continues to suffer under
Israeli occupation. In certain parts of the south and western
Beka'a, Lebanese citizens are suffering daily from the
bombing of their cities and villages as Israel continues to
refuse to implement resolution 425 (1978). Hundreds of
Lebanese are detained arbitrarily and spend years in Israeli
jails in what has been called the "security belt" and in Israel
itself. The International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) is not allowed to visit the prisoners and there is a
complete failure to implement the resolutions taken in this
respect by the Commission on Human Rights. Likewise, the
Israeli navy is continuing to enforce a blockade and
preventing fishing vessels from leaving the coast. Despite
these actions, there is no effective response aimed at ending
such flagrant acts of aggression.

The lack of measures and effective action on the part
of the Security Council to end Israel's acts of aggression
and the suffering of the people will destroy any hope of a
just and lasting peace and will merely help the situation to
deteriorate further and prolong the suffering of the people
of the region. The people of Lebanon are looking to the
Council to see if the international law promised to us by
the new world order will apply to Israel or not and to see
whether an exception will be made for Israel in the
framework of the application of international law.

