I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing. This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Over the past 25 years, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained generally peaceful and stable. We hope that all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will take the twenty-fifth anniversary as an opportunity to reiterate their commitment to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement, increase mutual trust, build consensus, maintain unity, strengthen cooperation and continue to advance the process of national peace and reconciliation. China respects the choice of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard to the future of their country, and supports the harmonious coexistence and common development of all ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country will hold local elections on 15 November and, in December, Mostar will hold its first elections since 2008. Those elections are of great significance for the consolidation of the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will meet each other halfway, persist in resolving pending issues through dialogue and consultation and jointly advance election preparations. In the light of the severe challenges posed by the coronavirus disease epidemic, all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina should put national interests first, strengthen unity and cooperation, promote the development of national mechanisms and systems, improve decision-making efficiency and capacity, increase investment in medical and health infrastructure and promote economic and social recovery and development in order to create an environment conducive to the harmonious coexistence of people of all ethnic groups. Maintaining peace, stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interest of the international community and countries of the region. The international community should adopt a fair, balanced and prudent attitude on the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to help the country promote the process of peace and reconciliation in accordance with the Constitution and improve its ability to achieve development and ensure national security on its own. We hope that the senior representatives will carry out their work strictly in accordance with their mandates, maintain an objective and neutral stance, pursue constructive dialogue and cooperation with all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina and promote the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. China hopes that the European Union's multinational stabilization force in Bosnia and Herzegovina will strengthen communication and coordination with all relevant parties and play a positive role in maintaining security and stability. For a long time, the peace and reconciliation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina has consistently received the attention and support of the international community and has benefited from tremendous help from other countries. We hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations in its foreign relations, handle relevant issues in a balanced and prudent manner, respect the sovereignty of other countries and refrain from interfering in other countries' internal affairs. China is willing to work with the international community to continue to contribute to the realization of lasting peace, stability and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
