The President (spoke in Russian): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Angola, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 11 August 1999 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document 5/1999/871.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1999/ 1061, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before
it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted

unanimously as resolution 1268 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

