Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Mr. Eide, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his
briefing. We also welcome the presence of Mr. Spanta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank
him for his statement.

We are closely following the elections in
Afghanistan, which will have a significant impact on
the country's peace process. We hope that the people of
Afghanistan will use them to elect leaders who will
represent the will of the people, promote social unity
and stability and advance the comprehensive
enhancement of the Government's governing capacity.

Maintaining stability is the focus of efforts in
Afghanistan. We hope that the Afghan national security
forces, together with the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and the International Security
Assistance Force, will do everything in their power to
maintain stability in Afghanistan and guarantee the
safety of the lives and property of the Afghan people.
We also hope that the Afghan Government, National
Army and National Police, with the assistance of the
international community, will continue to build their
capacities and independently assume the task of
maintaining national security and social stability at an
early date.

We note that, with vigorous support from the
international community, Afghanistan has made some
progress in the areas of the peace process and domestic
reconstruction. In particular, the area under opium
cultivation has been greatly reduced. That is a
significant achievement and a contribution to the
international counter-narcotics effort. The international
community should continue to increase its investment
in Afghanistan's economic reconstruction and assist the
country in the areas of agriculture, education and
health; support its effort to improve infrastructure;
promote the positive development of Afghan society;
and significantly reduce the number of destabilizing
factors in Afghan society.

We support the Organization's continued leading
and coordinating role in assisting Afghanistan in its
reconstruction. As a friendly neighbour, China will,
within its capabilities, continue to provide Afghanistan
with assistance, actively participate in its
reconstruction and work tirelessly to help it achieve
lasting peace and stability.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Norma Chan for her more than 30 years of
work at the United Nations and for her contribution to
international peace. I wish her every success in her
retirement.

