The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

First, I thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his
briefing. I express my appreciation to the Special
Envoy for his unremitting efforts to promote a political
solution to the Syrian question. Recently, there has been
positive momentum in the political arena. The leaders of
Russia, Turkey, Germany and France held the Istanbul
meeting aimed at promoting the political process, while
Special Envoy De Mistura has continued his efforts to
establish the constitutional committee. The eleventh
meeting of the Astana process will also be held soon.
The memorandum on stabilizing the de-escalation
zones in Idlib has generally been implemented, which
is conducive to creating favourable conditions for a
political settlement. However, challenges remain in
Syria.

Political negotiations are the only way out to
reach a political and durable solution in Syria. While
maintaining the United Nations as the main channel
of good offices, the international community should
continue to promote an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned process on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2254 (2015).
The focus should now be on the following three areas.

First, efforts must be stepped up to form a
representative constitutional committee that is
acceptable to all parties. A balanced approach is
required to accommodate the legitimate concerns
of the Syrian Government, so as to start an effective
and sustained political process. The United Nations,
in conjunction with leveraging the role of the Astana
process, must continue to increase its good offices to
help the parties in deepening their consultations.

Secondly, continued efforts are required to steer
Syria towards sustained stability and improvement on
the ground. The stakeholders that have influence over
the parties must make sure that the demilitarized zones
function effectively. The international community
should work together to fight terrorists and prevent
terrorist groups from staging a comeback. It is necessary
to respect and maintain the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and create a
favourable environment for the political process to
take hold. The international community should support
the return of the Syrian refugees and help with the
reconstruction of the country with a view to creating
favourable conditions for the return of refugees.

Thirdly, the Government and the opposition groups
must act on the basis of their country's future and
the fundamental interests of their people, solve their
differences and take it step by step to reach a political
settlement that reflects the conditions on the ground.
While also accommodating the legitimate concerns
of all parties, the international community should
encourage the parties to make conciliatory gestures
and enhance mutual trust. Council members must
strengthen unity and speak with one voice.

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community and will continue to play a
positive and constructive role in helping to promote
the political process, rebuild the country and improve
the humanitarian situation, so that the country and the
region can reclaim peace and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

