Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Throughout this week, we have been
addressing issues of paramount importance related to
the maintenance of peace and security. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea once again thanks and congratulates
the Swedish presidency and Foreign Minister Margot
Wallstrom for bringing to the table the issue we are
discussing this morning, namely, "Maintenance of
international peace and security: risks related to
climate change".

We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, who has been with us during these
discussions, for her briefing and reflections; Ms. Hindou
Ibrahim of the International Indigenous Peoples Forum
on Climate Change, who has presented us with a stark
vision of the reality of the effects of climate change
and the risks it poses to peace and security at the local,
national and regional levels; and the Iraqi Minister of
Water Resources, Mr. Hassan J anabi, for his illustrative
reports that make us see more clearly the complex issue
of establishing the relationship between climate change
and the maintenance of peace and security, that is, the
risks that climate change poses to the world's peace
and security.

On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, I
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency the
President of Narau, the Prime Minister of Curacao,
Kingdom of the Netherlands, and the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.

During a visit that Nigerien President Mahamadou
Issoufou made to the Lake Chad region in March 2017,
he told those accompanying him that he did not believe
that Boko Haram would have taken root without the
shrinking of Lake Chad, which has lost 90 per cent of
its surface area since the 1960s, with devastating effect
on local livelihoods and existence.

Shortly after that visit, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2349 (2017), which addressed the
multifaceted dimensions of the Boko Haram conflict.
Among its many elements, the resolution recognized
the adverse effects of climate and ecological
changes, among other factors, on the stability of the
region, including through water scarcity, drought,
desertification, land degradation and food insecurity. It
emphasized the need for by Governments and the United
Nations to undertake appropriate risk assessments and
adopt risk management strategies in relation to those
climate-related factors.

It should be recalled that in January, the Security
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
which addressed the activities undertaken by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices, and welcomed the efforts of the countries of
the region to combat terrorism and transnational crime.
The statement used the language of resolution 2349
(2017), which recognized the adverse effects of climate
change and ecological changes, among other factors,
on the stability of West Africa and the Sahel, thereby
reflecting the security implications of those factors for
the region.

For Equatorial Guinea, international peace and
security are threatened by various elements, each
representing a different challenge to the international
community. In addition to the threats posed by
political, religious and terrorist agendas, the climate
change affecting the entirety of our planet undoubtedly
presents new risks, raising those already in existence
to more dangerous and violent levels. In fact, climate
change affects basic and fundamental aspects of human
life, as we have already mentioned, such as access
to drinking water, the deterioration of land quality
to produce food, resulting in food shortages, and the
reduction of land suitable for living. All those worrying
aspects intensify the struggle among different groups
for control of scarce resources, thereby increasing
the risks and dangers of conflicts in various parts of
the planet.

Coping with climate change no longer depends
solely on scientists and academics. It has also become a
high priority political issue that needs to be addressed
frequently so as to ensure progress in achieving the
related objectives. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes and suggests that the climate issue should
be included in all reports submitted to the Security
Council on the maintenance of peace and security, as is
the issue of women and children in conflict, in order to
better understand and address the adverse implications
of climate change on various conflicts.

For Equatorial Guinea, a key question is how the
debate on this issue can contribute to the Council fully
assuming its commitment to climate change. Another
question is how to improve the analysis that the Security
Council receives on how and where climate-related
issues are a factor of conflict or insecurity. That is
why we strongly advocate the improvement of the
analyses and information on the subject provided by the
Secretary-General.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
once again congratulates Sweden on its decision to
raise this key issue and expresses its commitment to
supporting the international community's action to
combat the adverse effects of climate change.

