The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, New Zealand, Portugal
and Timor-Leste, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
2
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2008/124, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, New Zealand,
Portugal and South Africa. Members also have before
them document 8/2008/26, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Indonesia, Italy, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Panama, Russian Federation, South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Viet Nam


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1802 (2008).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
08-25099

