Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Looking at the empty seats
here in the Security Council Chamber, 1 cannot refrain
from asking: where are all of those representatives who
made such strong and emotional appeals today and
called on the Security Council to act? Why is it that the
representatives of Kuwait, Indonesia, Namibia, Senegal
and Iceland could not sit here and follow this debate
until it ends? With such heartbreaking statements, I
think that they should have stayed with us during our
important discussion.

In her remarks earlier, the Lebanese representative
quoted from different United Nations reports. I think
that I would have expected the Lebanese representative
to first read the recent reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Perhaps Lebanon should consider toning
down its rhetoric and turning up the heat on Hizbullah's
terrorist activities. Hizbullah has built an arsenal
of 120,000 rockets with the kind help of Iran, whose
representative just made another statement here. Those
rockets are located inside populated areas in southern
Lebanon as well as throughout Lebanese territory. In
operating within the population and directing attacks
against the civilian population of my country, Hizbullah
is committing a double war crime.

But I must say that I was once again touched to hear
the representative of Lebanon show such an interest
in Palestinian rights, though I would suggest that
instead of speaking empty words here, her Government
should take a look at the Palestinian refugee camps
throughout Lebanon, where Palestinians are kept in
some of the worst conditions in the region. They are
subjected to violence, discrimination, oppression and
marginalization from every sector of society.

I also found it interesting, again, as a response to
the Iranian statement, that the Iranian representative
was speaking about the Israeli occupation earlier,
although Iran is the main occupier in the Middle
East today, including in Syria and Lebanon. The
Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps is a terrorist
entity responsible for the murder of tens of thousands
of civilians in the Middle East and for terror attacks
around the world. In Lebanon, Iran is the chief sponsor
and supplier of illicit advanced weapons to Hizbullah,
in blatant violation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006). Iran is in violation of those resolutions. Iran
and its proxies, be it the Al-Assad regime, Hizbullah,
Hamas or the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, are a threat to
international peace and security.

Only in the parallel universe of a Middle East open
debate can a role model such as Saudi Arabia attack
Israel while acting with full impunity and killing tens
of thousands of civilians in Yemen while creating a
humanitarian catastrophe in that country. It is very
easy for Saudi Arabia to focus on the situation in my
country and echo empty concerns for human rights
while hiding the fact that, for example, today Saudi
Arabia carried out its first barbaric execution after a
pause for Ramadan by beheading one of its citizens.
This latest beheading brings us to 103 executions in
Saudi Arabia this year alone, a sharp increase over the
87 recorded executions during the whole of 2014.

With regard to the lengthy conspiracy theories that
we heard earlier from the representative of Venezuela,
I understand that the same culture of conspiracy is
also used for the daily and systematic persecution of
political activists and opposition members in Venezuela.
Malaysia does not hesitate to support the Hamas
terrorist organization here in the Council Chamber. It
should also be emphasized that Malaysia's support for
Hamas is also carried out on the ground. Hamas trains
terrorists on Malaysian soil with the full knowledge
of the Malaysian authorities. Hamas terrorists are
recruited and sent to Malaysia for weeklong parachute
training, in preparation for cross-border kidnapping
attacks in Israel. The support provided by a Security
Council member to a terrorist organization is an
obstacle to the resumption of our peace negotiations
and to the improvement of the lives of those whom
Malaysia claims to care about.

