Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Allow me first to
welcome you, Mr. President, to New York and to the
Security Council, and to thank you for coming here
personally to discuss this issue. We thank you for
having taken the initiative to hold today's thematic
debate, because it is truly very important to examine
the situation in West Africa from a regional
perspective. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for
their briefings.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

Post-conflict civilian and military efforts, by both
external and internal actors, are fundamental for peace
consolidation. Their aim should be to prevent the
recurrence of conflict and to establish the conditions
for durable peace and sustainable development. Such
efforts face significant political, policy, institutional
and financial challenges, particularly in Africa -
challenges that are distinct and specific to each region
of the continent.

In West Africa, we are faced with a very real lack
of coherent peace consolidation policies and strategies,
which is a key obstacle to success. Peace consolidation
efforts are considerably hampered by institutional
fragmentation, as well as by insufficient resources.
Lack of coherence and coordination in multilateral
efforts often leads to individual actors pursuing
personal interests, thereby undermining the possibility
of overall success.

In West Africa - if our figures are correct -
60 per cent of the population is younger than 30 years
of age. It is a well established fact that such young
people are frequently marginalized and unemployed
and can be easily recruited for wars. In fact, we can say
that for the past 10 years, in many parts of West Africa,
and particularly in Liberia, the biggest job provider has
been civil war. Solving this problem is a long-term
challenge which will continue to hamper peace
consolidation efforts.

We hope that many of those challenges will be
efficiently dealt with by the Peacebuilding
Commission, whose overall goal is to reduce the
chances of a country relapsing into violence after a
peace agreement. With the selection of Sierra Leone
among its first two cases, the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission indicated
the importance of West Africa in this endeavour.

Nevertheless, we consider that our approach to
these issues of peace consolidation will be more
effective if it is formulated within a regional
framework. Under such circumstances, peace
consolidation in one country is unlikely to succeed if
neighbouring countries remain at war or if peace
efforts are not harmonized.

To date, peace consolidation approaches,
instruments and funding arrangements have rarely been
tailored to address the regional nature of conflicts in
West Africa, and separate peace efforts have not been
coordinated or sequenced. The Security Council has
started to recognize this regional component and the
interaction of the various efforts undertaken in each
separate country. It is very important to coordinate the
activities of the various United Nations missions and
offices in the countries of the region so that, through
common efforts, we will manage to achieve the best
possible results. We hope that very soon the
Peacebuilding Commission will also move in that
direction and will include all the countries of the area
that are emerging from conflict in a regional strategic
effort of peace consolidation.

The emphasis of peacekeeping is on the short
term. It seeks to stabilize an immediate post-conflict
situation, provide security and monitor ceasefires and
peace agreements. Development policies, in contrast,
have a more comprehensive and long-term perspective.
Peace consolidation falls in between peacekeeping and
development, as it addresses the challenges of the
medium term, namely, to consolidate the existing peace
and build the foundations for development in the
future.

There is a short-term aspect, however, in peace
consolidation, particularly in Africa. It requires
immediate and extensive financial resources and
investment. In West Africa, insufficient funding
remains a significant obstacle to peace and
development efforts. External assistance is only a
temporary, short-term tool that should gradually fade

06-4607]
away, replaced by the building of solid foundations for
sustainable economic development in each and every
country. In West Africa, important activities in this
sector should include: the transparent and accountable
management of natural resources; combating youth
unemployment; jump-starting the economy; wealth-
sharing and the equitable distribution of resources;
long-term economic growth and investment; the
provision of health, social and educational services;
and reform of the banking and financial sectors. The
Peacebuilding Commission has to work closely with
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
national authorities and the Economic Community of
West African States in order to achieve those goals.

In conclusion, the challenges of consolidating
peace in Africa are immense, yet the benefits are truly
overwhelming. Overall, success will depend on the
provision of sufficient resources and the longevity and
strength of political commitment. It will also depend
on the application of the most appropriate elements of
peace consolidation. Finally, success will depend on
the designing of a more effective strategy in the
application of appropriate elements of regional peace
consolidation.

