Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks Joint
Special Representative Mamabolo for his briefing to
us on the situation in Darfur and on the status of the
implementation of Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
As we have stated over the past several months,
we would like to highlight again the fact that clashes
between the Sudanese Government and rebel groups
have been considerably reduced in comparison to
previous years. Although intercommunal conflicts
were noted, resolving them is nevertheless linked to the
root causes of the conflict. Strict compliance with their
unilateral declarations on the cessation of hostilities by
the Government and armed groups allows for progress
to be made in the peace process, which the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, the Joint
Special Representative and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan and the Sudan are
facilitating so diligently.

The relative calm afforded by the cessation of
hostilities must lead to bolstering the political processes
aimed at achieving peace in Darfur. The national
dialogue has allowed for advances in governance reform
with the participation of various political parties. It
is important that those new structures, which have
resulted from the national dialogue, be able to focus on
the implementation of the Doha Document. However,
it is critical to resolve differences with regard to the
Document. Implementing the provisions of the Doha
Document would allow for addressing root issues,
such as the adoption of land-related laws. Moreover, it
also provides for a permanent ceasefire involving the
armed movements and the disarmament of the civilian
population and militia, among other components, that
constitute fundamental requirements for establishing
stable and lasting peace in Darfur. We therefore call
on the movements that are not signatories to the Doha
Document to resume talks and move forward in the
political process, which represents the only way out of
the conflict in the Sudan.

Concerning progress in implementing the
recommendations set out in resolution 2363 (2017),
which we adopted several months ago, we believe that
it is crucial to work towards ensuring State presence
and strengthening the institutions and the police in
the territories from which the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) will
draw down. To carry out the reintegration processes
and ensure the security of the civilian population,
there must be constant and fluid coordination between
the Government, the United Nations country team
and UNAMID.

We also welcome Government measures to
strengthen judicial institutions - a key measure for
achieving success in the reconciliation processes and the
fight against impunity. In the same vein, we believe that
the Government's campaign to collect illegal weapons
and unlicensed vehicles in the Darfur region is a positive
step, which, despite the complications it is experiencing,
is noteworthy. Those governmental measures, which
are in line with the process of peacebuilding and being
carried out by the United Nations, require the support
of the international community.

In addition to the challenges I mentioned here, the
humanitarian situation of internally displaced persons
continues to concern us. Although there were no major
displacements this year, millions of internally displaced
persons remain exposed to various forms of violence,
among whom women and children are the main victims.
Let us hope that progress will be made in the plan
for the voluntary resettlement of internally displaced
persons. Moreover, the effects of inclement weather,
such as the flash floods in the Kalma camp, and the
spread of disease have claimed several lives since June.
We trust that the Government, as it has demonstrated
before, will ensure the necessary support for enabling
UNAMID to comply freely with its mandate and for
granting access to humanitarian workers so that they
can carry out the tasks of caring for those affected.

In conclusion, we recognize that there are many
challenges in this new phase of UNAMID, and we
would like to commend the work that has been carried
out in the Sudan over the past 10 years. Their work
and dedication in search of peace is one of the most
noble and difficult tasks in the world. We express our
gratitude to them.

