Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
should like to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this important and timely debate. I also
congratulate you on your able stewardship of the
Security Council this month. Undoubtedly, today's
debate is a welcome opportunity to underscore once
again the importance of finding a solution to the
situation in the Middle East and, in particular, the
question of Palestine.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. I also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
this morning.

Today's debate takes place against the backdrop
of the tragic events of 31 May 2010, when Israeli
forces attacked a humanitarian aid flotilla headed for
Gaza, demonstrating Israel's contempt for international
law, and therefore deserving condemnation in the
strongest possible terms. The Israeli military assault on
the aid flotilla clearly has a negative impact on the
search for a lasting solution to the challenges
confronting the region and results from the continued
illegal blockade of the Gaza strip.

In reaction to this incident, we recalled our
Ambassador to Israel for consultation and also
summoned the Israeli Ambassador to South Africa to
register the South African Government's strongest
protest at the Israeli Government's attack on the
flotilla.

The South African Government therefore calls for
the blockade of Gaza to be immediately lifted. This
blockade, which has brought untold hardships to the
10-45934
ordinary people of Gaza, has subjected Palestinians to
subhuman conditions and is both unconscionable and
unsustainable. South Africa, while noting Israel's
recent steps towards a shift in policy on Gaza,
unequivocally supports the Secretary-General's call for
an end to the blockade so that humanitarian assistance,
commercial goods and persons can flow through
functioning land crossings. The continuance of this
blockade deprives ordinary Palestinians of their rights
to cross-border trade and movement, limiting the
extent to which they can exercise their social and
economic rights and inflicting untold suffering and
collective punishment on the citizens of Gaza. The
illegal blockade of Gaza further serves to seriously
undermine the creation of an economically viable
Palestinian State.

My delegation has always stated that a long-term
solution to the challenges facing the region can be
achieved only through negotiations. For this to happen,
it is essential that a climate of mutual trust and peace
be created. South Africa notes that the internal
committee set up by the Israeli Government to probe
the Israeli attack has concluded its investigations.
Although it admits that mistakes were made by the
Israeli military, no further action was recommended.
However, South Africa reiterates its call for any
investigation to be prompt, impartial, credible and
transparent, in line with the United Nations
recommendations, and, as this action had international
ramifications, to be conducted by independent
international investigators. South Africa therefore
strongly supports the proposal of the Secretary-General
for an international investigation that would involve an
independent panel and include representatives from
Israel and Turkey to investigate this incident.

The international community cannot allow such
serious violations of international law to go
unpunished, which would only serve as a license for
further acts of impunity on the part of Israel. In this
regard, the Security Council must ensure that Israel
upholds its legal obligations under international law.
Such actions on the part of Israel, in our view, would
build the trust necessary for taking negotiations
towards a permanent solution.

My delegation notes with concern that, despite
Israel's restraint policy, settlement construction
continues in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We
therefore reiterate our call on Israel to immediately
cease the building and expansion of settlements and the
10-45934
continued demolition of Palestinian houses in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, which constitute a violation
of international law, relevant Security Council
resolutions and Israel's obligations under the Road
Map.

My delegation remains convinced that the only
viable solution to the challenges confronting the region
is a political solution based on the creation of a
permanent State of Palestine and Israel coexisting
peaceably side by side on the basis of the 1967 borders,
with Jerusalem as its capital, and the implementation of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative, as well as the Quartet
Road Map.

In this connection, my delegation is of the view
that the proximity talks between the parties should
result in credible negotiations with the objective of
finding a lasting solution to all permanent status issues.
The search for a lasting solution will require
demonstrable action on the part of all parties, and
Israel in particular as the occupier, in taking the
process forward and to achieve a lasting peace and
security in the region. Current Israeli action does little
to build confidence and has ironically served to further
frustrate attempts at achieving meaningful
negotiations.

My delegation is deeply concerned over Israel's
ongoing violations of Lebanon's sovereignty and calls
for the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
My delegation also calls on Israel to implement
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) with regard to
the Syrian Golan Heights. Only through a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East
that also addresses the Syrian and Lebanese tracks will
a durable and just peace in the region be achieved.

In conclusion, South Africa, as a product of the
solidarity of the international community, believes that
the international community owes it to the Palestinian
people to deliver them from the illegal Israeli
occupation. The resolution of this issue by and large
remains a question of political will. It will warrant
difficult decisions to be made and implemented,
particularly on the part of the Security Council. And if
the Security Council is to meet its responsibilities for
maintaining international peace and security, its
members must be prepared to take those difficult
decisions and, more important, to implement them. It
5
can no longer be business as usual when generation
after generation of Palestinians are being denied peace,
stability, freedom and respect for their human dignity.
This body must carry out its Charter obligations on the
maintenance of international peace and security and
decisively deal with this issue.

