The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Mozambique, Namibia,
Portugal, Romania, Swaziland, Sweden, Togo and
Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions ofthe Charter and rule 37 ofthe
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for External Relations of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de
Miranda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Miranda
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina), Mr. Moura (Brazil),
Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Theron (Namibia),
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Ducaru (Romania),
Mr. Nhleko (Swaziland), Mr. Schori (Sweden),
Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) and Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Richard Ryan, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning Angola.

There being no objection it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ryan to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a note
by the President of the Security Council transmitting a
letter dated 21 December 2000 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola, enclosing the final report of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Angola Sanctions, document
S/2000/1225.

I now give the floor to Mr. Richard Ryan,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning Angola.


