Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking you, Madam President, and the Nigerian
team for the calm and collected manner in which you
managed and guided the Council's work in August. We
appreciate the decision to hold this wrap-up session.
Mindful that New Zealand had intended to hold a
similar session during its presidency of the Council,
my statement will also briefly consider the Council's
work in July.

We appreciate the keen focus that Nigeria sought to
bring to certain issues during its presidency, including
to regional organizations and to the current challenges
Of global security, security sector reform, Ebola and
sexual violence in conflict, particularly in the Middle
East region, as well as the consideration of numerous
country-specific situations. In my delegation's View,
August was especially productive for the Council with
regard to its ongoing efforts to address the dire and
dismal situation in Syria. The unanimous adoption
of resolution 2235 (2015), on the establishment of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism to
identify perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian conflict is, in our View, an important step
towards establishing accountability for the perpetrators
of such Vile crimes.

On a related note, Malaysia also believes that
adoption of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/ 15),
which, inter alia, outlines the proposals by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura on the implementation of
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), presents
a unique opportunity for the Council and the Syrian
parties to work in better coordination while fully
respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria and of all other affected
States. We also reiterate that there can be no military
solution to the Syrian conflict and that all parties to the
conflict must abide by the relevant Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2165 (2014), which calls for
immediate and unhindered access for the provision of
humanitarian assistance directly to those affected by
the conflict.

At the same time, Malaysia believes that the
working methods with regard to that particular
presidential statement could have been improved.
While fully cognizant of the prerogatives of the
permanent members, we are of the view that, on this
particular issue, non-permanent members should have
been brought on board from the outset. Looking ahead,
we look forward to the operationalization of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. In that regard, we hope that
the terms of reference can be speedily agreed upon.

South Sudan was another highlight in the
month of August. We are greatly encouraged by the
constructiveness and flexibility that led to the Council's
unified stance, as reflected in presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/l6. The conclusion of the agreement to
end hostilities by all parties to the conflict in South
Sudan is an opportunity to chart a new path for the
country, and we look forward to its implementation. In
that regard, Malaysia reaffirms its support, alongside
that of other Council members, the United Nations and
other interested partners and stakeholders, for this new
start for the people of South Sudan.

The theme of sexual violence in conflict was
also the subject of the Council's attention in August:
first in the context of allegations of sexual abuse and
sexual Violence by peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (see S/PV.7500),
and subsequently in the closed briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zainab
Bangura on her recent visit to the Middle East region,
during which the horrific sexual and violence and abuse
suffered by women and girls in the context of ongoing
conflicts in Syria and Iraq was brought to light, as
reflected in the Security Council press statement
SC/l2027. On that issue, Malaysia believes that there
is a further role for the Council in ensuring that such
crimes not go unpunished.

The issue of terrorism and terrorist attacks
continues to be a scourge on international peace and
security, as evidenced by the number of attacks that the
Council has addressed in various press statements. In
that connection, my delegation wishes to offer belated
congratulations to Lithuania and Spain for successfully
organizing and hosting the special meeting of the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee held
on 28 July in Madrid.

Before concluding, allow me to briefly review the
Council's work in July under the presidency of New
Zealand.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to once again express our highest appreciation to
Ambassador Van Bohemen and the New Zealand team
for their superb handling of the Council in what was a
very busy month. As a non-permanent member of the
Council, we greatly appreciate New Zealand's efforts
to reinvigorate the Council's working methods and for
taking up difficult issues, such as the veto.

The strong and unified Council position on
resolution 2231 (2015), adopted under New Zealand's
watch, clearly demonstrated the Council's capacity to
come together. That is something we should always
aspire to achieve. Indeed, the Council's unity on the Iran
nuclear issue, South Sudan and the Joint Investigative
Mechanism in regard to Syria demonstrates the value of
dogged pursuit of diplomacy, dialogue and negotiations
with a View towards making positive, and hopefully
durable, contributions to international peace and
security.

I take this opportunity to wish Ambassador Churkin
and his team all the best in assuming the Council's
presidency in September. I Wish to reaffirm Malaysia's
commitment to engage constructively with the presidency
and all Council members with a view to discharging the
Council's mandates in the most effective and efficient
manner.

Finally, I also wish to express my delegation's
sincere condolences on the passing away of Lieutenant
General Jose Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., Force Commander of
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

