The President: As this is the first public
meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take this opportunity, on
behalf of the Security Council, to pay tribute to His
Excellency Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of November. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Cardi and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and OtherSerious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between

1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994

Note by the Secretary-General on the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2017/661)

Note by the Secretary-General on the report
of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (S/2017/662)

Letter dated 17 November 2017 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2017/971)

Letter dated 29 November 2017 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/1001)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of rocedure, I invite the
representatives of Croatia and Serbia to participate in
this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic', President of the
Republic of Croatia. I request the Protocol Officer to
escort her to a seat at the Council table.

Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic', President of the
Republic of Croatia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister
of Justice of Serbia.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2017/661, which contains a note by
the Secretary-General on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and S/2017/662,
which contains a note by the Secretary-General on the
report Organizationf the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. I also wish to draw the attention of
members to documents S/2017/97l, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 November 2017 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and S/2017/1001, which contains the text of a
letter dated 29 November 2017 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Judge Agius.


