Mr. Hachami (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express our thanks to sisterly Syria for
its effective stewardship of the Council last month.

We followed closely the briefing that Mr. Terje
Roed-Larsen gave to the Council this morning on the
most recent developments in the region, and I should
like to take this opportunity to thank him for his
efforts.

This meeting is of utmost importance in light of
the serious events in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The danger is growing daily as a result of
the Israeli Government's provocative actions, the most
recent of which was the decision in principle to remove
President Yasser Arafat from the Palestinian territories.
Even more alarming are suggestions by high-ranking
officials of the Israeli Government that there might be
more serious actions.

In that connection, Tunisia reaffirms before the
Security Council the legitimacy of the Palestinian
presidency and of the Palestinian National Authority,
and believes that any action violating that legitimacy
would further complicate the situation in the Middle
East and jeopardize the peace process in the whole
region. Therefore, Tunisia supports the Arab Group's
initiative to request that the Council convene this
meeting in order to shoulder its responsibilities in that
regard. In addition, Tunisia stresses the need for Israel
to comply with its commitments under the peace
process and under international law.

While the international community is attempting
to bring calm to the region and to salvage the peace
process, the Israeli Government persists in its policies
of besieging Palestinian cities and towns, demolishing
houses and infrastructures, extrajudicial killings, and
building the separation wall. In the light of the gravity
of the situation and the threat to security and stability
that it poses to the entire region, Tunisia reiterates the
call made by the President of the Republic of Tunisia,
His Excellency Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, at the Arab
Summit, held at Cairo in October 2000, to ensure
protection for the brotherly Palestinian people through
the deployment of international forces to separate the
parties and to monitor the ceasefire, a proposal that was
supported by many members of the international
community.

