The President: I shall now make some remarks
in my capacity as representative of the United
Kingdom.

The statement to be made later by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union will set out the overall policy to which the
United Kingdom Government subscribes.

Violence again seems to have gained the upper
hand in the Middle East. As the British Foreign
Secretary told the House of Commons on 23 July, the
Israeli air strike on Gaza City which resulted in 15
deaths and over 100 injuries was unacceptable. It was
also counterproductive.

Mr. Straw said that he recognized and understood
Israel's need to take action against suspected suicide
bombers and their accomplices. Israel was entitled to
take steps to protect itself from terrorist attack, but
those steps should be neither disproportionate nor
excessive.

The United Kingdom also believes that Israel has
obligations which it must respect under international
law, including international humanitarian law. Action
taken in self-defence must be proportionate. Israel must
avoid civilian casualties and avoid damaging civilian
property and infrastructure.

I should be clear that all acts of violence,
including by Palestinians, which indiscriminately target
civilians are completely unacceptable. They are never
justified under any circumstances or by any
explanation. We also condemn the practice of
extrajudicial killings.

The United Kingdom extends its sympathies to all
those from both communities who have lost family
members.

Ordinary Israelis and Palestinians deserve peace
and security. Violence will not provide the answer.
Peace and security can be achieved only by
negotiations. The United Kingdom will continue to
work at every level and to explore every avenue to get
that process going again.

It is important that both sides now focus their
efforts on creating the conditions necessary for a
resumption of negotiations. Negotiations to secure a
unilateral Palestinian de-escalation have been ongoing
for some time, and the United Kingdom has followed
them closely as part of our determination to help end
the cycle of violence and to restart the political
process.

We hope that, despite the acts of violence this
week, those negotiations will not falter. Indeed, the
very point of holding this debate now is to contribute
to efforts to preserve the chances of progress in
negotiations.

Both parties should respond to the challenges in
President Bush's statement and in the statement by the
"quartet" of 16 July, which the Council supported, with
the goal of a final Israeli-Palestinian settlement within
three years. The Palestinians must conduct security,
political and economic reform with an action plan
agreed by the "quartet" on 10 July, leading to a
Palestinian State committed to combating terror. The
United Kingdom stands ready to help with that.

Israel must take immediate and concrete steps to
support the emergence of a viable Palestinian State,
including easing restrictions, withdrawing to pre-28
September 2000 positions, releasing tax revenues,
freezing settlement activity and allowing free,
immediate access for international humanitarian
personnel to alleviate the worsening humanitarian
situation in the occupied territories.

As set out by European leaders at Seville last
month, our vision of the solution is an end to the
occupation and the early establishment of a democratic,
viable, peaceful and sovereign State of Palestine on the
basis of the 1967 borders, if necessary with minor
adjustments agreed by the parties. The two States
should be capable of living side by side within secure
and recognized borders enjoying normal relations with
their neighbours.

We shall need to see a fair solution to the
complex issue of Jerusalem and a just, viable and
agreed solution to the problem of the Palestinian
refugees.

There is now a remarkable degree of agreement
internationally about this vision. We are in close touch
with the United States, our European Union colleagues
and the parties about the way forward, and we will
continue to do all we can to help the parties break the
cycle of violence and restart political negotiations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

