Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this timely meeting and for
honouring us with your presence in chairing it. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his introductory statement.

International terrorism continues to pose
enormous challenges to the international community,
requiring increasingly coordinated efforts to ensure
that it is effectively prevented and countered. The
presidential statement that we are going to adopt
rightly calls for enhanced coordination among all
relevant actors, including improvements in the
cooperative work done within the United Nations
system, on the one hand, and among international,
regional and subregional organizations, including civil
society and the media, on the other. I would like to
highlight some aspects in this context that, in our view,
deserve particular attention.

First, I note the need to encourage and assist
States in developing comprehensive and integrated
counter-terrorism strategies. Those strategies must be
devoted not only to law enforcement and reactive
approaches, but also to addressing conditions
conducive to radicalization and recruitment for terrorist
purposes. The strategies therefore must include
consistent preventive efforts and measures of a
structural and cross-cutting nature. Moreover, where
such preventive approaches are concerned, we attach
great importance to the promotion of a universal
culture of mutual understanding and tolerance among
different cultures, religions and communities. In this
regard, we would like to underline the influential role
being played by the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, with its national and regional strategies
aimed at creating and nurturing a culture of inclusion
and tolerance for diversity.

Secondly, we very much value the attention given
to strengthening multilateral and bilateral technical
assistance programmes, offered upon request to the
States and regions that are most affected by terrorism.
The dimensions and seriousness of the challenges
posed to those States and regions by terrorism and
terrorist acts require, in our view, more consistent
provision of international assistance in the form
deemed most appropriate and effective. To that end, by
advancing regional solutions that are better tailored to
realities on the ground and better designed to respond
to similar challenges and to build on common strengths
and capacities, regional approaches often seem to be
the most effective framework.

Thirdly, we share the concerns expressed over the
increasing connection, in some areas of the world,
between terrorism groups and transnational organized
crime networks, including those involved in illicit arms
and drug trafficking, piracy and robbery at sea, money-
laundering and the trafficking of human beings.

Last but not least, we would like to reiterate the
particular importance of ensuring that counter-
terrorism measures fully comply with obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law. Respect for
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law is also, in our view, a very effective tool for
fighting radicalization and countering the narratives
and appeals put forth by terrorist groups.

In this regard, and specifically referring to the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on
terrorism, we are pleased to express our appreciation
for the remarkable improvements brought by the Office
of the Ombudsperson with regard to the fairness and
clarity of procedures for de-listing. Once again, we
take the opportunity to highlight the active role of the
Ombudsperson, Judge Kimberley Prost, in achieving
these goals in conformity with her mandate. In our
view, the possibility of introducing this positive step in
the framework of other United Nations sanctions
regimes merits further active consideration.

More has to be done, and in a more effective
manner, by the United Nations, including this Council,
to enhance the preventive agenda of global efforts to
counter terrorism. The United Nations retains wide
range of structures, both at Headquarters and in the
field, that in our view could be used in this area in a
more coordinated and interactive way.

We welcome all the organizational and
operational measures taken so far, but we encourage
further adjustments that could strengthen the
interaction of all the United Nations bodies engaged,
directly or indirectly, in preventive counter-terrorism
efforts. Among these measures, and as stated in several
occasions in the past, we are of the view that United
Nations political missions and political offices in the
field, which are particularly well placed to assess the
risks of terrorism and forms of violent extremism,
should be given the mandates and resources necessary
to allow them to advise and assist on appropriate
preventive efforts. They should function as a link
between the field and the relevant counter-terrorism
structures at Headquarters, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, among
others. We stand ready to engage in further thinking on
how to enhance the role and capacities of United
Nations missions and offices in strengthening this
preventive aspect of counter-terrorism.

As with many other international threats,
prevention is key to our medium- and our long-term
success in fighting terrorism.

