Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by commending the Gabonese presidency of the
Security Council and to express, Sir, through you, our
deep gratitude to the Republic of Gabon for its
initiative to organize a debate on a subject of the
utmost importance for the African continent. This
initiative is part and parcel of the valuable service that
your country has always rendered to Africa whenever
our continent has been threatened or the peace of an
African country jeopardized. The most recent visit to
New York of President Ali Bongo Ondimba, who
defended the highest causes of our continent and of
peace in the world, only supports my words.

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her briefing this morning, Mr. Costa for his
presence, and Mr. Duarte, who plays an extremely
important role in disarmament in Central Africa.

We all agree on the paradox that the African
continent produces few weapons but is beset by the
scourge of the illicit arms traffic, the consequences of
which range from massive violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law due to violence to
the phenomenon of child soldiers and the traffic in
small arms and light weapons, as well as to an almost
endless list of such phenomena as terrorist networks
and piracy in certain areas of the continent. Today, we
heard from the Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) of a
new phenomenon - the role played by fundamentalist
religious circles in the illicit traffic in small arms and
light weapons in Central Africa.

Aware of all these threats, African countries have
taken national, subregional and continental measures.
What has the African Union done? As certain previous
speakers have emphasized, the first African Union
conference on this issue - the Ministerial Conference
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons in Africa, held in
Bamako, Mali, in 2000 - adopted the African
Common Position on small arms and light weapons.
The Ministerial Conference recognized that the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons
undermines good governance and economic
development in Africa.

The Bamako Conference recommended that
certain measures be taken, inter alia, the development
and implementation of national programmes for
responsible management of light weapons, the
voluntary surrender of small arms and light weapons,
the reintegration of demobilized people, the
harmonization of legislation and the reinforcement of
subregional cooperation. The Conference also launched
an appeal for an international partnership to combat the
proliferation and illegal traffic in small arms and light
weapons. We are delighted that certain delegations,
such as that of Austria, have emphasized the
cooperation that the African Union has developed with
many partners, including the European Union and the
United Nations.

On the basis of the outcome of the Bamako
Conference, the African Union has adopted other
measures to curb illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. At the seventy-fourth session of the
Executive Board, held in Lusaka in 2001 in advance of
the adoption of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, measures were
taken enabling Africa's active participation in the
United Nation Conference held in 2001, at which the
continent defended a long-term international
partnership. Furthermore, in Windhoek, Namibia, the
African Union adopted the Common African Position
for the United Nations Conference of 2005. The
Windhoek conference requested the African Union
Commission to develop a binding legal instrument to
prevent, combat and eradicate illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. In 2006, the Executive
Council of the African Union adopted a global political
framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development, identifying mines and light weapons as
challenges to post-conflict reconstruction peace-
building. The African Union continues its endeavours
to meet its obligations in developing peacebuilding, to
which the Secretary General of ECCAS referred today.

It is clear that the adoption of good strategies and
action plans are not the main point. The main point is
their implementation. As far as Central Africa is
concerned, as we heard the Secretary General of
ECCAS say today, the region has adopted mechanisms
that should be supported, such as the Council for Peace

and Security in Central Africa. The capacities of
ECCAS itself should be strengthened, as should the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
All these strategies must continue to be developed. It is
also important for the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security in Central Africa to
enjoy the means necessary to continue to play an active
role in tune with the needs of the region. We welcome
the opening of a United Nations bureau in Central
Africa, trusting that its mission will essentially to
buttress subregional capacities.

To conclude, we believe that the issue of the
illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons must be
holistically analyzed in Central Africa. We think of the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. For several
years in that region, we have seen the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. It is therefore high
time that the phenomenon of the illicit exploitation of
natural resources be fought with the same vigour with
which we combat the illicit circulation of small arms
and light weapons.

The African Union will spare no effort to
implement all measures to make peace a daily reality
for all the sons and daughters of Africa, a dream that is
shared by countless men and women around the world
and that we must hand down to future generations. We
believe that the presidential statement to be adopted
today will contribute to that goal.

