Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First I wish to thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.

The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening
of this open debate. The Security Council has just held,
on Tuesday of this week, a ministerial meeting on the
situation in the Middle East, at which it adopted
resolution 1850 (2008). At that meeting, China's Vice
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. He Yafei, fully set out
the position and views of the Chinese Government (see S/PV.6045). Today I shall just stress the following four
pornts.

First, China welcomes the Council's adoption of
resolution 1850 (2008). At a time when the Middle
East situation is at a crucial juncture and faces many
uncertain elements, the resolution sends a strong and
clear signal for maintaining the momentum of political
negotiations on the question of the Middle East. That
demonstrates the Council's determination to push for a
lasting peace in the Middle East and its firm support
for political negotiations between Palestine and Israel.
It also reflects the broad consensus in the international
community in support of the peaceful coexistence of
two States, Palestine and Israel. We are confident that
the resolution, together with other relevant Council
resolutions, will become part of the legal framework
for a just solution of the Middle East question.
Secondly, we support the view expressed by some
countries that what is more important than the actual
adoption of the resolution is to ensure that it is
implemented. Israel and Palestine should live up to the
expectations of the international community by
persevering in and intensifying the political negotiation
process, as is called for in the resolution. We expect
both sides to overcome any obstacle to ensure that the
negotiating process is irreversible.

The Council also faces tests in that regard. The
Council should play its due role on the question of the
Middle East, especially in ensuring that its resolutions
are respected and implemented. We hope that the
Council will be more active in supporting the
negotiating process between Israel and Palestine. We
also hope that the Quartet will further strengthen
communication and coordination with the Council.

Thirdly, efforts to push for political negotiations
should be accompanied by efforts to improve the
situation on the ground and to strengthen the
Palestinian capacity. We urge Israel, as the occupying
Power, to take responsible action on the matter of
settlements. We are concerned at the plight facing the
Palestinian population in the West Bank and Gaza. We
call on the international community to continue to
provide Palestine with assistance, including
humanitarian, development and technical assistance. In
Gaza the immediate task is to ensure that the period of
calm is respected and extended. In the longer term, the
more important task is to vigorously seek ways to
strengthen the internal unity of Palestine.

Fourthly, a lasting peace in the Middle Ease is by
necessity a comprehensive peace. Achieving peace
between Syria and Israel, and between Lebanon and
Israel, is an important component of the Middle East
peace process. We expect Syria and Israel, and
Lebanon and Israel, to improve their relationships
through peace negotiations. We call on the
international community to exert greater diplomatic
efforts in that regard. The Arab Peace Initiative of 2002
has further, untapped potential. We expect the League
of Arab States and the countries of the region to play
an important role in pushing for a solution of the
Middle East question.

