Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): Ijoin previous speakers
in expressing our appreciation to Italy for convening
today's timely meeting. We also thank the Secretary-
General and other speakers for their respective briefings
and steadfast commitment to addressing the issue of
human trafficking.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption today of follow-up
resolution 2388 (2017), which will strengthen resolution
2331 (2016) in addressing heinous crimes of trafficking
in persons trapped in conflict situations.

Trafficking in persons is absolutely unacceptable
in any context. Human traffickers strip people of
their dignity and negate the respect inherent in all
humankind. My delegation wishes to briefly highlight
three aspects that we believe will make a real difference
in tackling this scourge.

First, it is imperative to strengthen cooperation and
coordination among Member States, as well as regional
and international organizations. Therefore, we call upon
Member States that have yet to ratify and implement
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its additional Protocols, which
provide the principal foundation for our concerted

actions, to do so as soon as possible.

Given the multifaceted dimensions of trafficking
in persons, which is associated with sexual violence
and funding terrorist activities, it is crucial that the
international community mobilizes complementary
legal means to investigate, disrupt and dismantle
trafficking networks. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
bodies, as well as bilateral partners, to provide technical
support to Member States to build and enhance their
law enforcement capacities.

As a country of destination and transit, we
have learned that cooperation and coordination
with neighbouring countries and the international
community are essential in our common efforts to
combat this ugly scourge. In that regard, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has taken a
unified commitment to combat and prevent trafficking
in persons through the implementation of the ASEAN
Convention Against Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, and its related plan of actions,
adopted in November 2015. We also appreciate the
strong support for such regional-level efforts by our
East Asia Summit partners, as reflected in the Summit
declarations adopted recently in September 2017.

Secondly, the Council must better utilize its
available tools to monitor trends in human trafficking
in armed conflict areas, identify perpetrators and hold
them accountable. Information on and evidence of
acts of trafficking in persons and sexual violence in
conflicts should be made available to the Council and
channelled to the relevant sanctions committees.We
support integrating into the work of the 1267 Monitoring
Team and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate a focus on addressing trafficking in persons
and the use of sexual violence in armed conflict where
there are clear linkages to terrorist activities.

At the same time, the crucial outreach and
advocacy roles of both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict must be better leveraged.
We call for the Council's continued engagement with
those envoys, including through the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict and the various
sanctions committees.

Finally, I would like to emphasize the need for
support for victims and survivors of trafficking and
sexual violence to help them return to a secure and
stable life. Women and children subjected to any
violations and abuses, including trafficking and sexual
violence at the hands ofDa'esh, Boko Haram and similar
groups, should be considered victims and given access
to funding and assistance. In that respect, the roles
of the local communities, civil society and religious
leaders are pivotal in ensuring the reintegration and
rehabilitation of survivors and in eliminating the
stigma that can be associated with the ordeal that they
have been through.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's
enduring resolve to combat and eradicate trafficking
in persons, and our equally strong commitments to
continuing to work with the international community
until we bring an end to those crimes against humanity.

