Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings delivered by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and Commissioner Sma'il Chergui.

We would like to begin by recognizing the
commitment, vision and unity ofAfrican States in taking
on their responsibility to prevent and resolve conflicts
on their continent, and to highlight their development of
a comprehensive legal basis, administrative structures
and coordination mechanisms based on Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. All of that fosters
synergies and complementarity between the United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council, and
the African Union and subregional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community, with the
shared aim of institutionalizing and making the peace
and security architecture in Africa more effective. For

example, the African peacekeeping missions can benefit
from the accumulated experience of the Council's
peacekeeping operations in the areas of planning, the
verification of aims, compliance with humanitarian
and human rights standards and accountability. In that
regard, we commend the recent African Union policy
documents on conduct and discipline and preventing
and responding to sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
missions. We would like to especially highlight the
best practices on fighting terrorism developed by the
regional operations in Burundi, the Sudan, Somalia and
the Sahel, which constitute an essential complement to
their respective United Nations missions.

We underscore the importance of having flexible
coordination mechanisms to enhance complementarity
between the various operational and geographical
dimensions and the synergies arising from greater
awareness of the circumstances and needs of the
regional actors on the ground. In that connection,
we would like to encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and other bodies in the United
Nations system to continue working closely with the
African Union in the framework of a strategic alliance
for developing policies and strategies for African
peacekeeping missions. To that end, it is important to
ensure coordination, joint visits and the annual meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council,
in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) and the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. In that regard, the recent Declaration of Shared
Commitments on the action plan for the maintenance of
peace reminds us of the importance of clearly defining
roles and tasks.

The United Nations can play a complementary role
by providing logistical and organizational support in
the areas where regional organizations take the lead.
We believe that we could explore the alternative of
temporarily assigning United Nations staff to offices
of the African Union. We also believe it is important
for the United Nations to support African development
and capacity-building, as well as the efforts of African
States to ensure predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding for peacekeeping operations by facilitating
their access to potential contributors. We emphasize
that ensuring adequate funding for such operations is
crucial if they are to achieve their targets and maintain
reserve forces that can deploy rapidly and in a timely
manner in the face of emerging threats. We stress that
developing regional capacities for prevention would
bring the Council significant savings in its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. In that regard, we also underscore the
importance of being able to rely on capacities for
analysing risks and conflicts and for mediation, and
in general for developing inclusive, transparent and
accountable institutions that can tackle the root causes
of conflicts and build sustainable peace.

In conclusion, we emphasize that it is crucial to
the effectiveness of all those tasks that we promote
the greater participation of women at all levels, and
especially in leadership roles and in interactions with
communities affected by conflict. Lastly, we would like
to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets who sacrificed their
lives in the past few weeks in the service of international
peace and security.

