The President (interpretation from French): At the
outset of the meeting, I should like, on behalf of the
Security Council, to express deep sympathy to the
Government and people of the United States of America in
connection with the tragedy they experienced as a result of
the bombing incident at the Olympic Games in Atlanta
early on Saturday morning.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ndikumana
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council regrets that both civilian
and military leaders of Burundi did not resolve their
differences through established constitutional
mechanisms and condemns the actions that led to the
overthrow of constitutional order in Burundi.

"The Security Council calls upon all Burundian
leaders to respect the Burundi constitution and the
will of the people of the country. The Council urges
the military leaders of Burundi to restore
constitutional government and processes, including
the continuation of the elected National Assembly
and civil institutions and respect for human rights.
The Council stresses that the present situation in
Burundi requires utmost restraint and calls upon all
concerned to refrain from any actions and statements
which could provoke further escalation of the crisis.

"The Security Council calls upon all Burundian
parties and leaders to halt all violence and engage
immediately in concerted efforts to achieve a lasting
national settlement and reconciliation. The Council
stresses their responsibility to protect the lives of all
persons, including President Ntibantunganya, Prime
Minister Nduwayo and members of their
government, and expects them to maintain
democratic institutions and to enter into negotiations
for a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for regional mediation efforts, including those of
former President Nyerere and the Organization of
African Unity.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.40 pm.

