Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, wish to thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing. I also thank
Ms. Aisha Khurram, who gave us an opportunity to
hear the voice of the youth of Afghanistan, as well
as Ambassador Adela Raz of Afghanistan, who, as
usual, very eloquently advocated on behalf of her
country. I would also like to commend Mr. Yamamoto's
commitment to an Afghanistan on the road to lasting
peace and thank him for his constant efforts.

Afghanistan will not be able to take that path
alone. The international and regional commitments to
the Afghan people must be unified and unfailing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) is the embodiment of that support on the
ground. Under the leadership of Mr. Yamamoto,
UNAMA has made outstanding progress in the area of
human rights, in particular in women's rights, and the
path to democracy. We must maintain that progress.

As we await the results of the 28 September election,
I would first like to commend the men and women of
Afghanistan for the courage they showed in braving the
threats to go to the polling stations. Although certainly
lower than in previous elections, the level of electoral
participation was nevertheless encouraging, and
despite the technical difficulties, we can conclude that
the voting process was satisfactory.

But that is only a first step. The credibility of the
elections now depends on the results being announced
and accepted by all of the candidates. To that end,
the vote-counting process must be transparent. The
Independent Election Commission must communicate
more openly and systematically throughout the entire
vote-counting process in order to build that trust and
prepare for a conclusive announcement of the results.
The next Government can best ensure its success by
peacefully and democratically accepting the results.
The latter will have the difficult task of leading the
inter-Afghan peace process.

In order to ensure lasting results, that process must
be inclusive and leave no segment of the population
behind. In order to ensure lasting peace, we will also
need to maintain the gains made in the areas ofjustice,
the rule of law and respect for fundamental freedoms,
particularly the rights and freedoms of Afghan
women, which Ambassador Raz has been eloquently
defending here at the United Nations. In that regard,
I commend her, as well as Ambassador Pierce, on
their successful launching of the Group of Friends of
Women in Afghanistan, in which I am very honoured
to participate.

Further progress is also needed to improve
governance, eliminate corruption and combat drugs.

The continued elevated levels of violence in
Afghanistan remain a source of constant concern for
my country. Civilian casualties have reached their
highest level since 2009, as Mr. Yamamoto just recalled.
Combating terrorism must remain a priority. We have
just renewed the mandate of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, and the commitment of
the United Nations alongside the Afghan people in the
fight against terrorism must continue.

In that context, it is important that the discussions
between the United States and the Taliban lead to
a significant reduction in the violence in order to
make it possible to establish a ceasefire during future
inter-Afghan peace negotiations.

The civilian population, in particular women
and children, continue to pay a high price, which is
unacceptable. The attack on 3 December in Jalalabad
that killed Dr. Tetsu Nakamura, founder and senior
official of the non-governmental organization Peace
Japan Medical Services, as well as five Afghans, is
shocking, and France condemns it in the strongest
terms. International humanitarian law must be upheld,
and we are duty-bound to ensure that it is respected.
Humanitarian and medical personnel must be protected,
as must civilian and humanitarian infrastructure,
and unimpeded humanitarian access must be ensured
throughout Afghan territory.

Humanitarian response is essential but insufficient.
We also must heed and fully take into account the
aspirations of Afghan young people, as expressed
strongly by Ms. Aisha Khurram. The most important
aspiration of young Afghans is an end to violence as
well as lasting peace, which will require a just and
inclusive process based on respect for the rights of all
and for basic equality between men and women. France,
which has long-standing and deep ties with the great
country of Afghanistan, will not waver in its support
for Afghanistan's efforts to achieve that goal.

We around this table have converging goals and
messages, which is key. Indeed, it is our goal and our
common responsibility here in the Security Council to
create conditions conducive to peace and security, which
will make it possible for young people in Afghanistan
to take charge of their own destiny and together build
a better future.

