Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to thank
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), for their clear and thought-provoking
presentations on the issue of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I would also like to associate myself
with the statement to be delivered later in the debate by
the United Kingdom delegation on behalf of the
European Union.

In the day-to-day work of the United Nations, we
sometimes seem to forget the overarching purpose of
our efforts. We are here to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in the dignity
and worth of the human person and to establish
conditions under which justice can be maintained. That
is our purpose, our raison d'etre. And that is why
Denmark believes that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is one of the most important thematic
issues on the agenda of the Security Council. We, the
peoples of the United Nations, must act to ensure the
protection of our fellow human beings, in particular
during armed conflicts. That is a responsibility that we
have not always been able to live up to. We need to
enforce the so-called culture of prevention that the
Secretary-General has called for.

In that regard, I would sincerely like to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for providing the
Council with such a strong and comprehensive draft
resolution on the protection of civilians. It includes a
number of indispensable measures and forward-looking
elements for the future work of Council, and of the
United Nations as a whole. We look forward to its
early introduction and adoption.

As clearly demonstrated in the Secretary-
General's latest report on this item (S/2005/740), the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of great complexity. Only by taking a multifaceted
and comprehensive approach - including legal,
political and socio-economic measures - can we fully
address the great number of problems related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. As recognized
by our heads of State and Government at the 2005
world summit, peace, security, development and human
rights are interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and
they are the foundations for collective security and
well-being.

The report identifies a number of general trends
that affect the lives of civilians in conflict. Indeed, the
list of trends is sobering reading. The armed conflicts
of today unleash their full wrath not on the opposing
army, but on the civilian population, in clear violation
of all rules and principles of international law.

However, the report also provides a number of
valuable recommendations for measures and actions
that the Security Council can take to strengthen and
improve its response to the protection needs of
civilians in armed conflict. Denmark fully supports
those recommendations. Allow me in that regard to
address two key points of particular importance to the
future work of the Security Council and the United
Nations system as a whole: the "responsibility to
protect" and the fight against impunity.

The 2005 world summit outcome underlined that
each individual State has the responsibility to protect
its populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. That is not an
obligation to be taken lightly.

Unfortunately, recent history demonstrates that
national authorities sometimes are either unwilling or
unable to provide the required protection. Should the
international community, confronted with such
manifest failings, just sit back and allow a new
Srebrenica or Rwanda to unfold before our eyes? The
answer to that question is obvious and was fully
addressed by our heads of State and Government at the
summit.

One of the keystones in the fulfilment of the
purposes of the United Nations is for the international
community to take appropriate action to protect
civilian populations. The United Nations Charter
provides a clear framework for our response. We have
a responsibility to use all peaceful means to provide
sufficient protection, but if those means fail, it is our
responsibility to use all necessary and available
means- including collective action in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter - to put an end to
ongoing acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. It is not just something
we can consider doing - it is something we must do.

There can be no real peace without real justice.
An armed conflict is not fully concluded before those
responsible for atrocities committed against the civilian
population are brought to justice. The Security Council
must continue to explore ways and means to fight
impunity. A number of international mechanisms,
including the International Criminal Court, are in
place. Universal legal protection standards already
exist, and while all States are free to choose which
international instruments they wish to become parties
to, it is key that we use all means at our disposal to
ensure that justice prevails. The Security Council
should continue to discuss all those issues as part of
our discussions on the strengthening of international
law.
As we move forward in our efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict, the 10-point platform of
action presented earlier to the Security Council by Mr.
Jan Egeland should guide the work of the United
Nations as a whole. We need to take effective measures
to implement those points of action.

We must ensure safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to civilians in need. We must
improve the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. The protection of internally displaced
persons and refugees is crucial; we already have a plan,
the Agenda for Protection, which requires our attention
and implementation. Finally, we must in all our efforts
pay particular attention to the special protection
requirements of women and children and take all

necessary measures to put an end to the systematic and
widespread sexual violence committed against women
and girls in armed conflicts.

Real change starts at home. Thus, real
improvements on all of those issues should start in our

daily Work in the Security Council. Denmark stands
ready to adopt a strong and forward-looking resolution
and to work for its full implementation for the benefit
of the millions of civilians trapped in armed conflict.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15p.m.
