Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honore for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and
acknowledge the significant contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
alongside the Government and the people of Haiti,
in rebuilding the country, in particular in the face of
natural disasters and the ongoing cholera epidemic.
While there is still much work to be done, significant
progress continues to be made, and the past six months
is no exception in that regard.

We believe that Haiti's long-term stability depends
on three key factors: ensuring security, for which there
is a clear need; strengthening governance institutions
and the rule of law; and improving the lives of Haiti's
citizens through an effective response to humanitarian
crises and the promotion ofsocioeconomic development.

On the development side, the Secretary-General's
most recent report (S/2014/617) records encouraging
advances. We commend the Secretary-General's
leadership of the United Nations efforts to eliminate
cholera in Haiti, and we note that rates are declining.
We welcome the Secretary-General's recent visit
to Haiti, where he launched the $2.2-billion total
sanitation campaign with Prime Minister Lamothe,
which aims over 10 years to scale up sanitation and
hygiene interventions in rural areas, in particular. It is
important that the international community continue to
support the United Nations and humanitarian partners
to completely eradicate cholera in Haiti.

It is also pleasing to note that Haiti has nearly
reached several of the Millennium Development Goals
ahead ofthe 2015 deadline. Among other achievements,
Haiti has seen a steady boost in enrolment rates in
primary education from 47 per cent in 1993 to nearly
90 per cent, achieving equal participation by boys and
girls in education. Haiti has also halved the number of
underweight children under five years. Infant mortality
has decreased by 44 per cent since 1990. The percentage
of households that have access to water has increased
significantly but still only two-thirds have such access.
That is a vital need. Weak water, sanitation and health
systems are enabling cholera, acute diarrhoea or other
water borne diseases to persist. That will require
sustained attention.

The holding of elections remains a crucial step
towards the strengthening of governance in Haiti. In
that regard, we have not seen the progress that has been
sought. In January last year, the Council issued a press
statement (SC/10901) calling for the holding offree, fair,
inclusive and credible elections by the end of 2013. At
that point, elections were already long overdue. Almost
two years have elapsed since that statement by the
Council, and we are in the midst of our fourth Council
debate on Haiti during that period. On each occasion,
the Council has called for elections to be held. Yet the
people of Haiti are still waiting for them to take place.

The holding of elections by January 2015 is not only
essential for the continuity ofParliament but also critical
to Haiti's recovery, reconstruction and development.
Prime Minister Lamothe's refrain that "Haiti is open
for business" is not as credible as it might be while the
political process is stalled. Political stability is essential
to the long-term socioeconomic development of Haiti.
We strongly urge all political actors in Haiti, including
President Martelly and members of the Senate, to put
aside their differences and to ensure the holding of
elections by January 2015.

Some progress has been made on the security front.

We agree with the Secretary-General's characterization
during his recent visit that the Haitian National Police is
the backbone of security in Haiti. The Haitian National
Police must continue to take on increasingly greater
responsibility for security in Haiti, with the United
Nations police focused on its mentoring role and acting
as backup only when essential, as Special Representative
Honore has said. The use of MINUSTAH's military
component to respond to security incidents should be
a last resort.

We commend MINUSTAH's ongoing efforts to
train police officers to prevent and to respond to sexual
and gender-based violence and its efforts to extend that
training to judges and prosecutors. We urge the Haitian
Government to continue to work with MINUSTAH
to increase efforts to support the prevention of such
violence, to strengthen the judicial process and to
ensure respect for the rights of victims. The increased
capacity of the Haitian National Police has allowed the
Secretary-General in his report to recommend a two-
step drawdown of MINUSTAH, with the first step being
a 53-per cent reduction in the military component. We
support the renewal of the MINUSTAH mandate for
one year at this level. Any further drawdown should be
conditional on further progress on the ground.

Australia agrees with the conclusions of the strategic
assessment review that it would be premature to end
MINUSTAH's presence before presidential elections
have taken place in 2015 and a new Government
is in place. The Mission will continue to play an
important role even as Haitian authorities take on more
responsibility. We encourage MINUSTAH to continue
to work to assist Haiti in building on the security and
development gains it has made.

