Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Unon.
I should like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.

Croatia welcomes the adoption of today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) and the
Security Council's strong focus on the ever-increasing
threat of terrorism and violent extremism.

It is obvious that no State can consider itself
immune to from this threat, which has many forms
and is carried out with total disregard for moral norms
and legal constraints. We need unified action in order
to respond adequately, efficiently and in a timely
manner. In that regard, we support and encourage the a
regular sharing of best practices by the United Nations
system and Member States, especially in terms of the
implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014).

It is our strong belief that the United Nations needs
to play a central role in global counter-terrorism efforts.
The United Nations has a variety of tools that can be
used to tackle this issue, be it from the suppressive or
preventive angles. However, we believe that there is still
untapped potential when it comes to dealing with the
conditions conducive to the development and spreading
of violent extremism and radicalization that may lead
to terrorism.

Decisive law-enforcement measures - as well as,
when needed, military operations - are a necessary
part of the efforts in the fight against terrorism.
Nevertheless, the fact that there is a growing number
of foreign terrorist fighters shows that the threat of
imprisonment or even the possible loss of life may not
be sufficient deterrents to discourage future terrorists.
Therefore, we should avoid a simplistic approach
that puts emphasis only the security dimension while
neglecting all other aspects. There is an apparent need
for an integrated approach that incorporates political,
social, economic, environmental and security aspects.

By addressing issues such as political and social
discrimination, exclusion and marginalization and the
lack of economic or any other prospects, we are making
the environment less fertile for further recruitment
of new terrorists. By spreading and nurturing
education, knowledge, mutual tolerance, interfaith and
intercultural understanding and respect among peoples,
we can inflict a significant blow on the misleading
narratives and ideologies of violent extremism and
terrorism.

We believe that special attention should be paid to
the ways and means of incorporating counter-terrorism
programmes within peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.

We see that terrorist influence can spread fast,
particularly in areas that have suffered the dire
consequences of armed conflicts. Terrorists thrive in
the absence of efficient and legitimate Governments.
The lack of good governance and the rule of law
provides the ultimate environment for radicalization.
Terrorists easily find safe havens and recruiting grounds
in contexts of prolonged or unresolved conflicts where
human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy
are constantly at risk or non-existent.

We therefore support the calls for mainstreaming
counter-terrorism programmes throughout the United
Nations agenda, both security- and non-security-
related. We welcome the significant results already
achieved in that regard, but we believe that we should
ensure greater cooperation, coordination and coherence
within the United Nations system, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations.

Universal threats such as terrorism require
a collective response, including developing new
conventions and protocols against terrorism. Data-
sharing and strategic communication networks are also
important parts of international cooperation in this
area.

Furthermore, we would like to highlight the
important role of civil society, the private sector,
religious authorities and the media in promoting
tolerance and respect for religious and cultural
diversity, which contributes to preventing terrorism.
Each Member State should seek to find the best way
to effectively empower them and engage for this cause.

In today's world, the Internet can have a very
important role in spreading violent extremist messages.
However, it can also be an important tool to counter
the appeal of terrorism and to reach out to younger
generations who might be susceptible to radical
propaganda. We believe that it is worth further
exploring the potential of the Internet as a platform for
deradicalization.

Allow me to assure you, Sir, that Croatia is firmly
committed to the goal of preventing and suppressing
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations at the
national, regional and global levels. In that we are
guided by the principles and values set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other relevant
international legal instruments.

