Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar, Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, for her briefing to the Security Council. We
appreciate her tireless efforts and those of her team
with regard to the crisis in Myanmar, especially the
Rohingya refugee crisis. We also welcome Mr. Shahidul
Haque, Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.
The Rohingya refugee crisis enters its eighteenth
month as we meet today. Those refugees ran for
their lives after having been eye witnesses to crimes
committed against their relatives and neighbours. We
grow increasingly concerned as the crisis persists,
particularly because multiple minorities continue to
seek refuge from Rakhine state in Bangladesh, given
the deteriorating security situation in different parts of
Myanmar. That represents a serious threat and might
deteriorate further and thus place a greater burden on
neighbouring countries, especially Bangladesh, which
has generously welcomed more than 1 million refugees
in the city of Cox's Bazar.

We are monitoring the developments of this issue
and are fully committed to supporting Myanmar and
Bangladesh to overcome the crisis. Our diplomacy
is based on humanitarian action. That is Why we
constructively contributed to organizing and carrying
out a mission for the Council to Bangladesh and
Myanmar, jointly headed by Peru and the United
Kingdom at the end of April 2018.

As a member of the Council and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, my country seeks to ensure
that Myanmar implements the requirements set forth
by the international community. We have noted that the
Government of Myanmar has taken a number of steps
to solve this humanitarian crisis since the end of the
Council's mission, including holding meetings between
officials from Bangladesh and Myanmar, signing
memorandums of understanding and establishing an
investigative mechanism regarding violations of human
rights. Those are good, positive steps, but they have yet
to be implemented.

The requirements and steps set forth by the Security
Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
as well as the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, are clear and specific.
They aim to address the root causes of the crisis, end
the suffering of refugees and ensure their voluntary,
safe and dignified return to their homes in Myanmar.
The recommendations include closing all internally
displaced persons camps; allowing all those in Rakhine
state to move freely, safely and unhindered; allowing
United Nations agencies and partners unconditional
access to all parts of Rakhine state; taking the
necessary measures to combat incitement to violence
and hatred, while ensuring peace and harmony among
all communities under the rule of law; conducting
independent and transparent investigations into
crimes and violations committed against the Rohingya
minority in Rakhine state; eliminating the root causes
of the Rohingya minority crisis without discrimination
and regardless of race or religion, while granting
them their inherent right to citizenship, as stressed in
General Assembly resolution 72/248, which calls for
granting full citizenship to the Rohingya minority; and,
lastly, starting comprehensive socioeconomic reforms,
while making efforts to address the root causes of the
Rohingya refugee crisis.

Kuwait stresses the need for the Council to closely
monitor this crisis in order to urge and encourage the
Government of Myanmar to engage constructively
towards reaching a comprehensive, just and definitive
solution that would grant the Rohingya minority
their right to citizenship, while ensuring their safety
and respect for all their human rights. We welcome
the efforts made by neighbouring countries in their
dialogue with Myanmar. We thank them for those
efforts, which complement other efforts by the
international community.

As we are moving to informal consultations after
this meeting, I will stop at this point and add further
comments and enquiries during consultations in the
closed meeting. However, before concluding, I sincerely
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over the Council
this month. Your presidency has been exceptional. We
also wish all the best to France and the French delegation
in presiding over the Council during March.

