Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy de Mistura for his comprehensive briefing.
As he ends his highly meritorious service, I would
like to express to him and his team our most sincere
gratitude on behalf of Kazakhstan for their efforts
and commitment to achieving enduring peace in
Syria. We greatly appreciate the Special Envoy's
outstanding engagement, as demonstrated in the
intensive consultations to convene a credible and
balanced United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and
-led constitutional committee. Mr. de Mistura's work
has been monumental. He has left his mark and legacy,
and we all greatly appreciate his efforts. He has built
a strong foundation for his successor to build upon.
We wish the new Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, every
success on his important assignment.

At present, the contours of a peaceful life in Syria
are becoming increasingly clear. We therefore consider
it to be very important to continue to work on the
establishment of a constitutional committee. It is not an
easy task, but we must patiently and consistently keep
at it, because there is no alternative. The committee
would enable the drafting ofa new basic law for Syria.

In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by
Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy for Syria, who this
week hosted high-level representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Turkey in Geneva to discuss the possibility
of establishing a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee. It is essential that all parties
involved provide maximum support for the earliest
formation of a Syrian constitutional committee. Those
consultations have made a significant contribution to the
political settlement in Syria as a follow up to the Sochi
final statement of 30 January, which is in line with the
Geneva process to implement Council resolution 2254
(2015). Astana believes that we can ensure the necessary
package of arrangements for a credible, balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee. That would also
include a balanced arrangement for chairing, drafting
and ensuring electoral viability.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General
appreciates the value of the Astana process and its
invaluable work, especially among the guarantors
themselves and with the representatives of the
Syrian opposition. The Secretary-General has
also acknowledged the importance of other high-
level meetings, including the Da Nang statement of
11 November 2017 and the Istanbul Declaration of
27 October 2018.

We believe that the only way to create peace in
Syria is to establish a comprehensive political process
under the leadership of the Syrians themselves, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also
believe that the Astana process has yielded positive
results aimed at strengthening the ceasefire and the
monitoring mechanism and has laid the foundation for
further political settlement in the framework of the
Geneva talks.

Kazakhstan commends the successful fight against
international terrorism and the destruction of the
combat potential of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other organizations in Syria. The chances
for a peaceful resolution of the crisis that has engulfed
Syria increase with the victory over terrorism. We all
agree that despite the stabilization and reduction of
escalation, the current situation in Syria requires the
increased attention and consolidated efforts of the
entire international community.

To conclude, even as we step down as a member
of the Council, Kazakhstan remains committed to a
peaceful resolution of the Syrian crisis and is hopeful
that the negotiation process in Geneva will succeed in
restoring peace and stability in Syria. We will continue
to do our best through the Astana process. We are
confident that the settlement of the Syrian conflict
has no military solution. We echo the United Nations
concerns that a full-scale escalation of hostilities in the
area must be averted at all costs. We are ready to work
with new Special Envoy Geir Pedersen to that end.

