Mr. Karzai (Afghanistan): It is a great privilege to
address the Security Council. I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, and the Government of Kazakhstan
for bringing us together for this important meeting on
Afghanistan and Central Asia. We consider today's
meeting an important initiative on an issue of strategic
relevance for peace and stability in Afghanistan and
our broader region. We also thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his insightful briefing.

I am pleased to recognize the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of our Central Asian
neighbouring States and other partner countries. The
high-level representation at this meeting signifies a
personal commitment to the imperative of securing
lasting peace and stability in my country, for which we
are deeply grateful.

Today's meeting comes just days after the Security
Council's visit to Afghanistan. The visit was an
opportunity to discuss, broadly, a number of important
issues, ranging from security, development and
regional cooperation, to governance, human rights and
democratization. We are confident that the outcome of
the visit will contribute positively to strengthening the
international community's engagement, cooperation
and consensus on Afghanistan.

One issue highlighted in the visit concerns the topic
on which we are meeting today: that Afghanistan's
stability and development should not be seen in isolation
from security and stability in the countries on our
periphery and beyond. In that regard, the imperative of
deepened cooperation between Afghanistan and Central
Asian States on common challenges and promoting our
shared prosperity has gained new impetus.

Afghanistan has always recognized the importance
of our relations with all regional countries, especially
those of Central Asia. Those bonds have endured on
the basis of mutual respect for each other's territorial
integrity, shared interests and common affinities of
culture and history.

Despite those positive attributes, over recent years
we have missed opportunities to expand the scope of
our cooperation for common security, development and
prosperity. Nevertheless, the past year has seen new
dynamism take shape in our cooperation with Central
Asian countries. That is based on the firm commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan to increasing
collaboration across multiple fields and sectors, such
as regional connectivity, energy, trade and transit,
security cooperation, agriculture and in the cultural
and educational spheres.

That new dynamic is manifested in a series of
high-level visits to the Central Asian region in 2017 by
the leadership of the Afghan Government. Last July,
President Ghani visited Ashgabat and met with Turkmen
President Gubanguly Berdimuhamedow. In August,
Chief Executive Abdullah visited Astana and met
with the Kazakh Prime Minister. And just last month,
President Ghani paid a visit to Tashkent, where he held
wide-ranging discussions with his Uzbek counterpart,
President Shavkat Mirziyoyev, and signed more than
20 different memorandums of understanding.

Those visits have helped set in motion a new era of
engagement, interaction and cooperation on a common
agenda for our security, economic development and
integration, as well as strengthening people-to-
people ties.

We all know that prosperity is not possible in the
absence of security - a fundamental requirement in
any society. Terrorism and violent extremism lie at the
forefront of the interlinked challenges threatening the
security and stability of Afghanistan and the region.

Our fight against terrorism is being conducted
on behalf of the region and the world at large. We are
making enormous sacrifices in that struggle in terms
of human lives, ordinary civilians and our security
forces alike. Despite all the challenges, our forces
have made progress in pressing violent militants and
terrorists, including the Taliban, the Haqanni Network,
Al-Qaida, Da'esh and the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, among others. In the past 10 months alone,
our security forces have carried out more than 2,000
security operations nationwide, which have resulted in
major losses among violent militants, including foreign
terrorist fighters from the region and beyond who come
to fight in Afghanistan.

We are pleased to note that the imperative of
addressing the problem of regional terrorist sanctuaries
and safe-havens is now recognized more than ever
before. That issue was loudly communicated by a broad
spectrum of Afghan society during the Council's visit
to Afghanistan last week.

Experience has shown that terrorism impacts all of
us, and the task of eliminating it lies beyond the capacity
of any single country. It requires a comprehensive
effort. In the context of our joint endeavours, we must

prevent the radicalization of our youth, and identify
and prevent the problem of cross-border terrorism and
criminal and other illegal activities.

We must also work together to overcome the problem
of illicit drugs. Progress in addressing that threat will
be possible only throughjoint and collaborative efforts,
focused on all aspects of the challenge, including
production, demand, trafficking of chemical precursors
and consumption.

We have engaged in comprehensive efforts to
improve security and defeat terrorism. Beyond the
scope of military efforts, we are working to ensure
success in our peace efforts with elements of the armed
opposition. On 28 February, we will convene the second
meeting of the Kabul Process, where we will present to
the international community our way forward for peace
and combating terrorism. We count on the full support
and endorsement of all Process partners, including
from Central Asian States.

The Kabul Process gathering will precede the
Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan in late March,
which we will co-host with the Government of
Uzbekistan. In that regard, we wish to highlight that
all such initiatives should serve to reinforce Afghan-
led and -owned peace efforts, under the Kabul Process,
which remains the overarching framework.

On the margins ofthe Tashkent Conference, we also
plan to hold the first meeting of the C5+Afghanistan.
The C5+1 cooperation framework for Afghanistan and
Central Asia is an important new regional initiative
that will maintain sustained dialogue across a broad
spectrum ofareas. The United Nations will undoubtedly
have a role to play in the Process.

Today's meeting also serves to underscore that the
dangerous nexus facing Afghanistan and the region
can and must be addressed only if existing efforts are
integrated and the peace, security and development
pillars are woven together. That imperative lies at the
core of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, an Afghan-
led initiative, which most Central Asian countries are
part of. That will remain a key focus as we work to
increase our cooperation with Central Asian countries
through various platforms, including the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, in which we hope to gain
full membership soon.

We also see additional potential for cooperation
with the United Nations Regional Centre on Preventive
Diplomacy (UNRCCA) in multiple areas. In that context,
we welcome the outcome of the imnisterial meeting on
security and development convened in November by the
Government of Uzbekistan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the UNRCCA. Efforts under
those formats will help us overcome issues of common
concern. In that connection, we are of the view that
any regional approach should harmonize and help to
consolidate existing international efforts for security
and stability in Afghanistan.

Another central theme in our discussion today
concerns the crucial way in which the development
agenda helps propel security. That is a key principle
guiding international efforts to stabilize conflict
situations worldwide. Afghanistan is clearly
no exception.

Over the past three years, the Afghan Government
has worked tirelessly to advance economic cooperation
towards a new horizon. We have done so through the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference, which
has seen unprecedented progress since its inception
in 2005.

The past year has seen many notable achievements,
but none as striking as the gains made in the area of
regional economic cooperation. What we envisioned a
few years ago is now truly taking shape and becoming a
reality. Projects such as the Lapus Lazuli Corridor and
Five Nations Railway, connecting China, the Kyrgyz
Republic, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Iran, will have
a profound impact on increasing connectivity and
boosting the movement of goods, ideas and people.

We also made headway in 2017 in the
implementation of other mega-projects, such as the
electricity and natural gas initiatives 4 the Central
Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission Trade Project
and the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
gas pipeline project. Moreover, the Chabahar Port is
now operational, thus increasing the flow and trade
of goods. Over the course of the year, we will work to
make further progress on those initiatives, the benefits
of which are far-reaching and not only help boost trade
and transit but also facilitate the exchange of new and
innovative ideas for our common prosperity, in line
with the related Sustainable Development Goals.

In conclusion, our gathering here today draws our
attention to the unique opportunity that lies before
us - an opportunity to shift the dynamic and transform
the nexus of regional, threats such as instability,
terrorism and other criminal activities, into a nexus of
peace, security, economic growth and development for
our prosperity. In that regard, we believe a new start
towards regional engagement and convergence has
begun. It is up to us to do our share and transform that
new vision into reality. Afghanistan stands confident
that our endeavour will succeed.

