Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset, on
behalf of my delegation, to express our sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, and the members of the
Security Council for convening this public meeting on
the report of the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) regarding its overall work and the Monitoring
Team. I would like also to take this opportunity to
extend our gratitude to Ambassador Heraldo Munoz,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and its
members and experts for their dedication and hard
work.

Recently, Indonesia has again become the target
and victim of acts of terrorism. On 9 September 2004,
a bomb exploded near the entrance gate of the premises
of the Australian embassy in Jakarta. Ten people lost
their lives and about 182 were injured in the attack. Let
me take this opportunity, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Indonesia, to acknowledge and
deeply appreciate the expressions of sympathy and
condolence from the international community.
Indonesia and Indonesians from all walks of life
strongly condemn the terrorist attack in Jakarta and are
determined to bring all the perpetrators of that cruel
and heinous crime to justice. At the same time, we are
not going to let our country become a land of fear and
insecurity. Indeed, the Indonesian Government has
already taken the necessary measures to deal with the
attack. We are again deeply appreciative of the offers
of cooperation and assistance in that regard,
particularly from the Government of Australia.

Let me reiterate that Indonesia is highly
committed to fighting terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We believe that terrorism represents a
serious threat to international peace and security and
we stand ready to support measures against it at the
national, regional and global levels.

The recent visit by the Monitoring Team of the
Committee to Jakarta was fruitful in allowing us to
share the experience and challenges faced by Indonesia
in implementing the sanctions. I should not deny that
further efforts and wider collaboration at all levels are
needed.

Indonesia fully endorses the call on member
countries to further improve the quality of the
Consolidated List. I believe that problems arising from
the incompleteness of background information on
individuals can be resolved by adding more
information to the List. In this case, countries that have
submitted names to the List should be able also to
share more information with other countries. The
completeness of the list will not only enhance the
effectiveness of the list but will also minimize or
eliminate mistakes in the efforts to apprehend
individuals connected to Al Qaeda and the Taliban. In
that regard, Indonesia welcomes the efforts of the
Monitoring Team to improve its working methods, as
set out in its first report.

Finally, I would like to stress Indonesia's
conviction that terrorism is the problem of every nation
and that we can best combat and vanquish this menace
through multidimensional and multilateral approaches
based on international law and respect for human
rights. Indonesia is one such party, and as we have
stated in the past, we stand ready to take the necessary
measures and to work with other States and
organizations to ensure that terrorism will have
nowhere left to hide and that it will be defeated.

