Mr. Munoz: On behalf of the members of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am pleased to
present the report of the Commission on its third
session (S/2009/444).

The annual debates on peacebuilding in the
Security Council and the General Assembly provide a
platform for reviewing and guiding the work of the
Commission by its parent organs. Most importantly,
they also allow for broader engagement of the United
Nations membership in addressing the critical
challenge of post-conflict peacebuilding.

This year, the Security Council and the General
Assembly were presented with an additional report by
the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (8/2009/304). The
report, which received significant input from the PBC,
highlighted the increasing emphasis that the United
Nations is placing on securing a coherent and
integrated global response to the challenges in
post-conflict situations.

As the Secretary-General mentions in that report,
while the United Nations is not the only actor in
post-conflict situations, the Organization is
increasingly expected to play a leadership role in the
field, facilitating engagement between national and
international actors, as well as among international
actors.

The PBC is the central intergovernmental body of
the United Nations that is mandated to ensure that the
Organization indeed leads the way towards the
alleviation of the suffering of populations in
post-conflict situations. Along with the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO), the Peacebuilding Commission continues to
promote the nexus between security and development
and a strategic vision for sustaining and consolidating
peace, avoiding relapse into violence and strengthening
the rule of law and the respect and promotion of human
rights. With its unique membership and its flexible
approach to engaging existing and potential actors and
partners, the Commission continues to be a viable
instrument for improving the United Nations response
to the needs and priorities of post-conflict countries.

The report of the PBC on its third session
represents a collective effort by the members of its
09-61989
Organizational Committee to highlight the most
important facts and analysis pertinent to the activities
undertaken by its various configurations. It also
provides observations on the possible way forward.
The report reflects the ongoing progress made by the
PBC in engaging the countries on its agenda.
Moreover, the Commission addressed a number of
critical policy questions and lessons learned of
particular relevance to its overarching mandate as an
institutional mechanism dedicated to addressing the
special needs of post-conflict countries.

As indicated in the conclusion of the report on its
third session, the Commission has consolidated its core
advisory role and demonstrated increasing support for
the countries on its agenda. In doing so, the
Commission has continued to broaden and deepen its
partnerships with critical actors. This is an essential
step forward as the Commission strives to ensure the
operational relevance of its advice and promote the
coherence of peacebuilding strategies.

First and foremost, the PBC continued to
strengthen its linkage with the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Indeed, during the reporting period, we
witnessed an important breakthrough in efforts to
deepen the relationship with the Economic and Social
Council through the participation of the PBC
Chairperson in the Council's 2009 substantive session
and an exchange of views with Council members on
the important nexus among security, recovery from
conflict and development. In addition, the Economic
and Social Council and the PBC jointly organized a
special event, in collaboration with the World Food
Programme, on the food and economic crisis in
post-conflict countries. The event was a testimonial to
the continued preoccupation of the PBC with the
challenge of providing for the basic and economic
needs of populations emerging from conflict.

The PBC Chairperson also met with the President
of the Security Council on 1 July and participated in
the Security Council debate on the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (see S/PV.6165). In addition, the chairs of the
four country-specific configurations continued to brief
the Security Council regularly on developments in the
peacebuilding process in the four countries on the
Commission's agenda: Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone.
09-61989

The PBC also continued to expand partnerships
with numerous national, regional and international
actors, including United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, international financial institutions,
regional organizations, the private sector and civil
society.

In mentioning essential partnerships for
peacebuilding, I wish to highlight the most recently
concluded visit to the African Union headquarters in
Addis Ababa, in which I was accompanied by my
colleagues, the Vice-Chair, the chairs of the country-
specific configurations and the Chair of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned, and supported by the
PBSO and the United Nations Liaison Office to the
African Union.

I paid similar outreach visits to the Organization
of American States, the international financial
institutions headquartered in Washington, DC, and the
European Commission's headquarters in Brussels.
These visits contributed to deepening and
strengthening dialogue with these key regional and
international partners, whose contributions and support
to peacebuilding in countries on the Commission's
agenda, and globally, are crucial.

With regard to the activities of the various
configurations of the PBC, it is important to underscore
that the Organizational Committee, representing the
core group of PBC members, continued to address
possible approaches to enhancing its capacity to
implement its core mandates and adapt to prevailing
global realities and evolving approaches to critical
peacebuilding priorities. To this end, the Committee
convened a number of meetings and discussions, which
are enumerated in the report.

I wish to underscore the important discussions
that the Committee convened on enhancing the
capacity of the PBC to fulfil its resource mobilization
mandate; employment and income generation, as well
as private sector development in post-conflict
countries; the implications of the financial crisis on
countries emerging from conflict; the United Nations
rule of law coordination strategy in countries emerging
from conflict; and most recently, the prospects for the
mandated 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture and for improving
engagement with countries seeking the Commission's
advice.
3
In addition, the Chair of the Commission
undertook a number of activities to raise global
awareness of the challenges facing countries emerging
from conflict. To this end, our participation in
numerous seminars, workshops, public media
interviews and special events served as important
platform for advocacy on behalf of the countries on the
PBC agenda and of general peacebuilding challenges.
Most recently, this activity resulted, among other
things, in a unique contribution to the PBF from
proceeds of a commemorative digital version of John
Lennon and Yoko Ono's classic song "Give Peace a
Chance". I encourage all representatives to tell their
sons and daughters to download "Give Peace a
Chance" from iTunes, and to do so themselves, because
the proceeds will go directly to the PBF.

The linkage of United Nations peacebuilding
activities to the world of celebrities is deemed to be
important in raising awareness and encouraging
contributions to noble United Nations causes at the
level of the general public. To that end, the PBC is also
working on appointing an ambassador for
peacebuilding from among a number of possible sports
and arts celebrities. In addition, the country-specific
configurations continued to lead the design and
monitoring of the progress in the implementation of the
strategic frameworks for peacebuilding in the four
countries on the PBC agenda.

In Burundi, the Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone, the chairs of the four
configurations regularly visited the four countries and
interacted with high-level national officials, civil
society, partners and senior United Nations officials at
the country-level. In the four countries, the PBC
membership collectively continues to promote
inclusiveness and national ownership of the
peacebuilding processes. While facing a number of
country-specific challenges in the areas of resources,
capacity, political commitment and coherence, the
Commission provided a viable political platform to
address these challenges and seek the partnerships that
are needed to help drive the coherence of activities and
deliver tangible dividends on the ground.

Finally, the Working Group on Lessons Learned
continued to provide an informal platform for the
Peacebuilding Commission to draw on the expertise of
practitioners from within and outside the United
Nations system, as well from countries with certain
experience in post-conflict peacebuilding. The Working
Group also continued to seek useful ties with the work
of the Commission's configurations, the United
Nations system and the larger peacebuilding
community. To this end, the discussions addressed
critical priorities, such as rule of law assistance,
sustainable reintegration, regional approaches to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
role of national dialogue in peacebuilding.

Throughout its various configurations, the PBC
received substantive support from the PBSO. The
Office continues to provide an essential linkage to the
PBC with the operational entities within and outside
the United Nations system. The PBSO continued to
give regular quarterly briefings to the Committee on
the activities and operations of the PBF. These
briefings contributed to deepening the strategic linkage
between the Commission and the PBF and provided the
Commission with regular opportunities to provide
overall policy guidance on the use of the Fund in
support of the strategic objectives of peacebuilding in
the countries under the PBC's consideration. The
synergy between the PBC and the PBF is an area to
strengthen even more.

As the United Nations peacebuilding agenda and
its ties with other peacebuilding actors expand, the
PBSO's scope and areas of support will continue to
expand as well. The Office's human and substantive
resources will thus need to be further enhanced. The
recent appointment by the Secretary-General of Judy
Cheng-Hopkins as Assistant Secretary-General and
head of the PBSO brings a capable leadership with
significant field experience to manage the support
provided to the PBC, on the one hand, and the
operations of the PBF, on the other.

Three years since the operationalization of the
milestone decision of the 2005 World Summit to
establish the PBC, PBF and PBSO, the United Nations
peacebuilding agenda is expanding in scope and depth.
Peacebuilding is an area that may contribute to further
defining the image of the Organization in the coming
years. The unique feature of peacebuilding as
providing the nexus between security, the rule of law
and development activities to support laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development is
undoubtedly the primary strength behind the concept.
At the same time, with multiple actors involved in a
range of humanitarian, security and development
activities, the challenge of ensuring a coherent and
integrated response is daunting. Likewise, the
principles of national ownership and inclusiveness
have been pivotal to the work of the Commission
during these years.

While we can certainly identify initial progress in
linking the advisory role of the PBC with United
Nations and non-United Nations operational entities,
the PBC remains, in my view, underutilized. The
Commission combines a unique link to the three
principal organs of the United Nations, a unique
composition of membership and a unique degree of
flexibility to engage non-United Nations and
non-governmental actors.

Therefore, a potential added value of the PBC at
the country level is to leverage its weight in order to
advance mutual accountability between national actors
in the concerned country and its international and
regional partners. In particular, the PBC could promote
seamless transition from humanitarian to early
recovery assistance, synergy between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mandates, and national capacity-
development in critical peacebuilding priorities.

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (8/2009/304), the Peacebuilding Commission
has a critical role to play in championing and
promoting the agenda outlined in that report. The
Commission is certainly positioned to help realize a
number of important actions recommended by the
Secretary-General in that report. In addition, the
envisaged 2010 review of the Commission's founding
resolutions will provide a prime opportunity to further
build on the experiences it has gained, define its
potential role in support of an expanding United
Nations peacebuilding agenda, and enhance its support
to countries emerging from conflict.

Finally, in taking the lead on the 2010 review, the
Security Council and the General Assembly will be
charting an important course for the future relevance of
the United Nations in tackling post-conflict situations.
This task will be a challenge to our collective capacity
to deliver on the promises and ideals of the United
Nations Charter, and to respond essentially to the needs
of the most vulnerable people of the world.

