Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would say that I have already responded in
my statement to the overwhelming majority of
comments and statements by colleagues; I do not think
there is any need for me to go back to them. I would,
however, like to respond to just one question that
related to the intentions of the Russian Federation. I
want to stress that our intentions are very simple: they
are rooted in history. History shows that Russia has
very close ties to the many peoples of the Caucasus -
peoples whose relations with each other, for centuries,
have, unfortunately, been very difficult and, often, not
friendly. We now see this in the relations between
Georgia and Abkhazia and between Georgia and
Ossetia.

But looking at the whole interconnected history
of this issue, I should like to make the observation that
north of South Ossetia lies North Ossetia, which is a
republic of the Russian Federation. That is something
that must be borne in mind. We have a deep sense of
responsibility vis-a-vis the peoples of the Caucasus,
and that applies - in a very positive way - to the
people of Georgia and to Georgia itself. Of course, it is
very difficult at this stage to speak of normal feelings
between Georgians and Russians, but such feelings
existed for centuries; they were very friendly feelings.
We are convinced that the time will come when those
feelings and those relationships will return.

When referring to North Ossetia, however, I must
also say that about a million Georgians live in the
Russian Federation, many of them occupying leading
roles in our country's cultural and public life; they are,
of course, fully fledged citizens of the Russian
Federation.

Hence, the intention of the Russian Federation in
this case is to ensure that the people of South Ossetia
and Abkhazia not fear for their lives or for their
identity. We spoke today of the beginning of the
conflict and of how it has developed since 7 August.
But we must also look further back into history. We
must look back to a time when, in 1991, Georgia tried
to deny Abkhazia and South Ossetia not only their

autonomy but also their identity, by declaring them to
be Georgian. When the Abkhaz and South Ossetians
protested against that, Georgia responded with a
military operation, which of course failed. That
certainly was a major tragedy for the peoples of
Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Georgia, and it produced
a large number of refugees. But the solution lies not in
a new operation - not in a repetition of the tragic
mistake of 1991 - as we can see now.

The solution lies in the settlement plan that was
emerging, which called for the conclusion of an
agreement on the non-use of force, the establishment of
economic contacts and the rebuilding of the social
infrastructure, followed by a move towards resolving
the political relations between Georgia and South
Ossetia.

I do not want to go into the details of this, but
Mr. Alasania was quite wrong to mention Chechnya.
Russia did not decide on Chechnya's autonomous
status; we never declared that Chechens were Russians.
There, fortunately, everything has been sorted out. We
have a distinguished Chechen Republic within the
Russian Federation, whose citizens are citizens both of
the Russian Federation and of the Chechen Republic,
and that republic is alive and well. We truly hope that
the same situation will come about at some point with
respect to the relations among Georgians, Abkhazians
and South Ossetians.

