Mr. Khalikov: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the northern Sudan.

In the two and a half weeks since the Government
of the Sudan decided to suspend the operations of three
2

national and expel 13 international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) from the northern Sudan, the
United Nations has continued to advocate at all levels
for a reversal of this decision. The needs of vulnerable
people continue to be the first and main consideration
of this effort. The Secretary-General has been in close
contact with Arab and African leaders and members of
this Council, all of whom have expressed their concern
about the plight of the vulnerable people across the
Sudan. We are equally concerned that the decision has
resulted in very harsh treatment in Darfur and
Khartoum of staff members and organizations that had
been invited as guests of the Government of the Sudan
to assist the Sudanese people.

While we continue to press for the reversal of this
decision and to underscore its impact on the lives of
the Sudanese population, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan agreed to complete a series
of rapid assessments in the three Darfur states. Teams
have been tasked to ascertain the gaps in four life-
saving sectors: food aid, health and nutrition, shelter
and, lastly, water and sanitation. The teams have also
assessed the capacity available to cover the immediate
life-threatening needs. The findings will be finalized
this weekend with Government counterparts in
Khartoum. We should be able to speak more next week
about their impact on the wider assistance effort in
Darfur.

Since Assistant Secretary-General Bragg briefed
the Security Council on 6 March, there have been
significant signs of an erosion of humanitarian
response capacity, with a concurrent impact on the
lives of people in Darfur. We see this particularly in the
camps, but we believe that gaps may also be opening
up in rural areas where there is no longer a
humanitarian presence. For example, in Zam Zam
camp, near El Fasher, the departure of two key NGOs
leaves the remaining, smaller agencies to cope with
more than 36,000 newly-arrived internally displaced
persons. It may be recalled that these people were
forced to flee after fighting in Muhajariya in the South
Sudan. These began with clashes between the Sudan
Liberation Army-Minnawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), and led to fighting between the
Sudan Armed Forces and JEM. that included air attacks
in and around the town by the Sudanese air force in
January and February. The departure of Medecins sans
Frontieres-France from Nertiti in West Darfur has left
the Ministry of Health, UNICEF and the World Health
09-27501
Organization without an implementing partner to carry
out vaccination campaigns and treatment for the
meningitis outbreak in Jebel Mara. The loss of partners
has led to a similar situation in Kalma and prevented
the mass immunization campaign that has been so
desperately needed.

Overall, it has become clear that the loss of the
support provided to local NGOs and Government line
ministries has eroded operational management capacity
in key sectors. It is also troubling that the Government
has continued to seize humanitarian assets. In one
particular case, the Government has still not returned
control of a United Nations warehouse, containing
shelter and other items, to the United Nations. We are
grateful that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation (UNAMID) in Darfur has helped the
humanitarian community protect many essential
supplies in the past two weeks, but it is regrettable that
this continues to be necessary, especially in areas
controlled by the Government.

I should also note that the impact of the decision
is now being felt elsewhere, in particular in the three
protocol areas of Blue Nile, Southern Kordofan and
Abyei. The delivery of humanitarian and development
assistance in those areas is crucial to the successful
implementation of the already fragile Comprehensive
Peace Agreement.

The loss of operational capacity is not the only
challenge we are facing on the ground. Insecurity
affecting beneficiaries and aid workers alike has been
increasing for quite some time. The kidnapping of two
Sudanese and three expatriate staff members of
Medecins sans Frontieres in North Darfur temporarily
halted all operations in rural areas of that state. We are
grateful for the work of the Sudanese authorities to
help secure their release.

Regrettably, this abduction is part of a wider
pattern. Over the past two weeks, three separate attacks
on UNAMID saw one peacekeeper killed and three
others injured. We urge the Government to minimize
its rhetoric against foreigners in the media and to
ensure the safety and security of all United Nations and
associated staff. We also urge armed groups in Darfur
to take active steps to ensure that United Nations and
NGO staff stay safe.

On 15 March, we noted with concern remarks by
President Al-Bashir referring to the possible departure
of all foreign humanitarian organizations in the Sudan
09-27501
in a year's time. The Humanitarian Coordinator will
take this up further with the Government.

As the conflict continues, and as many parts of
Darfur continue to be unstable or are under the
influence of the rebel groups, the work of the United
Nations and its partners will continue to be vital in
helping Sudanese citizens affected by conflict receive
the aid to which they have the right. We urge all
leaders in Darfur - State and non-State - to facilitate
the provision of life-saving assistance to civilians in
need.

There is no doubt that our ability to help the
people of Darfur and northern Sudan has been
seriously compromised. The current atmosphere of fear
and uncertainty facing all aid organizations is affecting
the assistance available to the people of Darfur. The
hard-won partnership between the Government and aid
organizations has been cast aside in a way that raises
questions as to how this relationship can move
forward. We must find a way to decrease tensions and
ensure the timely and sustainable provision of
protection and humanitarian assistance, based on the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality.

We urge the Government of the Sudan to use the
mechanisms established explicitly for the purpose of
resolving disagreements. We also believe that the
provisions of Sudanese law and the agreements with
the international community, including the Joint
Communique on the facilitation of humanitarian
assistance in Darfur, should be respected and used. We
want to engage in a transparent and productive
dialogue with the Government based on these laws and
agreements.

The safety and security of all aid workers -
national and international - and of commodities and
assets, whether owned by NGOs, United Nations
agencies or Member States, must be assured. We look
forward to the results of the joint assessment missions,
which will be important to show the scale of the gaps
and the capacity needed to fill them.

