Ms. Chen Peijie (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
too wish to thank the President, Justice King, and
Prosecutor Rapp of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
for their briefings. At the same time, I wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for her presence at
our meeting today.
I wish to note that after hearing the briefings, we
see that since the Special Court started briefing the
Council two years ago, it has made real progress in its
work, and that is commendable.

Here, I wish to make the following points. First,
China has always supported the work of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone and will continue to do so in the
future.

Secondly, the Special Court has made progress in
its trials, as we have heard. Some trials have been
completed and some are still under way, including the
trial of Charles Taylor, which is being carried out by
the Special Court in The Hague, using the facilities of
the International Criminal Court. We believe that
independent and fair trials help to promote national
reconciliation, peace and stability in the region
concerned. Therefore, we look forward to the smooth
progress and early completion of the relevant trials.

Thirdly, we are pleased to learn that the Special
Court has also made steady progress in its completion
strategy. It has amended its rules of procedure and
evidence in order to enhance the efficiency of trials,
and it has set very specific goals for its work. We have
also noted that the Special Court has begun to address
outstanding issues, including capacity-building in local
judicial institutions. All of that is to be commended.
We hope that the Special Court will continue to work
actively to achieve its various working goals as it
continues to implement its completion strategy.

Fourthly, we heard from the President and the
Prosecutor of the Special Court that the Court
continues to face a number of difficulties. In particular,
they referred to the issue of cooperation. I believe that
that is a very important issue indeed. Therefore, I
should like to call on those countries in a position to do
so to continue to provide support to the Special Court
and to take a more cooperative approach so as to help it
resolve issues such as the enforcement of potential
sentences and the relocation of witnesses.

