Mr. Lancry (Israel): Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for this month, and to congratulate your
predecessor, the representative of Mali, for his most
able leadership. I would also like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Great Britain,
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, for his outstanding
leadership.

The issue before the Council today is one of
particular relevance to the people and the Government
of the State of Israel. The State of Israel has been
threatened by terrorism since its independence in 1948,
and acts of terrorism continue to threaten the lives and
welfare of Israeli citizens.
Just yesterday, a Palestinian terrorist perpetrated
another atrocity in the Israeli city of Hadera. At
approximately 11 p.m., a terrorist from the Al-Aqsa
Martyrs Brigade - a group linked to Yasser Arafat's
Fatah movement - entered a wedding hall packed with
hundreds of people and opened fire with an automatic
rifle and hand grenades, killing 6 Israelis and
wounding more than 30 others. After firing several
rounds, the gunman's weapon misfired. Had this
fortuitous mishap not occurred, the terrorist rampage
would surely have claimed the lives of dozens of
others.

Because of such attacks, Israel has developed an
extensive network of government authorities, a body of
domestic legislation, a range of practical policies and
an intense commitment to combat terrorism in all its
aspects. The formation in 1996 of the Bureau for
Counter-Terrorism within the Office of the Prime
Minister, the establishment in December 2001 of the
Department for Counter-Terrorism in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Israel's continued efforts to engage in
dialogue and cooperation with other countries, and the
ongoing endeavour to improve an extensive body of
legislation - all this emphasizes Israel's enduring
commitment to fight terrorism.

Our report submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) outlines the steps that
Israel has taken to combat terror and to comply with
the demands of the Council. The report describes in
detail the extensive legal instruments Israel has created
and the policies it has enacted to help protect its
citizens from harm and to lend support to the
international campaign against terrorism.

Cooperation with other countries and with the
international community has been a mainstay of
Israel's anti-terrorism strategy for decades. Israel has
long recognized that the increasingly global nature of
the terrorist threat increases the need for cooperation
among States, and this has continually been reinforced
by Israeli legislation and in agreements reached with
other States.

Consequently, Israel shares its knowledge,
expertise and techniques in fighting terrorism with
other States and constantly seeks to learn from the
counter-terrorist experiences of others. This continued
sharing of information and experience is vital and has
always been central to Israel's counter-terrorist
strategy. Israel also attaches great importance to
participation in international instruments designed to
combat terrorism. Israel has already signed and ratified
a number of international conventions, and many of the
remaining conventions are in the process of
ratification.

As numerous world leaders have stated in the
aftermath of 11 September, terrorism cannot be fought
by targeting only the terrorists themselves. Terrorists
depend on the support, assistance and safe harbour
granted by States, and it is the States that provide such
assistance to terrorist organizations that must be
targeted no less than the terrorists themselves.

The Security Council must therefore ensure that
all States comply with the Council's resolutions, and
that there are consequences to face for failing to do so.
In this regard, Israel warmly welcomes the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which has a crucial role to play in helping States
develop counter-terrorist strategies and ensuring
compliance with resolution 1373 (2001).

Foremost among its objectives must be to
carefully scrutinize the reports submitted under
paragraph 6 of the resolution and to closely monitor the
actions taken by States to bring their legislation and
policies into accord with the will of the international
community. The Committee should not be prevented
from drawing attention to States that fail to fulfil their
international responsibilities. No State can be allowed
to believe that it can continue to support terrorism with
impunity.

In addition to the numerous important measures
stipulated in resolution 1373 (2001) and adopted by
many responsible Governments, it is important that in
our campaign against terrorism we make no
distinctions between terrorist organizations on the basis
of the causes they espouse and the objectives they
purport to pursue. We must defend the principle that no
cause justifies the deliberate and indiscriminate
targeting of civilians. We must define terrorism on the
basis of what one does, not what one does it for.

As the Secretary-General declared in the
aftermath of the attacks of 11 September and has
emphasized on other occasions,

"There can be no acceptance of those who
would seek to justify the deliberate taking of
innocent civilian life, regardless of cause or
grievance. If there is one universal principle that
all peoples can agree on, surely it is that."
(A/56/PV12, para. 26)

Failing to uphold this principle will have disastrous
consequences for the international campaign against
terrorism, as it will bestow a measure of legitimacy on
those who seek to achieve their goals through violence.
This will serve to empower extremists at the expense of
leaders willing to resolve disputes through peaceful
dialogue. If the international community tolerates any
act of terrorism as a legitimate tactic, it renders
irrelevant the very methods it has championed for the
peaceful resolution of disputes.

Israel has been a willing partner in the counter-
terrorism effort and is committed to sharing and
working with other States in order to assist the
international effort against the scourge of terror. Israel
hopes that its experience will be of value to other
States and, at the same time, that it will be able to learn
from the knowledge and expertise of others in our
shared challenge of combating international terrorism.

We firmly believe that through the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, by increasing and enhancing international
cooperation and by using the tools at our disposal to
target State sponsors of terror, we can protect ourselves
and succeeding generations from the horrors of
terrorism.

As I come to the end of my statement, I must add
that I truly regret the baseless allegations made here
this morning by the representative of Syria. His
statement was a transparent attempt to divert attention
from Syria's own record as a country that supports,
encourages, finances and harbours a vast gamut of
terrorist organizations. When Syria was elected to the
Security Council, the international community had
hoped that it would become a more responsible
member of the family of nations. After listening to the
Syrian statement this morning, I have to conclude that,
unfortunately, Syria has so far failed to rise to this
challenge.

