Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, as well as Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their useful briefings on the situation in
eastern Ukraine.

At the outset, we renew our commitment to
respecting the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, without interference in its internal
affairs. We hope that all relevant stakeholders will
fully implement resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk
agreements for peace, as well as presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12 of 6 June. We hope that they will seek
a comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue
through dialogue, especially in line with the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group, in order to
achieve immediate progress on the implementation of
the Minsk Agreements. We also urge both Ukraine and
the Russian Federation to reach a peaceful solution to
the crisis and to show greater political will not only
to strengthen the ceasefire and implement previous
agreements, but also to revitalize a lasting and
comprehensive negotiation process.

The announcement of so-called early elections in
the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk on 11 November
contradicts the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements
for peace, which include specific provisions on holding
local elections in those areas. In that regard, any steps
that could hinder progress in implementing the Minsk
agreements must be avoided.

Following the briefing given by Ms. Mueller, we
note that the humanitarian situation is still bad, owing
to the many obstacles to the relief work and the lack of
funding for the response plan. The hostilities continue
in eastern Ukraine, despite a relative improvement in
the situation. Shelling, light weapons and landmines
still represent a deadly threat to civilians, who continue
to be killed and maimed. In that regard, we stress the
importance of ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all the areas affected in order to improve
residents' living conditions.

In conclusion, we call for a peaceful solution to
the crisis in eastern Ukraine, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the agreements
signed by the parties involved, including the Minsk
agreements, which are the appropriate way to settle the
crisis in the region, along with the mediation efforts of
the stakeholders who enjoy the respect and appreciation
of the two parties to the conflict and the international
community as a whole.

