The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/ 128, containing a letter dated
3 March 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
progress towards implementing the
recommendations of the inclusive political
dialogue, held in Bangui from 8 to 20 December
2008. It reiterates its full support for this process,
as an effective framework to foster national
reconciliation and stability in the Central African
Republic. The Council calls on all parties to
sustain the momentum created by the dialogue
2
and the spirit of compromise and cooperation that
enabled its successful holding.

"The Security Council demands that all
armed groups which have not yet done so,
particularly those recently operating in the
northern Central African Republic, cease violence
immediately. It calls on all parties to respect and
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
signed in Libreville on 21 June 2008 and their
earlier commitments contained in the Sirte
Agreement of February 2007 and the Birao
Agreement of April 2007. It invites countries in
the region to support efforts to bring all groups
into the peace process.

"The Security Council calls on all armed
groups to immediately cease the recruitment and
use of children and release all children associated
with them. The Council calls on all parties, as a
matter of priority, to develop and implement, in
close collaboration with the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic, action plans in the framework
of Security Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and
1612 (2005).

"The Security Council stresses the urgency
and imperative necessity of carrying out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process (DDR). It calls on all parties in the
Central African Republic to work with
determination to that end. The Council welcomes
the pledge made by the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) on
30 January 2009 to contribute to fund the DDR
process, and calls on the international community
to provide timely and adequate support to the
process.

"The Security Council calls on the
Government of the Central African Republic and
all political stakeholders to ensure the timely,
effective and transparent preparation for the 2009
and 2010 municipal, legislative and presidential
elections.

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendation by the Secretary-General, in his
letter dated 3 March 2009 (S/2009/128), to
establish a United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA) to succeed the current
09-29447
United Nations peacebuilding office (BONUCA).
It notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office will perform the
following tasks:

"(a) To assist national and local efforts in
implementing the dialogue outcomes, in
particular through support for governance
reforms and electoral processes;

"(b) To assist in the successful completion
of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and the reform of security
sector institutions, and support activities to
promote the rule of law;

"(c) To support efforts to restore State
authority in the provinces;

"(d) To support efforts to enhance national
human rights capacity and promote respect for
human rights and the rule of law, justice and
accountability;

"(e) To closely coordinate with and support
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as the implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding and projects
supported through the Peacebuilding Fund;

"(f) To exchange information and analysis
with the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) on
emerging threats to peace and security in the
region.

"It also requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that the integrated office undertakes the
following additional task:
"(g) To help ensure that child protection is
properly addressed in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the DDR
process, including by supporting the monitoring
and reporting mechanism established according
to resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

"The Council requests the Secretary-
General to ensure that the smooth transition to the
new integrated office take place as soon as
possible, including through the early deployment
of the new Special Representative and deputy.
The Council further requests the Secretary-
General to inform it in his next report on the
structure and strength of the new office, bearing
in mind that resources for special political
missions are limited.

"The Security Council welcomes the
support provided by the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Central African Republic,
looks forward to the finalization of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding, and calls on the
donor community to work with the Commission
to identify sectors that are critical for long-term
stability and development in the Central African
Republic and to intensify their support in those
sectors."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 pm.

