Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the United States
delegation for its initiative in convening this debate and
to Secretary Kerry for his presence. I also thank the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes region, Ms. Mary Robinson, for their sustained
engagement and leadership, and of course all the
briefers for their insightful remarks.

As the attendance of the participants today
indicates, we are at a pivotal moment in the search
for durable peace and security in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. We
should be ashamed by the staggering toll ofthe conflict:
the lives of more than 5, perhaps 6, million people,
the displacement of millions more and the subjection
of countless men, women and children to horrendous
human rights abuses. Today, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is languishing at the bottom of the United
Nations Human Development Index.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
provides the best opportunity to definitively break the
cycle of violence and instability. We are at a moment of
hope because of the leadership and efforts of regional
Governments and organizations, working in close
cooperation with the United Nations and the Secretary-
General himself, and now with the World Bank.

The potential genius of the Framework is that,
for the first time, all the relevant parties have made
clear commitments to integrate political, security and
development efforts 4 a nexus that is essential to
tackling the root causes of instability. The recent joint
visit by the World Bank President and the Secretary-
General reflects what should be a crucial impetus for
the region. There have been encouraging early signs
of follow-up on the Framework commitments, but
also stark reminders of the sobering challenges ahead.
Attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars and infighting
among the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) near Goma are ongoing. Just last
week, attacks by the Allied Democratic Forces in
Kamango forced more than 65,000 refugees to flee into
Uganda. We note Ugandan Foreign Minister Kutesa's
warnings this morning about the Allied Democratic
Forces.

The immediate priority must be to ensure that
all signatories take practical steps to implement their
commitments under the Framework. Where they fail
to live up to these commitments, they must be held to
account, by their own citizens and civil society, by their
regional neighbours, and by the broader international
community, including the Security Council.

Australia welcomes the initial efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to initiate key reforms. The establishment of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo's National Oversight
Mechanism is an important step, as was the inaugural
meeting of the 11+4 regional oversight mechanism and
the establishment of the technical support committee.
The implementation of tailored, realistic benchmarks
will, however, be fundamental to the success of the
Framework. It is imperative that broad agreement is
reached on the specific benchmarks and how these will
be taken forward by the next meeting of the regional
oversight mechanism in New York in September.

All signatories have committed under the Framework
not to interfere in the affairs of neighbouring countries
and to neither tolerate nor provide assistance or support
of any kind to armed groups. Any collaboration
between the FARDC and the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda must cease, as must any support
to the Mouvement du 23 mars.There can be no peace so
long as such support continues.

Turning briefly to some key practical challenges
and priorities ahead, persistent reports of grave human
rights abuses and widespread sexual violence by armed
groups and the FARDC undermine the foundations for
any lasting peace. At an event Australia co-hosted this
week, we heard first-hand the impact ofthe use ofrape as
a tool of war to destroy communities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Impunity cannot be tolerated. It
is critical that decisive action is taken to prevent such
atrocities and to investigate and prosecute such crimes.
In this context, the efforts of the International Criminal
Court deserve our full support.

It is also critical that security sector reforms
be intensified. Ultimate responsibility far security
rests with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government. A professional and effective army is
central to this. The FARDC's capabilities, discipline
and cooperation with the United Nations Mission,
including the Intervention Brigade, will be critical
to the success of efforts in the Kivus. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration must, finally, also be
given genuine priority. The unregulated flow of small
arms and failure to implement effective reintegration
strategies are themselves root causes and drivers of
conflict.

Women's participation and leadership in
both the security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes is essential
to long-term peace. So, too, is their direct engagement
in the implementation of the Framework. Special Envoy
Robinson's work to ensure their full and effective
participation, including through the recent Bujumbura
Conference is long overdue, prospective and reassuring.

In concluding, Australia reaffirms our strong
support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade, and expresses our deep appreciation to the
troop-contributing countries. The Intervention Brigade
cannot, of course, be seen as a panacea or a substitute
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo's own
responsibilities. What the Brigade can do, and what the
Council intended it to do, is to act as a circuit-breaker
to create the space for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to implement the necessary reforms
and tackle underlying issues of the conflict.

The Brigade's creation was an historic and risky
decision by the Council, borne out of frustration
certainly, but more so from necessity. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours have provided

the essential enabling environment for a new start, but
implementation will obviously be decisive. The Council
itself must continue to give incisive and consistent
attention to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
reinforce the incentives for change and to break the
cyclical patterns of the past. We all know that this is a
genuinely critical moment; we must ensure it becomes
transformative.

I understand there is a Congolese saying that "no
matter how hard you throw a dead fish in the water,

it still will not swim". The framework of hope is very
much alive, and we need to ensure it is able to swim.

