Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy thanks
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important debate.

(spoke in English)

Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and wishes to make the
following remarks in its national capacity.

The terrorist threats we face seek to divide us by
race, ethnicity, nationality, values and religion. The
risk is particularly high in the Middle East, where
the multiethnic and multireligious character of those
societies is under severe threat. As a close friend and
neighbour of the region, Italy stresses the importance
of preserving the inclusiveness of those societies.
We are actively engaged in projects in favour of
ethnic and religious minorities, including Yazidis and
Christian denominations, providing health care and
psychological support, rebuilding schools, supporting
educational and social reintegration and protecting
the unique multicultural heritage in Iraq and in the
region. We are also active partners in multilateral
forums to counter terrorism and violent extremism, and
we contribute to the search for the necessary political
responses to the crises affecting the Middle East.

Italy strongly condemns the widespread violence
and grave abuses of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed by Daesh, associated
groups and other terrorist organizations targeting
individuals belonging to ethnic, religious and other
minority groups. We are appalled by the brutal
persecution suffered by all of those groups, individuals
and communities, and we recognize that the first
victims of Daesh are Muslims.

Let me focus on some specific issues where Italy
can provide added value to the debate and to our joint
effort. First, in prevention, by promoting dialogue and
mutual understanding, especially at the grassroots
level, through education and awareness-raising
campaigns. Our fight against discrimination on ethnic
and religious grounds is first and foremost a cultural
initiative that requires long-term efforts to protect
younger generations.

In that regard, we have been working with the
Office of the Special Advisors on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect on updating the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which
strengthens the United Nations early warning capacity
by stressing the importance of sectarian Violence and
religious-based propaganda as warning signs ofthe risk
of atrocity crimes. The post-2015 development agenda
can also contribute to our prevention efforts. An agenda
promoting sustainable development can tackle the
root causes of violence and human rights abuses and
promote peaceful and inclusive societies.

Secondly, outreach to all ethnic and religious
communities in the Mediterranean and the Middle East is
essential. Only by winning back groups and communities
that harbour feelings of disenfranchisement, distrust
and marginalization will it be possible to seriously
affect the recruiting power ofDaesh and other extremist
groups. Media can also play a key role in promoting
dialogue and tolerance, thus countering the narrative
proposed by extremists.

Thirdly, reconciliation and inclusion can promote
inclusive political processes and tolerance, diversity,
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as values and
ingredients for the stability of the region.

Fourthly, accountability is critical in fighting
impunity and promoting justice. Atrocities committed
against individuals of a different religion, belief or
ethnic background must not go unpunished. As recent
United Nations reports have suggested, such acts carried
out in violation of international human rights law could
amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity, or even
genocide. As Vice President of the Assembly of States
Parties to the International Criminal Court, allow me to
mention the role played in the fight against those crimes
by the Court and by the Security Council in referring
such situations to the Court, as well as the need for
support and follow-up by the Council to promote more
effective prevention through justice.
The last issue is cultural heritage. The deliberate
destruction of cultural and religious heritage by Daesh
in Syria and Iraq constitutes a war crime, according
to international law, and reveals the determination
to eradicate all traces of diversity in the region. Italy
considers it a priority to stop the destruction, and we
support UNESCO's role in that respect. Building on
our experience as the first country to create, in 1969,
a police force specialized in the protection of cultural
heritage and the fight against illegal trafficking in
cultural property, Italy is promoting, together with
Spain and other partners, a UNESCO draft resolution
on culture in areas of conflict. In the light of the
strong connection between the preservation of cultural
heritage and peaceful coexistence, Italy calls on all
States members of UNESCO to join in that effort.

In our capacity as co-lead country of the Counter-
ISIL Finance Group of the Counter-ISIL Coalition, we
call for the swift implementation of resolution 2199
(2015) to counter the illicit trafficking in cultural
property. We also welcome the joint statement on the
destruction of cultural heritage proposed by a cross-
regional core group composed of Chile, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Italy and Poland and endorsed by 137
countries in the Human Rights Council.

To achieve our common goal, Italy welcomes the
Secretary-General's proposal today to draft an action
plan with concrete measures. We are ready to cooperate
to that end.

