Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Special
Coordinator for Middle East Peace Process Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union later today.

The vision of a democratic, robust, and prosperous
Middle East remains unfulfilled. Radicalization, the
spread of terrorism, the proliferation of weapons,
declining economies, and uprooted people make it
incumbent upon the international community to look
for an urgent way to end the conflicts.

The situation in the Palestinian territories continues
to raise our greatest concern. The reality on the ground
gives little reason for hope. Recent rocket attacks by
militant groups underline once again the volatility
of the current deadlock, which risks escalating
even further. Continuing settlement expansion and
demolitions severely erode the prospects for a viable
two-State solution, plunging the parties even deeper
into the circle of violence and mutual mistrust.

Gaza needs immediate and genuine reconstruction
and development. For the first time, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East is about to run out of funds, overwhelmed
by mounting challenges. There are growing risks of
further radicalization in the Gaza Strip. Improving
humanitarian and economic conditions in Gaza could
be a key factor in prospects for peace itself.

We welcome the recent steps taken by Israel to
ease restrictions in Gaza. But the immediate and
unconditional lifting of the closure on the Strip and the
free flow ofpeople and goods, while addressing Israel's
legitimate security concerns, are necessary for genuine
relief and recovery.

We call on Israel to enable accelerated Palestinian
construction, as well as socioeconomic development, in
Area C. We furthermore call on the Israeli authorities
to halt plans for forced transfers of the population
and the demolition of Palestinian housing. We also
urge Palestine and Israel to make efforts to improve
political, economic and security conditions of life
for the Palestinian people. Such actions will serve to
strengthen the prosperity and security of both Israelis
and Palestinians.

We look forward towards renewed engagement in
the peace process by the United States, with strong
involvement by the European Union, the League of
Arab States, the Quartet and regional actors. There
is no other solution but an immediate resumption of
peace negotiations to seek a final political settlement
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles 4 including the principle of land for
peace - the road map, and the Arab peace initiative,
leading to two democratic and sovereign States living
side by side within established borders.

Syria has become the worst humanitarian crisis and
a State failure. Just under a quarter of a million Syrians
have been killed, and more than half of the population is
displaced. Impunity reigns, justice and accountability
are absent and the political process runs on empty. The
Syrian Government has failed in its responsibility to
protect its people. It has been a perpetrator of crimes
against its very own people. Chlorine gas attacks are
fast becoming a daily reality. They persist because
perpetrators continuously escape justice. Only by
attributing responsibility to specific individuals,
entities and Governments that are responsible for
chemical weapons attacks can we make them stop. The
Council must take action in that regard.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has taken steps to alleviate the suffering of the
people, but obstacles to humanitarian aid and medical
assistance are too numerous. Progress on accountability
for appalling crimes is nowhere in sight. It is up to the
international community to live up to its responsibility
to protect. A political solution is the only way forward,
and we look forward to the briefing by Staffan de
Mistura to the Council next week.

In Lebanon, the longer the crisis of institutions
remains unresolved, the greater the threat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to Lebanon's integrity and
stability. The international community must continue
to assist the country in strengthening its institutions
and its army and managing the impact of the influx of
Syrian refugees.

I conclude with Yemen, which continues to suffer
from casualties of more than 3,500 dead, 16,000
injured and nearly 1.3 million displaced. Four out of
five Yemenis are in need of humanitarian assistance. A
reliable flow of humanitarian aid into Yemen is urgently
needed, while avoiding excessive restrictions on both
United Nations and commercial shipments. All Yemeni
parties should engage in dialogue without preconditions
and rally behind United Nations-facilitated processes.
The alternative is State fragmentation, the rise of
sectarianism and empowerment of terrorist groups.

