Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Since the Security
Council first took up the issue of protection of
civilians, the changing nature of armed conflict has
continued to have a profound impact on the situation of
civilians in armed conflict. The Council took an
important step forward through the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009), with its focus on humanitarian
access and protection mandates as well as monitoring
and reporting. We also welcome the establishment of
the Security Council informal Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians, as well as the growing
emphasis on benchmarks and clearer protection
language in country-specific decisions of the Council.
It is clear that the Council has paid greater attention to
this topic in the recent past.

To track progress in implementation, the
development of indicators for systematic monitoring
and reporting on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Emergency Relief Coordinator would be
helpful. When included in protection benchmarks, such
indicators could help us to assess the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions and identify remaining gaps
and challenges.

In spite of the Council's stronger engagement, the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/579)
reveals the continued gap between the normative
advances and realities on the ground. To better protect
civilians and ease their plight, we must urgently
enhance compliance with international law by State
and non-State actors, continue to empower United
Nations peacekeeping operations to better implement
their protection mandates, improve humanitarian
access, and enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law.

Among the core principles of international
humanitarian law are the distinction between
combatants and non-combatants, proportionality of the
use of force, and the imperative to take all feasible
measures to minimize civilian casualties. Violations of
these rules, such as the use of weapons of
2

indiscriminate effect in densely populated areas and the
denial of humanitarian access, warrant a clear response
from the Security Council. The Council must call for
compliance with international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict and ensure accountability in cases
where massive and systematic violations have
occurred. Where violations of international
humanitarian law routinely go unpunished, a climate of
impunity will prevail and lead to further violations.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
accountability mechanisms should first and foremost
be established at the national level. This is in line with
the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
which reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to
prosecute and punish the most serious crimes under
international law. International accountability efforts
are required only when national systems are unable or
unwilling to fulfil their obligations. The Security
Council could establish commissions of inquiry or
similar accountability mechanisms, and of course also
make use of its competence to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court.

The effective delivery of humanitarian assistance
is intrinsically linked to timely access to populations in
need, as well as to the safety and security of those who
provide assistance.

The safety of humanitarian workers remains
precarious. The Council has a particular obligation to
provide for the security of United Nations staff and to
ensure that there is no impunity for attacks on
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel, which may
constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute. We
welcome in this regard the entry into force of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, which
expands the legal protection of the 1994 Convention.

Significant concerns often exist in relation to the
protection of civilians in situations that are not formally
on the agenda of the Council. It is therefore essential
for the Council to develop innovative ways to address
protection concerns in such situations and to enhance
its preventive and early warning capacities. The
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
could play a central role in that regard by receiving
briefings and assessments on emerging violations of
international humanitarian law by non-State and State
actors.
10-64740
