Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I think
Mrs. Ogata has thrown us a bit of a challenge this
morning. I have been going quite carefully through her
speech since she made it.

The challenge is to get beyond analysis, which we
are quite rich on this morning, into some suggestions for
practical action. Of course, she and we need to say that
we must stop conflict and we must help internally
displaced persons and refugees. We can put that in
various detailed ways, but actually we are not necessarily
going to do very much by saying that and we are not
going to do very much by issuing a worthy but
unoperational presidential statement later this morning.

There are two areas which I would like to touch on
very briefly, since I think we are going to need another
session on this if there is to be a proper follow-up. One
is Mrs. Ogata's suggestions in parts of her speech on
what we should be focusing on. I think it may help if she
says a little bit more about a couple of them: access to
internally displaced persons and refugees and the
responsibility of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for that; as well as
her difficulties to get through Governments. We need only
think of the situations in Angola and, of course, Burundi,
as well as other places where humanitarian workers have
been deliberately attacked and prevented from getting to
the people we are trying to help. There is the question of
access and special protection and I am glad we are talking
as much this morning about internally displaced persons
as about refugees.

There were two particular areas Mrs. Ogata fastened
on: the strengthening of law enforcement capacity and
support for regional peacekeeping. In those two areas, she
is bridging the debate through to the responsibility of
Governments on the ground. The United Kingdom, for
one, is trying to do a lot in Africa to increase capacity by

 

one means or another. I will not spend time in going over
what we are doing.

This takes us through to the duty of Governments on
the ground. I entirely accept that it is the particular duty of
richer countries outside Africa to put resources into this
problem. I hope we are doing that, but, as African
representatives in particular have said, we are not doing it
enough. The problem we always find with Africa in
particular - and this is why we are having a "month of
Africa" - is that what we are doing is mopping up the
misery, but we do not seem to have a handle on the tap out
of which misery is flowing. Unless you have a sense of
turning off the tap that is producing misery, there is a
disincentive to go on pouring money into a bottomless box.

There are two things that I noted Mrs. Ogata as
saying. The difficulty of having access to large numbers of
people in insecure and isolated areas is compounded by the
complexity of assisting civilians in their own country,
where their own state authorities or rebel forces in control
are frequently the very cause of their predicament.

There are no effective conflict-resolution mechanisms
in Africa; on the contrary, armed groups waging war
against Governments are often openly supported by other
Governments. I am not seeking to transfer blame for failure
to support a huge programme for internally displaced
persons and refugees in Africa. But the responsibility for
internally displaced persons and refugees has to be shared
by mechanisms like UNHCR, Governments outside Africa
and Governments on the ground. Where is the
accountability for this? I believe that one of the good things
about this debate, like the AIDS debate on Monday, is that
we are raising the profile of problems that do not often get
debated properly.

Just as there should be a stigma for Governments that
will not recognize that there is an AIDS problem, there
should be a stigma for Governments that allow national
policies to override ordinary people's lives, at the cost of
ruining them. Of course, there is sensitivity in the Security
Council about getting into that sort of business, but, as a
result, we do not address the problem. I believe that we are
going to need to discuss quite a bold new step at some
point if we are to have any effect on the misery of conflict
in Africa.

Ambassador Dejammet pointed to a very important
area in comparing what happens in Europe with what does
not happen in Africa. In Europe we have the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which has had a
huge effect on producing freedom and better standards in
Europe. We now have a stability pact for parts of Europe
that are still a long way behind the times in dealing with
proper standards and human misery. Why do we not have
that for Africa? Why do not Africans have that for
Africa? Unless we have a structure which has the strength
in its framework to bear the burden of what UNHCR and
other organizations are trying to do in Africa, everything
collapses.

So we must talk about the responsibility of
leaderships in Africa and about accountability for ruining
people's lives, as well as about the insufficiency of
resources that are being put into the work of UNHCR and
other organizations. Unless we follow up this debate with
some discussion of what Ambassador Dejammet and
others, and I, have said this morning, we are not going to
achieve anything by way of results.

Finally, I believe that in paying tribute to what
UNHCR is doing, which we all do - and to you, Mr.
President, for holding this debate - we should express an
interest in Mrs. Ogata's suggestion of a refugee education
trust, which I think my Government would like to look at
in terms of wishing to support it. There is an idea there
which can be expanded, and I would like to thank Mrs.
Ogata for making that proposal. But in following up, we
must go back to the area that she called middle-level
security measures, which, I believe, will be the area, in
practice, where the Security Council should be following
up, as long as there can be a proper framework in Africa
for a partnership between African leaderships and other
continents in dealing with the problem we are talking
about today.

