Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Ithank Ms. DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, as
well as Ms. Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings to the Security
Council today.

It has been almost five years since Russia's
illegal annexation of Crimea and the beginning of its
aggression in eastern Ukraine. This highly volatile
situation clearly poses a threat to international peace
and security, and Sweden has throughout its tenure on
the Security Council worked to ensure that the Council
remains seized of the matter.

The continued high levels of Violence in Donbas
and our deep concern about the so-called elections
planned for 11 November prompted us and several
other members to call for this meeting. Let me be clear
about why this issue belongs in the Council. What we
see is an attempt to redraw borders in Europe, backed
by military power. That is a Violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. It also represents a violation of
the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris for a
New Europe. This challenge to the international legal
order is not a regional problem, but one with global
implications. We regret that there are no signs of Russia,
a member ofthe Council, reversing its actions to comply
with international law. Again, let me be clear: Russia's
aggression is the origin of the conflict, and Russia has
the influence to end it whenever it so chooses.

We remain deeply concerned about the continuing
violence and the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine. The conflict has already caused
more than 10,000 deaths and affected more than
3.8 million people directly, 70 per cent of them
women, elderly persons and children. Almost two
thirds of the close to 2 million internally displaced
persons are women. We note slight improvements in
access for humanitarian organizations, but continue
to emphasize the need for full and unhindered access,
both in Government-controlled and non-Government-
controlled areas. Sweden will continue providing
principled humanitarian assistance to meet the most
urgent needs of the people affected by the conflict.
As we heard from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) today, the humanitarian
appeal remains underfunded. We join OCHA in calling
on donors to increase their contributions.

While the international community continues
to support the Minsk agreements, not even the
first provision in the agreements - a complete
ceasefire - has been implemented. In line with
consistent demands by the European Union, we call
for the full implementation of the agreements, starting
with an immediate and lasting ceasefire. We support the
efforts made within the Normandy format to that end
and commend the Government of Ukraine for recently
extending the special status law for the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.

The so-called elections in Donbas planned for
November are, in turn, a blatant violation of the
Minsk agreements. We call on Russia to assume its
responsibility and use its influence to stop them from
being held. The Minsk agreements clearly state that
local elections should take place only after proper
security conditions are put in place. That means
a complete ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy
weapons, monitored by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Russia must
ensure that the armed formations controlling certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk observe the ceasefire,
and is must cease all military and financial support
to those formations. The Minsk agreements further
stipulate that elections should be held under Ukrainian
legislation and be in accordance with OSCE standards
and monitored by the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights. We strongly support
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
which must be given full, safe and unhindered access
throughout the country, including along the Russia-
Ukraine State border and to the Crimean peninsula.

Finally, the ongoing militarization of Crimea and
the tensions in the Sea ofAzov raise additional concerns
and create a very dangerous backdrop for the planned
so-called elections. The redeployment of military
vessels and the excessive inspections of commercial
traffic in an area already affected by conflict have
not gone unnoticed. By ceasing those activities, and
taking steps to ensure that the Minsk agreements are
finally implemented, Russia could send a signal that it
is serious about reducing tensions.

Russia's aggression against Ukraine, in blatant
disregard of international law and the European security
order, has caused tremendous suffering and must come
to an end. Until such time, the Council must remain
actively seized of the matter.

