Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Sir, on
the occasion of your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November.

Let me also extend a welcome to High Representative
Valentin Inzko and thank him for his briefing, his report
(S/2013/646, annex) and his important work.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU), but
I would like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.

The territorial integrity, stability and functionality
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign and united
country, are of the highest importance to Croatia. They
are also fundamental prerequisites for the stability and
prosperity of the whole region of South-East Europe.

The specific political system rooted in Dayton
Peace Accords is, in many aspects, based on ethnic
representation, which rests on genuine equality
between three constitutive peoples. At the same time,
that equality is a prerequisite for the stability of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It provides the three pillars on which
the country rests under the present circumstances.
Removing any one of the three pillars would destabilize
relations and increase the danger of pulling the country
apart and of conflict among the ethnic groups.

At the moment, Serbs have the advantage of relative
ethnic homogeneity in the Republika Srpska; Bosnians
have the advantage of the biggest numbers; and Croats
are in danger of losing representation at the level of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those are the
facts of which we have to be mindful.

It is in the interests of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
our region, as well as Europe as a whole - something we
are reminded of particularly on the eve of the hundredth
anniversary of the First World War - to achieve a
stable and functioning Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
will inevitably lead in future towards a civic State. But
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not there yet; as a matter
of fact, it is still far from it. Nevertheless, our goal is
the same, and we plea for a strategy that has a chance
of achieving that goal. We have to start by recognizing
the facts on the ground and work gradually towards
achieving a civic State.

Acting as if the goal of a stable, functioning State
in which everybody felt comfortable and represented
already existed would be a little like pretending in the
manner of the well-known fairy tale of the emperor's
new clothes. Instead of pretending, we need to select
the best strategy for achieving that goal. We believe
that recognizing the need for stability based on three
pillar, instead of two-pillar instability, has the biggest
chance of success.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a State of all its
citizens, regardless of ethnicity or faith. As such, it
must implement the verdict of the European Court of
Human Rights in the Sejdie-Finci case. The fact that
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who do not belong
to one of three constituent peoples are discriminated by
the election process, as well as the fact that Bosniaks
and Croats in the Repubika Srpska and Serbs in the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina suffer the same
type of discrimination, is an unfortunate legacy of the
Dayton Peace Accords. The equal constituent status of
all three peoples is of key importance for the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as is implementing the
verdict of the European Court for Human Rights as a
way towards a Bosnia and Herzegovina that belongs to
all its citizens.

As a strong supporter of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
is concerned that some representatives of the Republika
Srpska continue to challenge the territorial integrity of
the State they are an integral part of. As noted in the
report, there continues to be a

"long-running negative trend of some
representatives from the Republika Srpska
predicting and advocating for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the independence of
the Republika Srpska" (S/2013/646, annex, para. 6).

That must not be taken lightly.

Croatia welcomes the fact that in October the
census was conducted - the first in the post-war
period. However, according to the reports from the
ground that we have received, it appears that the results
of the recent census in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
be carefully examined in order to make sure that every
citizen of that country had the opportunity to express
his or her national, religious and other identity.

Croatia strongly supports, and will continue to
support, the European and Euro-Atlantic integration
process of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a fully functional
State of its three constitutive peoples and other citizens.
That is a crucial element for the stability not only of
Bosnia and Herzegovina but also of South-East Europe.
The more Europe in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the better.

We welcome the facilitation efforts of the European
Commission to help political parties to come to an
agreement regarding the constitutional changes.
Bearing in mind the importance of an effective
coordination mechanism in achieving the European
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we hope that that
issue will also be solved in the days to come so as to
ensure that the available EU funds can be used.
It is in our interest and is our responsibility to
encourage further reforms and the implementation of
the Sejdie-Finci ruling. Bosnia and Herzegovina must
not be left behind the whole region in the EU integration
process.

Regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina's advancement
towards NATO membership, we urge the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make additional
efforts for the implementation of the six-party political
agreement regarding the issue of military property and
to work constructively to implement the agreement
without delay in order to start the first cycle of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's membership action plan as soon as
possible.

Regarding the negotiations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the trade regime with the European
Union after Croatia's EU accession, we regret that the
additional protocol to the Stabilization and Association
Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet
been concluded. We particularly regret the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not accept the negotiating
principle on the basis of traditional trade. We therefore
urge the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to come to a viable and sustainable agreement on that
issue as soon as possible.

Croatia wishes to continue the Euro-Atlantic
partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We stand
ready to cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina
on all issues relating to Croatia's EU membership and
to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with firm political
and robust technical support in the process of European
integration.

Let me conclude by saying that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is an important State that needs our full
attention. Unfortunately, its rich and often troubled
history is at present a source of tensions and dispute
rather than the springboard for a better future. But
things can be changed for the better. We need a flexible,
tailor-made approach to Bosnia and Herzegovina that is
methodically somewhat different from the approach to
other European countries.

Recently, Bosnia and Herzegovina proved that it
can compete with the best and secure its place in the top
tier: it qualified for the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. One
might say that football is only a sport but there is no
reason why such a remarkable accomplishment could
not be repeated in other fields, not just on the football
pitch. It is up to all ofus to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
to secure its proper place in the architecture of a new
Europe and the world of the twenty-first century.
Croatia, as a close neighbour and friend that
shares a 1,000-kilometre land border with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, stands ready to be at the forefront of
those efforts.

