Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and also to thank Mr.
Morris for his informative briefing on the correlation
between hunger and peace and security in Africa. This
is a highly appropriate topic for Security Council
discussion.

The challenges in Africa represent a compelling
call for international cooperation to support the
continent's efforts to achieve lasting progress, peace
and security. We would like to draw attention to some
specific situations where hunger continues to threaten
peace and security on the African continent.

In the Sudan, insufficient resources to meet
humanitarian needs in Darfur could exacerbate existing
tensions and Violence as well as provoke additional
cross-border displacement into eastern Chad. In
southern Sudan, reduced food contributions will
hamper resettlement and further stretch the already
scarce household resources of both resident and
returnee populations.

Ethiopia, in addition to the current acute crisis,
suffers from chronic drought and problems stemming
from overpopulation, land degradation, poor market
systems and infrastructure, and the delayed
implementation of the public safety net programme.

The United States believes that at least 12 million
people are at risk, and the United Nations estimates
that over 500,000 children are suffering from various
forms of malnutrition. Localized famine conditions
exist in a number of regions within the country, and the
situation is expected to deteriorate if more resources
are not provided to address urgent humanitarian needs.

In West Africa, inadequately resourced food
pipelines have already forced the World Food
Programme (WFP) to reduce rations in refugee camps
in Sierra Leone. In Liberia, inadequate resettlement
packages for returnees will be complicated by ration
cuts in the coming months, coinciding with the national
election period. Those could serve as a flashpoint in an
already volatile environment and further inhibit the
resettlement process.

The Government of the Niger has also recently
declared a food security emergency. The United
Nations reports that 3.6 million of that country's
inhabitants, including 800,000 children, are vulnerable;
13.4 percent of children there are acutely
malnourished, and 2.5 percent are severely
malnourished. Such alarming rates are normally
associated with conflict-torn countries.

In southern Africa, WFP had planned to provide
food aid to 8 million people. At the present time, WFP
stocks and food pipelines in all six countries of the
region are extremely limited. Without new
commitments, WFP will be unable to meet the food
needs of several million highly vulnerable southern
Africans. Lives are unquestionably at stake. Recent
fragile gains towards good governance and the number
of people benefiting from antiretroviral therapy are
also at serious risk.

Zimbabwe is a particular problem, as its food
problems are politically motivated and not caused by
natural conditions. We are deeply concerned at the fact
that the ongoing campaign to demolish low-income
housing and informal businesses has created at least
420,000 homeless persons, many of whom are children.
Depriving those people of shelter and income has
aggravated the already serious humanitarian crisis. We
stand ready to assist Zimbabwe with large-scale food
assistance, as we did in 2002-2004, but we strongly
oppose Government policies that are making the
problem worse, and we urge the Government to end the
slum-demolition campaign. We urge the Government to
engage in a dialogue with the opposition and civil
society to end Zimbabwe's political impasse and to halt
the continuing decline of the economy. Zimbabwe's
self-inflicted economic meltdown affects trade,
investment and food security throughout southern
Africa.

President Bush has challenged international
partners in the donor community to provide greater
assistance to Africa and to address the critical
humanitarian needs identified by the United Nations.
The United States has already provided nearly $1.4
billion this fiscal year for humanitarian needs in
Africa, and we will soon provide an additional $674
million. Today President Bush announced that he
would ask Congress to spend $1.2 billion through 2008
to help fight malaria, which will benefit 1.2 million
people a year, 95 per cent of whom are in sub-Saharan
Africa.

The United States recognizes that global food
insecurity is complex and dynamic, and that there is no
standard recipe or solution that will properly address
all the national and regional crises that we face today.
The international community must continue to develop
tools that are flexible enough to address the unique
causes of each particular crisis.

African nations themselves remain responsible
for the well-being of their citizens. They must take
appropriate actions to address the root causes of crises.
Malnutrition, especially in children, has long-term,
irreversible consequences, ultimately decreasing
economic productivity and hindering development.

Let me say in closing that Jim Morris has shown
tremendous leadership in his role as head of WFP and
as the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Humanitarian Needs in Southern Africa. We would
also like to commend the hard work of WFP field staff
worldwide.

