Mr. Begec (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/768), Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his briefing and Ambassador Mahmoud
Saikal for his statement. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the work carried out by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
coordinating the international community's support
for Afghanistan.

As we leave behind the NATO Warsaw Summit and

move towards the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan,
we are indeed at a critical time. We were pleased to see
that the international community will continue with its
security and development assistance to Afghanistan.
We also welcome the dedication and determination
of the Government, security forces and people of
Afghanistan and their genuine efforts to overcome the
many challenges they face.

As the Secretary-General's report shows, the
security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile.
The Afghan security forces' fighting capabilities and
coordination skills are improving in the light of lessons
learned. However, the insurgents are improving their
techniques, too, and they remain a source of serious
concern. In that regard, continued international support
is vital. At the same time, the peace and reconciliation
process should also continue to be Afghan-owned and
-led. It is crucial to convince the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table. We support the work of several
mechanisms that have been established in various
formats to coordinate efforts in that direction and stand
ready to contribute to them.

In that understanding, we will continue our
bilateral assistance to Afghanistan in the areas of
security and development and our contributions to
NATO as a framework nation, as well as making
genuine contributions to the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process. In Ankara in June, as the co-leader country of
the Counter-terrorism Confidence Building Measures
within the Process, Turkey organized a course in
critical infrastructure protection from terrorist attacks.
We will soon finalize the preparations for two more
events, on radicalization and the financial aspects of
combating terrorism, towards the end of this year.

Before concluding, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey will continue to stand by our Afghan brothers as
long as our help is needed.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
