Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, Cote d'Ivoire would like to vigorously
condemn the heinous attacks perpetrated in Burkina
Faso and San Diego and express its deepest condolences
to the families of the victims, as well as its support
to the relevant authorities and its solidarity with the
Mozambican authorities. Our thoughts are also with
the family of Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri of
Ghana, Chief of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force.

My delegation welcomes the convening of
this meeting and congratulates Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, on her very informative
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We would also like to thank
Ms. Nada Majdalani and Mr. Gidon Bromberg for
their briefings.

The Israeli-Palestinian dispute is today one of
the most complex conflicts, which the international
community has been facing for several decades. Despite
numerous mediation efforts by the United Nations and
bilateral partners, the crisis remains unresolved. The
ongoing political and security challenges in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including the situation in
Hebron, as well as the serious humanitarian crisis
affecting Palestinians have, over the years, eroded the
hopes for a lasting peace that were raised by the Oslo
Accords, which were signed in 1993. In addition, the
shrinking space for possible political compromises
between the parties, as well as recurrent inflammatory
ideology and rhetoric, are exacerbating armed tensions
and confrontations. Notwithstanding that bleak picture,
Cote d'Ivoire continues to believe that peace between
Israelis and Palestinians is still possible.

My country's commitment to dialogue as the
preferred means of settling disputes between peoples
and our unwavering position in support of the security
of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination are the
foundations of the message ofpeace that my country has
always conveyed to all parties to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In short, Cote d'Ivoire strongly supports the
solution of two States coexisting peacefully within the
1967 borders. Given the current impasse and the vicious
cycle of violence that it engenders, my delegation
supports the international consensus on the need to
relaunch the Israeli-Palestinian peace process in order
to find mutually acceptable solutions to key issues, such
as the status of Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade
on Gaza and the security of the Palestinian population
in Hebron. cote d'Ivoire takes the opportunity of this
debate to once again call on the parties to the conflict to
engage resolutely in a constructive dialogue and abstain
from any unilateral action that could revive tensions.

My country is deeply concerned about the
consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the
humanitarian situation, particularly in Gaza, which
is Characterized by increasingly difficult access to
health-care services, ongoing water shortages and
power outages. The humanitarian crisis is aggravated
by a difficult socioeconomic situation, marked by
irregular payments of civil servants' salaries and
a sharp increase in unemployment, in particular in
Gaza, where more than 50 per cent of the working
population, most of whom are young people, has been
affected. Cote d'Ivoire therefore reiterates its appeal
to international partners to continue their material and
financial support for the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees, whose work is
vital for populations in distress.

Like the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the ongoing
crises in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen are
also a matter of concern to my delegation. With regard
to Syria, cote d'Ivoire believes that the following
three major actions could help to further strengthen
the international community's peace efforts: first,
maintaining the ceasefire in Idlib governorate in order
to prevent further loss of life and a worsening of the
humanitarian crisis; secondly, ensuring the sustainable
delivery of aid by removing all obstacles and ceasing
hostilities; and, lastly, engaging stakeholders in
implementing the relevant provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).

With regard to the conflict in Yemen, my country
welcomes the mediation efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations, and calls
for their continuation in order to reverse the trend of
violence, overcome food insecurity and resolve issues
of access to drinking water, primary health care and the
risk of epidemics.

All such efforts will unfortunately be in vain
until the parties to the conflict definitively renounce
a military solution to the crisis to engage in talks
and make the necessary compromises with a view to
building together a future of peace and stability for
all Yemenis.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support to the Special
Envoys of the Secretary-General for their dedication
to peace in the Middle East under difficult conditions.
My country remains convinced that there can be no
lasting solution to either the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
or the armed conflicts in Syria and Yemen except
through dialogue.

In conclusion, my country urges all international,
regional and national partners to redouble their efforts
to restore peace to this troubled region and to put an end
to the suffering of millions of people.

