Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): When a vessel or a person
is sinking in the ocean an S.O.S. distress call is sent,
and it is the moral and legal duty of all others at sea
to render immediate assistance to that sinking ship or
person, without asking why that has happened to them.
Certainly the reasons for the situation are important,
but let us agree that they are secondary compared to
the life ofa single human being. An S.O.S. call is being
sent right now from the small island developing States
(SIDS) that are losing their territories, populations
and resources, and thus their very existence, due to
the grave impacts of climate change. It is our common
obligation to hear their call and to respond to it without
any further delay.

The long-lasting debates on climate change are very
important because that is exactly what threatens small
island States. These talks should be continued with a
view to making a success story of the upcoming summit
in Paris. But in those sophisticated debates we should
not forget about the lives of hundreds and thousands of
our brothers and sisters populating the sinking islands
in the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic oceans. It is not just
a formal political matter of combating climate change;
it is a matter of the security of 44 small island nations,
a matter of their own very existence. They are being
threatened not by guns and missiles. They are being
threatened by a much worse enemy - a climate-related
natural disaster, a rise of ocean levels caused by climate
change. That enemy is no less serious than weapons
of mass destruction or genocide. It threatens entire
communities and nations, entire countries and regions.
We have to take this challenge very seriously before it
is too late. We need to put on life vests and act now in
order to prevent the catastrophic consequences of the
climate change faced by SIDS.

As we all know, the people of Kiribati have already
started to leave their sinking lands. The same forced
displacement and migration is rapidly approaching
others - Tuvalu, Vanuatu and the Maldives. The
Security Council should therefore take concrete
preventive steps. In order to avoid possible issues
and tensions caused by this forced migration and
displacement, which can be quite long-lasting, there is
an acute need to address the legal status of the people
who are forced to leave their homeland owing to the
loss of territory caused by ocean-level rise. Given the
serious safety and security implications, we should take
into account all possible legal and human rights aspects
of this phenomenon.

Ukraine stands by the side of SIDS and is committed
to the relevant Security Council agenda and elsewhere
in the framework of the United Nations and its agencies.

