Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting,
and to thank Special Adviser Lang for his report and
his valuable introductory remarks. We also thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs for his
briefing and the representative of Somalia for his
statement.

Lebanon reiterates the importance of developing
a holistic approach to the situation in Somalia that does
not only deal with the security situation but also
supports the building of institutions and economic
development in that country. We reaffirm our
condemnation of acts of piracy and armed robbery,
which pose a threat to international navigation and
trade and obstruct humanitarian access. We also agree
with the call by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in its communique of 15 October 2010, for
the Security Council to deal with

"the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in a
holistic manner, with the view to effectively
addressing its underlying causes and other
equally serious threats which affect the livelihood
and well being of the Somali people, in particular
illegal fishing and dumping of toxic substances
and waste off the coast of Somalia".

In that regard, we support Mr. Lang's proposal to
establish a committee to investigate illegal fishing and
maritime pollution.

Although the international naval presence in the
region contributes to containing the problem of piracy,
it does not address its root causes. Those continue to
lie in the lack of security, stability, the rule of law and
development in Somalia. Somali pirates are not born at
sea but on Somali land. Strengthening maritime
surveillance in a particular area will not be enough to
stop them. The continued evolution of their methods of
work and the expansion of their area of operations
from the Gulf of Aden into the Indian Ocean attests to
that.

Therefore, today we need to respond quickly and
effectively. In that context, we welcome the report of
the Special Adviser (see S/2011/30), which emphasizes
the extreme urgency of the situation and the pressing
need to act before we reach the point of no return. We
take note of that report and would like to highlight the
following points.

First, international law, and particularly the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, sets
the legal framework applicable to combating piracy
and armed robbery at sea.

Secondly, the failure to prosecute those
responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery and
the reluctance of States to incarcerate them for long
periods undermine anti-piracy efforts. It is indeed
alarming to learn that more than 90 per cent of pirates
captured will be released without prosecution - a
practice described as catch-and-release by Mr. Lang
and already noted by many colleagues.

Thirdly, naval and coast guard forces are
necessary in combating crimes at sea. However, the
ability of Somalia is very limited in that regard. We
therefore call for building and equipping Somali
forces, particularly its coast guard.

Fourthly, a legal structure is needed to authorize
the required executive and judicial jurisdiction over
suspected pirates.

Fifthly, we encourage the United Nations to assist
Somalia and neighbouring countries in delimiting their
maritime zones, which would clarify jurisdictional
matters among them and allow them to perform their
necessary duties within their areas of authority.

We could not agree more with Mr. Lang's
recognition of the need for economic and social
development to create incentives that would steer local
Somalis away from a piracy-based economy. The
international community needs to remain one step
ahead of the pirates. We therefore welcome the main
recommendations in the report and support the adoption
of a new Security Council resolution on this matter.

