The President (spoke in French): As this is the first
public meeting of the Security Council for the month of
October, I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf
ofthe Security Council, to pay tribute to His Excellency
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu, Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of September. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Alemu and his delegation
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of international peace and security

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2312 (2016)
(S/2017/761)

The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of the following countries to
participate in this meeting: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Latvia,
Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia
and Spain.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/827, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the following countries: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/76l, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2312 (2016).

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay


The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2380 (2017).

The meeting rose at10.10 a.m.

