Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation is grateful to
Ambassador Dahlgren and, through him, to the
Government of Sweden for the keen interest that they
have always shown in Sierra Leone. Ambassador
Dahlgren's recent trip to that country is a clear testimony
to his commitment as Chairman of the Sierra Leone
sanctions Committee. The importance of such visits
cannot be overemphasized. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report and Mr. Miyet for his update.

Whilst noting with satisfaction that the Sierra
Leonean Government is consolidating its authority, we
deplore the fact that the military situation is still volatile
and unpredictable, due likely to rebel activity, killing and
mutilating of civilians. Ambassador Dahlgren has given
us a graphic illustration of these atrocities.

Only the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has the ability to
deal with the rebels and to help restore stability to Sierra
Leone. This is why my delegation has been calling for
increased assistance to ECOMOG. Furthermore, the
impact of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNOMSIL) will be felt better only when
ECOMOG is given the logistics and material support that
it requires. ECOMOG and UNOMSIL have mutually
reinforcing roles. They complement each other, but if one
of the parties is lacking adequate resources, their overall
performance will not be satisfactory.

Only a few days ago, we began an open debate on
post-conflict peace-building, but we all know that, without
the necessary resources, there can be no meaningful
peace-building. This is why the international community
should disburse, as quickly as possible - as indicated by
Mr. Miyet - the pledges and commitments made during
the special conference on Sierra Leone. We cannot see
 

how, without the adequate resources, the Government's
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration could be carried forward, especially the
component affecting women and children.

With regard to the question of human rights, we have
no doubt that a successful rehabilitation programme, within
the wider context of post-conflict peace-building, could also
take care of human rights concerns. Post-conflict peace-
building efforts should be concentrated on development-
oriented projects for self-employment. Creating attractive
outlets for ex-combatants and even rebels would encourage
them to lay down their arms and participate in the uphill
task of nation-building.

So much for the internal situation. From a regional
perspective, as the representative of France rightly pointed
out, subregional and regional cooperation is also important
in the search for peace. The Mano River Union summit is
a case in point. President Kabbah paid an official visit to
the Gambia recently. Such high-level exchanges of visits
contribute to confidence-building and should be encouraged.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the extension of the mandate of
UNOMSIL for another six-month period. We also salute the
role of Reverend Jackson in the region and we thank you,
Sir, for organizing this open meeting, which we find very
useful.

