Ms. Power (United States of America): Listening
to the representative of Russia, one might think that
Moscow had just become the rapid response arm of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. So many of the assertions made
this afternoon by the representative of the Russian
Federation are without basis in reality. Let us begin
with a clear and candid assessment of the facts.

It is a fact that Russian military forces have taken
over Ukrainian border posts. It is a fact that Russia has
taken over the ferry terminal in Kerch. It is a fact that
Russian ships are moving in and around Sevastopol. It
is a fact that Russian forces are blocking the mobile
telephone services in some areas. It is a fact that Russia
has surrounded or taken over practically all Ukrainian
military facilities in Crimea. It is a fact that, today,
Russian jets entered Ukrainian airspace. It is also a
fact that independent journalists continue to report that
there is no evidence of violence against Russian or pro-
Russian communities.

Russian military action is not a human rights
protection mission. It is a violation of international
law and of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the independent nation of Ukraine and a breach of
Russia's Helsinki commitments and its United Nations
obligations. The central issue is whether the recent
change of Government in Ukraine constitutes a danger
to Russia's legitimate interests of such a nature and
extent that Russia isjustified in intervening militarily in
Ukraine, seizing control of public facilities and issuing
military ultimatums to elements of the Ukrainian
military.

The answer of course is no. The Russian military
are secure. The new Government in Kyiv has pledged
to honour all of its existing international agreements,
including those covering Russian bases. Russian
mobilization is a response to an imaginary threat.

A second issue is whether the population of Crimea
or other parts of eastern Ukraine are at risk because
of the new Government. There is no evidence of that.
Military action cannot bejustified on the basis ofthreats
that have not been made and are not being carried
out. There is no evidence, for example, that churches
in eastern Ukraine are being or will be attacked. The
allegation is without basis. There is no evidence that
ethnic Russians are in danger. On the contrary, the new
Ukrainian Government has placed a priority on internal
reconciliation and political inclusivity.

Acting President Turchynov has made clear his

opposition to any restriction on the use of the Russian
tongue. No one has to explain to Ukraine's new
Government the need to have open communications
not only with leaders of the country's Russian ethnic
majority in the Crimea and elsewhere but also with its
neighbours. That is why, when the current crisis began,
the Government sent its former chief of defence to the
region to try to defuse the situation. A second emissary
was prevented from entering the Crimean Verkhovna
Rada to engage in discussions. It is why the Ukrainian
authorities have repeatedly reached out to Russia.
Russia needs to reciprocate and to begin to engage
directly with the Government of Ukraine.
I note that Russia has implied a right to take
military action in the Crimea if invited to do so by
the Prime Minister of Crimea. As the Government
of Russia well knows, that has no legal basis. The
prohibition on the use of force would be rendered moot
were subnational authorities able to unilaterally invite
military intervention by a neighbouring State. Under
the Ukrainian Constitution, only the Ukrainian Rada
can approve the presence of foreign troops.

If we are concerned about the rights of the Russian-
speaking minorities, the United States is prepared to
work with Russia and the Council to protect them.
We have proposed and wholeheartedly support the
immediate deployment of international observers and
monitors from the United Nations or the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
ensure that the people about whom Russia expresses
such concern are protected from abuse and to elucidate
for the world the facts on the ground. The solution to
the crisis is not difficult to envision. There is a way out,
and that is through direct and immediate dialogue by
Russia with the Government of Ukraine, the immediate
pull-back of Russia's military forces, the restoration
of Ukraine's territorial integrity and the urgent
deployment of observers and human rights monitors,
not through more threats and more distortions.

Tonight, the OSCE will begin deploying monitors
to Ukraine. Those monitors can provide neutral and
needed assessments of the situation on the ground.
Their presence is urgently necessary in Crimea and in
key cities in eastern Ukraine. The United States calls
upon Russia to ensure that their access is not impeded.

The leadership in Moscow may well be unhappy
about former President Yanukovych's decision to
flee Ukraine and move in with them. Russia may be
displeased with the new Government, which was
approved by Ukraine's Parliament by an overwhelming
majority, including members of Yanukovych's own
party. Russia has every right to wish that events in
Ukraine had turned out differently but it does not have
the right to express that unhappiness by using military
force or by trying to convince the world community
that up is down and black is white.

Russia's calls to turn back time so as to implement
the 21 February agreement ring hollow. It was
Yanukovych who failed to abide by the terms of that
agreement, fleeing Kyiv and ultimately Ukraine. The
United States categorically rejects the notion that the
new Government of Ukraine is a Government of victors.
It is a Government of the people and one that intends
to Sheppard the country on 25 May towards democratic
elections that would allow Ukrainians who would prefer
a different leadership to have their views heard. The
United States will stand strongly and proudly with the
people of Ukraine as they chart out their own destiny,
their own Government and their own future.

The bottom line is that for all of the self-serving
rhetoric that we have heard from Russian officials in
recent days, there is nothing that justifies the Russian
conduct. As I said at our last meeting (see S/PV.7124),
Russia's actions speak much louder than its words.
What is happening today is not a human rights
protection mission or a consensual intervention. What
is happening today is a dangerous military intevention
in Ukraine. It is an act of aggression. It must stop. That
is a choice for Russia. Diplomacy can serve Russia's
interests. The world is speaking out against the use of
military threats and force. Ukrainians must be allowed
to determine their own destiny.

