Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me first of all to express
the grief of my Government, and my own personal
sorrow, at the tragic death last Friday of a dear friend,
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, former Foreign Minister of
Mali and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Angola, and at the deaths of five of his colleagues and
two members of the aeroplane crew. Maitre Blondin Beye
and the United Nations officers accompanying him gave
their lives, under the flag of the United Nations, for the
cause of peace and a better future for all the people of
Africa. They deserve our highest tribute and immense gratitude.

Italy fully endorses the statement delivered by Sir
John Weston on behalf of the European Union. I would
like, however, to add some considerations not only as the
Permanent Representative of Italy, but also as one of the
10 elected, independent members of a Committee which
sits in Geneva three times a year to monitor the
implementation of the international Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

Today, thanks especially to your own efforts and
sensitivity, Mr. President, the Security Council has a
unique opportunity to discuss how the world can protect
children affected by armed conflict and ensure compliance

 

with the too-often-challenged obligations enshrined in
article 38 of that Convention, which is - allow me to
remind the Council - even more universal than the Charter
of the United Nations, having been signed by 193 countries
and ratified by 191.

It was here in the Security Council, in January 1996,
that I heard for the first time a detailed account of the
tragic phenomenon of child soldiers. It was when the
current Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright, then
Permanent Representative of the United States, delivered a
very strong and passionate statement upon her return from
Liberia. Mrs. Albright described the plight of Liberian
children in the following terms:

"The era of the child soldier in Liberia must come to
an end immediately. It is an outrage by any standard
of civilization that children under the age of 15,
numbering between 4,000 and 6,000, are toting
automatic weapons, slaughtering innocent civilians and
ignoring the rule of law. They have no identity other
than through the weapon they carry." [S/PV.3621, p.5]

These words could not be more timely today.

I would be remiss if I did not equally acknowledge the
very impressive and magnificent role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, in raising
public awareness of the tragedy of the children soldiers.
Ambassador Otunnu is carrying on in the distinguished
tradition of Mrs. Graca Machel, who brought the gravity of
the phenomenon in all its dimensions to the attention of the
world in her well-known 1996 study on the impact of
armed conflict on children, which was presented that same
year to the General Assembly. It remains the most thorough
and up-to-date study of the phenomenon. I should like once
again to take this opportunity to thank Mrs. Machel and to
strongly support the role of Ambassador Olara Otunnu as
United Nations Special Representative in defence of
children affected by war.

For centuries, maybe millennia, during war and other
armed conflicts children have been exposed to all forms of
Violence. In the past these used to be considered the
unfortunate but inevitable side-effects of war. However,
they have now taken on new and even more horrifying
characteristics: more and more children have become
involved directly in wars as combatants, deliberately
recruited for this purpose by Governments, armed groups or
warlords. Some are impressed into the army; others are
kidnapped from their families; still others are forced to
enlist in order to defend their families. Many children are
picked up off the street, or from schools or orphanages.
Sometimes a combination of poverty and fear leads
families to offer their children to warring groups: their
"paycheck" often goes straight to the family. At other
times children become soldiers simply to survive; with no
centre to their lives, they come to see the various armed
factions as a sort of family.

In their forced exodus from conflict areas, huge
waves of refugees and displaced persons have a deep
physical and emotional impact on children, who are the
more vulnerable in such events - the first to suffer and
the first to die. They often have to walk for days at a
time without food or water, while refugee camps are all
too often characterized by high levels of violence, abuse
and untold humiliation and suffering.

Furthermore, in the wake of wars children are
exposed to the dangers of landmines and thousands of
unexploded devices, sometimes disguised to look like
toys - like butterflies or pineapples.

As was mentioned earlier, according to the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), in the last 10 years
alone 2 million children have been killed in wars, 6
million maimed, 12 million left homeless. Is this not a
modern-day "massacre of the innocents"?

The problem of children in war is dealt with
extensively in article 38 of the Convention of the Rights
of the Child of 20 November 1989. Under that article,
States parties are required to respect and to ensure respect
for rules of international humanitarian law applicable to
them in armed conflicts; take all feasible measures to
ensure that persons who have not attained the age of 15
years do not take a direct part in hostilities; refrain from
recruiting under-15-year-olds into their armed forces; give
priority to the oldest in recruiting any 15-to-18-year-olds;
and take all feasible measures to ensure protection and
care of children who are affected by an armed conflict.

Building on these provisions, the Geneva-based
Committee on the Rights of the Child has emphasized in
its jurisprudence that the effects of armed conflict on
children should be considered in the framework of all the
articles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In
particular, it has stressed that it believes, in the light of
the definition of the child and the principle of the best
interests of the child, that no child under the age of 18
should ever be allowed to be involved in hostilities, either
directly or indirectly.

 

I believe that it is high time that everyone fully
complies with these very precise and binding provisions.

We very much welcome the adoption of a presidential
statement by the Security Council on children affected by
armed conflict. It will certainly send a strong and
unequivocal message to Governments, to armed bands and
warlords, and to world public opinion on the relevance of
the problem and the need to find an urgent solution.

Most of all - and here I agree entirely with Special
Representative Olara Otunnu - what we need most of all
is to move from words to action. We dare to propose the
following measures, whose immediate implementation
would greatly contribute, we believe, to the defence of
children.

First, we should raise to an even greater extent the
awareness of public opinion and let the world know where,
how and by whom these horrible crimes of exploitation of
innocent children are committed. Every case in which a
warlord presses children into conflict must be denounced
and exposed. We need in particular to mobilize the media:
believe me, a special report on the little screen in our
houses can often do more good than dozens of conferences
or workshops on the issue.

Secondly, we must urge the immediate demobilization
of all active soldiers younger than 18; the adoption of
measures to achieve this goal would send an important
signal to the international community. In this context, we
strongly hope that the final statute of the international
criminal court, which is currently being negotiated in Rome,
will include a provision bringing within the jurisdiction of
that court the crime of using children in hostilities.

T hirdly, in peace agreements and in peace-building,
we need to give high priority to the problems of children
and to the need to integrate them into civil society.
Substantial - not nominal - financial and human
resources should be earmarked by the donor community for
humanitarian aid and assistance to children who are victims
of war for their demobilization and rehabilitation after the
conflict.

Fourthly, since 1994, as has been recalled today, a
working group at the United Nations has been studying a
draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child that would set 18 as the minimum age for
involvement in hostilities. This draft protocol should at long
last be finalized, opened for signature and ratified as soon
as possible.

Finally, for the effective protection of children from
the risk of mines, we need a complete ban on anti-
personnel landmines, strengthened financial assistance for
demining operations, mine-awareness programmes that
teach children to avoid mines, and rehabilitation and
assistance programmes for children injured and maimed
by mines.

The scourge of children in wars must be eradicated,
and eradicated immediately. Italy strongly urges the
cooperation of all States, international and national
organizations, relevant United Nations bodies and civil
society in stepping up their efforts to that end.

After all, we must never forget that children are the
future of humanity: our own future.

