Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his
briefing on the outcome of the latest round of talks
in Geneva, and to take this opportunity to once again
express our full support for his tireless and dedicated
diplomatic efforts to help bring an end to the Syrian
crisis. We appreciate his wisdom and leadership in
facilitating the intra-Syrian talks, and we take note of
the limited but incremental progress that has been made
in the latest rounds, which have enabled the parties to
once again sit in the same room and start engaging
substantively on the four basket issues involved in a
possible settlement of the Syrian crisis.

It is clear that we are meeting today against a
backdrop of the reports of the use of chemical weapons
on 4 April, which has shocked and appalled all ofus here
and indeed the whole world. We hope that the alleged
incident will not have a serious impact on the political
track. The issue now is how, while doing what we
must to assure accountability, we can return to honest
pursuit of the noble goal of making progress towards a
peaceful settlement and thereby ending the suffering of
the Syrian people, who have endured so much for the
past seven years. We believe that the Foreign Ministers
of the Group of Seven (G-7) struck the right note on
11 April in their joint communique from Lucca, Italy,
when they said that

"[W]e believe that there is an opportunity to bring
this tragic crisis to an end and we hope that all
major partners will live up to their international
responsibilities and seize this opportunity."

It was even more encouraging to hear them say that
if the situation were conducive and others were also
willing to meet their obligations, the Group would be
prepared to do its part by "pursuing a political settlement
and ultimately contributing to the costs of stabilization
and reconstruction". As we have said time and again,
only a comprehensive political solution can enable that
objective to be realized. That is why we must fully
support the intra-Syrian talks and the efforts of Special
Envoy de Mistura. Once again in that connection, the
message of solidarity that came out of the high-level
Brussels Conference on support to Syria and the region
was indeed timely, and an important ingredient in the
creation of a supporting environment for the Geneva
talks under the auspices of the United Nations.

Now is the time for the Council to do everything
possible to make sure that the peace talks make
tangible progress. In that regard, it is absolutely vital
that those who have influence on the parties exercise
the leverage on them needed to ensure that they
seriously and collectively engage in the talks with a
clear commitment to ending the conflict. It has become
very clear that without the involvement and cooperation
of the major Powers and the countries of the region,
nothing will move forward. It is with that in mind that
we, like Special Envoy de Mistura, look forward to the
outcome of the meeting between the Foreign Ministers
of the United States and Russia in Moscow today.

We have of course been following the developments
on the ground and are deeply disturbed by the continued
fighting across many parts of Syria. The military
approach should not be allowed to have the upper hand.
We believe that the role of the guarantors is critical to
ending the violations of the ceasefire and consolidating
the Astana process. We very much hope that the next
Astana talks, which are expected to take place next
month, will be instrumental in that regard. Without full
implementation of the ceasefire the prospects for any
progress in the intra-Syrian talks will be doomed.

Lastly, what we have understood in the course of
the past three months or so on the Council is that the
views on a number of important issues concerning the
crisis in Syria do converge. Everybody agrees that there
is no alternative to a political solution. Everybody also
agrees that it is essential to fight terrorism and violent
extremism in Syria. We all agree on the importance
of ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. Furthermore, everybody agrees that the use of
chemical weapons is totally unacceptable and that any
party, State or non-State, found guilty of such crimes
must be held accountable. We should therefore really
capitalize on what unites us in order to ensure progress
on finding a lasting political settlement of the Syrian
crisis and realizing the hope expressed in Lucca by the
G-7 Foreign Ministers. We know that this is easier said
than done, but if the necessary political will is there,
we do not believe that it is too difficult to overcome the
current paralysis and achieve a breakthrough.

