Mr. Saleh (Eritrea): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and Italy on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of November. I
have the honour to address this meeting of the Security
Council on behalf ofthe people of Eritrea who have, for

over half a century, been at the forefront of the struggle
for peace and human dignity in the Horn of Africa.

Today once again, the Security Council has missed
another opportunity to rectify its transgression against
the people of Eritrea and to positively contribute
to security in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea,
which have long suffered the debilitating effects of
the scourge of conflict, poverty and terrorism. For
five years - including this - the Monitoring Group
on Somalia and Eritrea has asserted that there is no
evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia,
which is the principaljustification invoked for imposing
sanctiona. This should never have come as a surprise,
as Eritrea's role in combating terrorism in the region is
a matter of historical record.

With regard to Djibouti, it is unprecedented for the
Council to sanction one party without any symmetry,
especially when the dispute is under a mutually agreed
mediation. The skewed manner in which the Security
Council has been handling the dispute continues to
breed a sense of non-obligation for the Government of
Djibouti, which pursues a policy of provocation aimed
at stirring up tensions when, in fact, the border between
the two countries remains calm. Moreover, Eritrea finds
it ironic that the Council has chosen to remain silent
on Ethiopia's illegal occupation of sovereign Eritrean
territories for 15 years while it harasses Eritrea on
account of a putative border dispute with Djibouti.

The message to the people of Eritrea from those
that supported resolution 2385 (2017) is loud and
clear. Eritrea has done no wrong, nor has it violated
Security Council resolutions, yet the sanctions will be
maintained for the sole purpose of targeting Eritrea.
The message to the citizens of the region is equally
clear - there is no willingness on the part of the
Council to address the core issues undermining peace
and security in the region.

The emphasis placed by some Council members
on alleged support to armed groups is inappropriate,
unacceptable and based on a double standard. It
will reward aggravation, occupation, the policies of
destabilization and regime change, and provocation.
It will encourage the perpetuation of zero-sum games,
which is unfortunate, but more importantly, it will be
viewed as a discredit to this organ, which is mandated
with the critical task of maintaining international peace
and security.
The Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region remain
volatile and fragile. Eritrea is making its modest but
significant contribution to stabilizing the region;
however it is critical to examine whether the sanctions
that have been in place against Eritrea for the past
eight years are abating conflicts or fuelling them.
Evidently, the sanctions have worsened the situation by
rewarding an aggressor and giving Ethiopia a sense of
impunity. They have entailed the perpetuation of the
conflict, resulting in a heavy price paid by the peoples
of Ethiopia and Eritrea, as well as complicating the
regional security situation. Eritrea once again calls on
the Council to redress that wrong, in the interests not
only of Eritrea, but also of Ethiopia, the subregion and
the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region.

Regional peace and security in the Horn of Africa
and the Red Sea region are first and foremost the
responsibility ofthe countries of the region. Eritrea will
continue its constructive engagement and contribution
to ensuring peace, amity and progress in our region.
Eritrea's conviction arises from its belief that a
conducive environment is essential to its all-inclusive
and people-centred development.

I wish to conclude by thanking those delegations
that did not support this politically motivated and
counterproductive resolution adopted by the Council.

