Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I would like
to start by conveying our appreciation to the President
for holding this high-level meeting on peace and
security in Africa. I am greatly honoured to participate
in this forum on behalf of the President of the Republic
of Angola, His Excellency Jose Eduardo dos Santos,
who for unavoidable reasons could not travel to New
York.

Allow me to congratulate the President, on behalf
of my Government and on my own behalf, for the wise
manner in which he has been conducting the work of
the Security Council, especially for the opportunity and
pertinence of including in its agenda an issue that is
vital to its good performance, and that is matters
related to peace and security in Africa. I would also
like to express my appreciation to the previous Council
President for the constructive manner in which he,
together with the Secretary-General, contributed to the
realization of this important high-level meeting, which
takes place at a juncture when both the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) are confronting multiple
and complex challenges linked to peace and
development in the African continent.
On the occasion of the 2007 Security Council
meeting on the same topic, under the French
presidency (5749th meeting), the Council recognized,

among other aspects, the fundamental role of regional
and subregional organizations in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts on the basis Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, as well as of Council
resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631 (2005), to which we
can add presidential statement 2005/39. The Council
reiterated the importance of the relevant paragraphs of
the Outcome Document of the 2005 Summit, General
Assembly resolution 60/1, on the need for development
aid for Africa and strengthening the African Union's
operational capacity for peacekeeping operations for a
10-year period.

Africa is aware that the principal causes for the
conflicts in the continent have a direct relationship
with circumstances resulting from the complexity of its
ethnic and linguistic phenomena. However, they are
also fundamentally linked to the underdevelopment
that is a consequence of the undeniable legacy of a
long period of colonization that dramatically marked
the course of its history. It is in that context that the
AU, along with subregional economic communities,
has been deeply engaged in the operationalization of its
peace and security structures and mechanisms, namely
the African Standby Force, the early warning system,
the Panel of the Wise and the Special Fund for peace
and security.

We understand that in order for the United
Nations and the AU to be able to adequately counter
the constraints on the efficiency of the necessary
cooperation in the domain of conflict prevention,
management and resolution, it is of the utmost
necessity to address the issues of peace and security in
an inclusive manner, not dissociating them from
development problems. The convergence of those
elements is fundamental for the success of
peacekeeping operations. That is one of the lessons we
learned while following and observing certain conflict
resolution, peace consolidation and economic
reconstruction processes as the first Chairman of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, in 2006
and 2007.

As we have already mentioned, peace and social
development are correlated elements that complement
one another. Having achieved peace, the Republic of
Angola has been undertaking enormous efforts to
create subjective and material conditions for its
reconstruction, with a View to reaching sustained
development. The accomplishments of my Government
have deserved the recognition of all the Angolan
society and the international community, in light of the
tangible results already reached in the recovery of the
economic and social infrastructure destroyed during
the war and in the construction of new infrastructure.
Judging from the positive trend in our economic
growth, which is above of 19 per cent, our perspectives
are, frankly, encouraging.

It is in this perspective that the Angolan
Government conceived and is implementing the
National Strategy for Poverty Reduction in order to
reach the human development indicators set out in the
Millennium Declaration. Our experience has
demonstrated that in the African context, the
consolidation of peace results from the combination of
various factors such as the conception and
implementation of a coherent policy of national
reconciliation, the implementation of economic
reforms that favour the provision of ample space for
free initiative on the part of national and foreign
citizens, the constant reinforcement of State authority
as an imperative for the consolidation of democratic
institutions, and respect for and safeguarding of human
rights as a component of peace, democracy and
development, among others.

Indeed, under the able leadership of the President
of the Republic, Jose Eduardo dos Santos, Angola has
been removing the hurdles that hindered the smile of
its people. Today, only six years after the end of the
internal conflict that lacerated the country for several
decades, peace and national reconciliation are
consolidated, and with them democracy, whose
consecration will be strengthened with the holding, for
the second time in the history of Angola, of the
legislative and presidential elections foreseen for 2008
and 2009, respectively.

The Republic of Angola reiterates, therefore, its
firm commitment to working in a self-sacrificing and
altruistic manner in the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, and in the subregional organizations
of which it is a member, towards helping to find
peaceful solutions for the conflicts that still persist in
certain countries of our continent. To that effect, my
Government considers the cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations to be of extreme
importance.

I would like to state that my delegation will
support the deliberative text that will result from our
debate.
