Mr.Ibrahim (Malaysia):Onbehalfofmydelegation,
I warmly welcome You, Sir, to the Council and I thank
you for presiding over this meeting. We highly value
your presence and the high-level representations today
from Senegal, Ukraine and Angola. Your participation
in this open debate provides prominence to a topic that
has long been marginalized in the Council.

We are appreciative of the briefing by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and we acknowledge the clear
message of the Secretary-General on the unsustainable
situation in occupied Palestine.

Malaysia also associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Iran and
Kuwait on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.

For the purpose of today's meeting, I wish to focus
my statement on the plight of Palestinian children and
on the issue ofillegal settlements.

Since the start of the latest wave of Violence last
October, children have consisted of almost a quarter of
the total Palestinian casualties. According to UNICEF,
last month alone 9 Palestinian children were killed
and more than 205 were injured by Israeli forces and
settlers in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. By
comparison, UNICEF reported no Israeli child fatalities
or injuries during the same period. The intention to
cause maximum casualties was evident as Palestinian
civilians, including children, were deliberately shot
with live ammunition or rubber-coated bullets by
Israeli forces. In some cases, they were denied medical
treatment and left to suffer agonizing deaths.

The indiscriminate and disproportionate approach
of the occupying Power towards Palestinian civilians
was captured in a horrifying video last October. In the
video, an Israeli military vehicle entered the Palestinian
Aida refugee camps and an Israeli soldier threatened
over a loud speaker:

"As long as you throw stones, go home or we
will gas you. We will gas you until you die. The
children, the youth, the old people - you will all
die. We will not leave any of you alive."

Arbitrary arrests and detentions of Palestinian
children also continued. Since last September, close to
400 Palestinian children have been arrested or detained
by Israeli forces. Many of these children have been
Violently seized from their homes at night, beaten,
blindfolded, strip-searched, interrogated without legal
counsel, held incommunicado from their parents and
placed in solitary confinement. Even schools have
not been spared from attack. Last November, over
70 Palestinian school children suffered from tear gas
inhalation as Israeli forces fired tear gas canisters and
sprayed skunk water at a school in Hebron. The illegal
practice of brutally executed collective punishment
also persisted as Israeli forces demolished the homes of
Palestinians, rendering Palestinian families, including
children, homeless and in destitution.

Meanwhile, in the Gaza Strip, health-care professionals
from the Gaza Community Mental Health Program
reported a sharp increase in the number of children
with post-traumatic stress disorder, except that in
Gaza there is no such thing as "post". Traumatic stress
disorder has sadly become a daily reality. Even after
the disproportionate Israeli aggression in Gaza of July
2014, Palestinians continued to suffer under repressive
Israeli occupation and inhumane blockade. Children
in Gaza who were once top students and cheerful
suffered psychological trauma and became aggressive
and withdrawn, had persistent nightmares and were
terrified of loud noises.

Bearing in mind all the illegal Israeli practices
against children, in violation of international law, we
must search our conscience and ask ourselves: What
kind of future have we shaped for the Palestinian
children, who have grown up knowing only injustice,
oppression, anger and violence throughout their lives?
Clearly, the lack of accountability for Israel, including on
the issue of the protection of children, has emboldened
it to commit further violations with impunity. With
our continuing inaction, we run the risk of setting off
a ticking time-bomb, with grave repercussions for the
region and the world.

Last year was yet another lost opportunity for
the Council to make progress on the Palestinian
question. Despite promising initiatives by some
Council members, in the end we were back at square
one, dashing the dreams and hopes of those who have
suffered far too long and confirming that their miseries
had once again been ignored. We were told to wait, and
while we complied and waited Israel, with its insatiable
appetite for land-grabbing, seized even more lands from
the Palestinians, snubbing the two-State solution. Just
last week, the Israeli Government declared 370 acres of
land in occupied West Bank to be State land, effectively
confiscating more Palestinian land and robbing the
Palestinians of their future.
This month alone, the Israeli authorities continued
to demolish housing structures belonging to Palestinian
Bedouins in occupied East Jerusalem, rendering
homeless over 40 Palestinians, half of them children.
The forced displacement was part of the Israeli plan to
build illegal settlements in the E-l corridor for thousands
of Israeli settlers. There is no doubt that these actions
are illegal and contrary to international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Furthermore, the
illegal settlements constitute the single-most damaging
factor that endangers the two-State solution.

The Council must stop turning a blind eye to
these Violations and start holding Israel accountable,
based on international standards of human rights and
international law. We can no longer accept excuses that
any action against Israel, even if to uphold international
law and human rights standard, is either anti-Semitic
or will jeopardize the possibility of peace talks.
Instead, we must expose these excuses for what they
are - farcical pretexts to perpetuate the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestine.

In the short term, pending a final and comprehensive
settlement of the Palestinian question, we need to
seriously consider the option for international protection
for the Palestinian people, including children. Such
protection, which has numerous precedents at the United
Nations and could constitute a confidence-building
measure, would go a long way towards ending impunity
and ensuring stability and security in occupied Palestine
and the region. The international community should
also pursue all legal, diplomatic and economic channels
to step up its pressure on the Israeli Government and
make it too costly for Israel to continue with its illegal
settlement policy.

In the long run, we still aspire to a two-State
solution - to the States of Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security based on the pre-1967
borders. However, the prospect for peaceful coexistence
is diminishing by the day, especially due to Israel's
settlement policy and our inaction. If we continue to
do nothing, this will feed into the agenda of those who
seek to destroy the prospects for the two-State solution,
and the two-State solution will eventually become a
delusion. The consequences will be grim, not only for
the region but for all humankind. We must not look on
helplessly as that happens.
