Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Security Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 1979 (2011), which highlights
the importance attached by the international
community to settling the conflict in Western Sahara.
The resolution sends three important messages.

First, it recalls the priority nature of the political
process. We welcome the acceleration of unofficial
talks under the auspices of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and hope that official negotiations
will quickly resume. We support the initiatives taken
by Mr. Ross along these lines, but he will be able to do
nothing without the commitment of all parties, which
should participate in the negotiations, as recalled by
the resolution we have just adopted. The parties should
show a sense of realism and a spirit of compromise,
and abstain from any provocation.

The settlement of this question is a necessity not
only for the people of Western Sahara, but also for the
stability, security and integration of the Maghreb
region. Nothing should therefore distract us from this
objective. In this regard, Morocco has presented a
serious and credible autonomy plan that is a good basis
for negotiation.

The second message is that the resolution sends a
clear message of support for the reforms undertaken by
Morocco, especially with respect to human rights. The
King of Morocco, in his historic 9 March speech,
launched a reform movement that the Council wishes
to support. In this context, we are pleased that Morocco
has decided not only to establish national human rights
mechanisms, but also to ensure access to the 33 special
procedures of the Human Rights Council. The Security
Council has welcomed and encouraged these new
substantial measures, which will benefit the population
of Western Sahara in particular. But the resolution also
recalls that the situation of the Sahrawi population in
the Tindouf camps should not be forgotten.

The third message is that the resolution highlights
the considerable progress being made in the area of
confidence-building measures. The agreement of the
parties and the neighbouring States to meet regularly
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to reassess the
entire confidence-building programme is important.
Last week, the dispatch of a team to study the
construction of a road that would facilitate family
visits and the organization of a seminar in Portugal
between Sahrawis in Western Sahara and in the camps
are positive developments. Every effort must be made
to alleviate the day-to-day difficulties of the Sahrawi
population. We salute the role played by the UNHCR
in this regard. We support any additional measures
taken on the political and humanitarian levels, with the
agreement of the parties, to promote mutual trust.

