Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate Minister Rafael Bielsa
and the Argentine Republic on their timely initiative of
convening an open debate on Haiti during the
Argentine presidency of the Security Council this
month. It is extremely important for Paraguay to see
the willingness of the Security Council to make known
and explain topics of overarching interest to all
Member States, and in particular matters related to
security and institutional stabilization in countries
affected by internal conflict.

The establishment of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in June
2004 provided the endorsement necessary to guarantee
an orderly and transparent transition to institutional
and political recovery in the Republic of Haiti, thereby
averting destabilizing effects in the region. We would
therefore like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti,
Mr. Juan Valdes, for his detailed briefing on the current
situation, which pointed to substantive progress
towards the normalization of activities in the country.

We are also pleased to note the active joint
participation of the Organization of American States
(OAS) and the United Nations in the electoral process
this year, which will be of vital importance. We
therefore hope that that process will also have the
resolute support of other institutions and States in order
to ensure free and transparent elections with the
participation of all Haitians.

The human and financial resources mobilized to
date for MINUSTAH confirm the willingness of
Member States to decisively support multilateral
cooperation to overcome the climate of instability and
disorder that prevailed during Haiti's political crisis
and that caused significant damage and irreparable
losses to the Haitian people. Paraguay is taking part in
the Stabilization Mission by contributing staff officers.
However, for logistical reasons beyond our control, and
although our desire remains firm and committed, we
have had to postpone to a later stage the deployment of
troops to the field.

Paraguay welcomes the active mobilization of a
great number of Latin American and Caribbean
Member States, which has provided an effective and
decisive response to a humanitarian emergency
besetting a country of the region. Meanwhile, as we
have heard during this open debate, financial
contributions are still lagging. We urge donor countries
and financial institutions to streamline the process of
fulfilling the pledges they made at the donors
conference in Washington last year.

Finally, we would like to place on record
Paraguay's commitment to continue to support the
cause and ideals of the United Nations as it seeks to
bring about lasting stability and development for its
Member States, in particular for those that have for far
too long seen their aspirations thwarted when it comes
to providing their citizens with the stability and
institutional development necessary to support their
legitimate right to achieve sustainable economic and
social development.

