I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. China steadfastly believes that a political solution is the only way out of the Syrian conflict and calls on the international community to scale up humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. We support the United Nations in continuing to play a leading and coordinating role in this regard. Today I would like to highlight four points. First, we should adhere to the principle of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned solution, and redouble our efforts to push forward the political process. China welcomes the consensus achieved at the third session of the small body of the Constitutional Committee. We appreciate Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to prepare for the fourth session, including his recent visit to Damascus. We hope the parties concerned will maintain close contact with the Special Envoy and advance the political dialogue on the basis of existing consensus, so as to achieve tangible results as soon as possible. Meanwhile, the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria must be fully respected and defended. The work of the Syrian Constitutional Committee must remain independent and free from foreign interference and manipulation. Propositions or actions that go against the fundamental interests of the Syrian people will not enjoy wide support and will go nowhere. Secondly, we should stabilize the security situation across Syria to create conditions for the political process and humanitarian operations. Since March, the situation on the ground in north-west Syria has been generally stable and calm. The relevant parties have made great efforts to maintain the ceasefire arrangement. China calls on the Syrian parties to heed the ceasefire appeals from the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy and to encourage the Astana process to continue playing an important role in that regard. Meanwhile, the security situation in Syriais still faced with multiple challenges and risks. Foreign occupation has caused turbulence in Syria and the region beyond, and the terrorists are seeking to take advantage of the pandemic to expand their operations and control. According to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1031), many armed groups are systematically targeting civilians, and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant cells have stepped up their attacks and insurgence. The international community should help and support the Syrian side in coping with those security challenges, combating terrorism and defending national security and stability. Thirdly, we should improve local humanitarian conditions through the use of holistic measures. The economic situation in Syria is still very fragile, and the Syrian Government has taken a host of measures to address the difficult situation of its national economy. The international community should take concrete steps, fulfil its pledges of assistance and support Syria in developing its economy, rebuilding its infrastructure and improving people's livelihoods. Humanitarian assistance should not be accompanied by preconditions or be used as a tool to pressure the Syrian Government. China supports the United Nations in implementing and promoting cross- line and cross-border humanitarian operations. The World Health Organization (WHO) recently completed its delivery of medical aid to north-east Syria by land from Damascus, and the World Food Programme-led logistics cluster has expanded the trans-shipment hub at the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point. Those efforts and that progress should be fully recognized. We encourage the United Nations to strengthen its dialogue with the Syrian Government and local authorities so as to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of cross-line operations, simplify procedures in cross- border operations and make relentless efforts to meet the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. Fourthly, we call for the immediate lifting of unilateral coercive measures against Syria. Such measures have severely weakened Syria's economic foundation and resources-mobilization capacity and hindered the Syrian people's access to medical supplies and services. Vulnerable groups, including women, children and internally displaced persons (IDPs), bear the brunt of its impact. China urges those countries responsible to respond to the appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, heed the call of the vast majority of States Members of the United Nations and immediately lift the unilateral coercive measures against Syria. The Security Council should look seriously into the negative impacts of such measures, listen to the concerns of the illegally sanctioned countries and push for the alleviation of the impact and the finding of ultimate solutions. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs should also pay close attention to this issue and provide analyses and recommendations in the relevant reports. Before I conclude, let me talk briefly about the coronavirus disease. In recent days, we have seen a surge of confirmed cases in many countries and regions, and there is a risk of a second wave of coronavirus globally this fall and winter. As a vulnerable country, Syria is suffering deeply from the pandemic owing to lack of health-care resources and limited testing and treatment capacity. According to the Secretary-General's report, there are signs of a high degree of community transmission in Syria, and densely inhabited districts, in particular IDP camps, are faced with greater risks. The international community should strengthen support for the Syrian Government and the WHO in taking more proactive measures to prevent the spread of the virus and save lives. China has provided medical assistance to Syria. We will continue to help Syria to prevent and contain the virus and support the Syrian people in overcoming the pandemic at an early date.
