Mr. Celem (Turkey): On numerous occasions, we
have expressed our views on the need to make the
Security Council more transparent, responsive,
accountable and representative. At meetings of the
General Assembly and of the Open-ended Working Group
on the Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and
Other Matters Related to the Security Council, as well as
at meetings of the Council itself, we have explained our
position regarding transparency in and democratization of
the Council's decision-making process. During the next
round of deliberations of the Open-ended Working Group,
we shall continue to address this issue. My delegation
strongly believes that openness and democratization in the
working methods and procedures of the Security Council
will enhance the Council's efficiency and effectiveness.

 

Under Article 25 of the Charter, Member States agree
to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council. This makes the Council unique within the United
Nations system. Furthermore, the authority of the Security
Council' s decisions emanates from the fact that the Council,
in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter, acts on behalf
of all Members of the United Nations. For that reason, it is
essential that the Council's decisions be in accord with the
views of the general membership.

The fact that Council decisions must have an adequate
consensual basis is also inherent in the letter and spirit of
Article 1 (4) of the Charter, which lists "harmonizing the
actions of nations" as one of the purposes of the United
Nations. Therefore, the creation of a credible and workable
mechanism for dialogue between the Council and the
general membership is of utmost importance. This would
enable the general membership to participate, where and if
necessary, in the Council's decision-making process and
would ensure greater support for the actions of the Council.

It is in line with this reasoning that we have welcomed
and strongly supported all initiatives and steps for achieving
transparency. In our letter circulated as document
S/ 1994/ 1237, we underlined our support for the initiative of
Argentina and New Zealand pertaining to the
institutionalization of the procedures for consultations
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries. In the same vein, we welcomed the French
initiative of 9 November 1994 (S/ 1994/ 1279).

The new and improved proposal on institutionalized
dialogue between the Council and the troop contributors
was outlined in the statement by the representative of
Argentina. My delegation, along with many others,
associates itself with that statement. We strongly believe
that the mechanism proposed by Argentina would contribute
to the enhancement of the effectiveness and moral authority
of the Council.
