Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I would also like to thank and commend the Permanent Representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for his efforts during his country's presidency last month. On 11 December 2018, the Council issued a presidential statement that stated the following, (spoke in English) "The Security Council welcomes the continued improvements in the security situation across Darfur outside the Jebel Marra area, aided by the deployment of Government security forces associated with the arms collection campaign" (S/PRST/2018/19). (spoke in Arabic) On 12 December 2019, Her Excellency Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, former Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, presented to the Council (see S/PV.8684) her quarterly report covering the period between 4 October to 11 December 2019. She prepared that report after her visit to the Sudan, during which she personally reflected on the reality of the situation in Darfur, stating in her report the following: (spoke in English) "Without a doubt, the situation in Darfur has improved since my visit last year and, in the larger context, since the imposition of the sanctions regime.The security situation has largely normalized, with the exception of the presence of rebel groups in limited areas of Jebel Marra." (ibid., p.2). (spoke in Arabic) In that same briefing to the Council, the former Chair of the Sanctions Committee also said: (spoke in English) "T therefore encourage the Committee and the Council to explore different options as to how the tool of sanctions might support and acknowledge the achievements made so far by the Sudanese authorities and the people." (ibid.). (spoke in Arabic) I wish to take the opportunity of this meeting to clarify some fundamental facts. First, the sanctions imposed on the Sudan as a result of the situation in Darfur 15 years ago are no longer relevant. That is why the Council must reconsider those sanctions and lift them in response to developments on the ground in Darfur. Secondly, as we have said repeatedly in our statements and meetings with Council members, the situation in Darfur is making steady progress on a daily basis. The ceasefire currently being observed throughout Darfur has not experienced a single breach since it was announced. Moreover, ongoing, serious negotiations are taking place between the Government and the parties sponsored by the State of South Sudan, which have resulted in the signing of a declaration of principles between the Government and groups affiliated with the Sudan Revolutionary Front and beyond. That represents a quantum leap towards stopping the war and restoring peace not only to Darfur, but to the entire country. Thirdly, with regard to the sanctions imposed on four individuals under resolution 1672 (2006), I wish to clarify that one of those individuals retired from service in the Sudanese Armed Forces several years ago. He no longer has any connection to public service in the Sudan. Another is currently detained and subject to ongoing criminal investigations. The two remaining individuals - the former leaders of armed movements - went into hiding years ago and we currently have no information on their whereabouts. Council members are aware that the border region in which Darfur is situated is experiencing delicate security conditions and activities of extremist groups, in particular Boko Haram, Da'esh and transnational organized crime networks involved in illegal migration, human trafficking, drug trafficking and arms smuggling. Those challenges on the western borders of the Sudan require the Sudanese security forces and law enforcement authorities to build capacity and enhance their efficiency in order to address the precarious security situation. Of course, that is simply not possible due to the sanctions imposed upon us under resolution 1591 (2005).Inconclusion, we welcome the adoption ofresolution 2508 (2020) today. We stand ready and willing to cooperate with the Sanctions Committee, which we hope will consider options for lifting the sanctions. I once again underscore my country's commitment to working with the international community in order to build a new Sudan where the values of freedom, peace and justice prevail, especially after the glorious December revolution. That is something we can achieve only if the Council engages positively with the aspirations of the people of the Sudan, most importantly by lifting the sanctions imposed upon them. The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.
