The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zebari
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the members of the
Council, I extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms.
Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
30 of resolution 1546 (2004), document 5/2006/360.

Members of the Council also have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 12 June 2006 from the
Secretary-General, transmitting letters concerning the
2
International Advisory and Monitoring Board. This
letter and its enclosures will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2006/394.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/377, which contains a letter dated
9 June 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and by His Excellency
Mr. John Bolton, representative of the United States,
on behalf of the multinational force.

I now give the floor to Ms. Angela Kane,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.


