Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Australia for convening this briefing and for its work on
trying to improve the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions. Australia was one of the main sponsors and
contributors to the recent high-level review of United
Nations sanctions, and your efforts, Mr. President, as
Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) show clearly that you are putting theory into
practice. I also thank Mr. Feltman and the Secretary
General of INTERPOL for their briefings this morning.

As Mr. Feltman set out, sanctions are a vital foreign
policy tool that can contribute to achieving United
Nations objectives. They are used to prevent conflict,
human rights abuses, terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons. They have made a critical and positive
difference in situations from Afghanistan to Yemen.
It is incumbent on the Security Council to ensure that
sanctions are used properly. That means designing them
to have maximum and targeted impact and ensuring
that they are implemented properly. Each sanctions
regime is designed to achieve its own specific objective
and has its own specific challenges.

Sanctions have been used to support negotiations
towards peace agreements and wider efforts to prevent
conflict. We have seen that in the cases of Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire sanctions. Even the threat of
sanctions, as we saw with the build-up to the eventual
creation of the Yemen sanctions regime, can make
spoilers to peace and security think twice about their
actions. Sanctions have also been used effectively to
counter terrorism. The ability of Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups to operate has been significantly
constrained by United Nations counter-terrorism
sanctions. The United Nations has united to tackle
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and
sanctions will help to degrade ISIL's capability.

Moreover, counter-proliferation sanctions have
made it more difficult for some States to acquire goods
that could aid the development of weapons of mass
destruction. They have helped to restrict Iran's access
to proliferation-sensitive materials and technologies,
and, with other economic sanctions, they have been
important in bringing Iran to the negotiating table.
Discussions between the E3+3 Governments and Iran
have made progress in recent days. We have explored
with Iran ways to bridge some of the significant gaps
that remain. Both sides are committed to a deal and we
still believe that that is possible, but Iran needs to show
greater flexibility on its programme and to take some
tough decisions if we are to achieve that. We need to
sustain the momentum generated from recent rounds
of discussion in order to secure the comprehensive
agreement that is in everyone's interests.

Given that sanctions are increasingly being relied
upon to tackle a variety of challenges, it is important
that we consider how to make best use of them. The
sanctions committees, the Secretariat and expert
groups all have a role to play in this. Their work
should mutually reinforce each other. They should
continue to work together to ensure that sanctions help
to achieve the political goals set out by the Security
Council. I welcome Mr. Feltman's recommendations to
further improve sanctions' procedures. We should look
carefully at those recommendations.

In addition, the United Kingdom believes that
there is scope for the commitees themselves to be more
active. We suggest that all committees should meet
every six months at the level of deputy permanent
representative or higher. That would bring a periodic
discussion at a more strategic level, which could be an
opportunity to review some of the longer-term aspects
of the respective regimes. Are we closer to achieving
our goals? How might we adjust the regime? What can
we learn from implementation efforts to date?

We also see scope for sharing best practice and
lessons learned to cross the regimes. Visits by experts
from capitals can contribute to the debate. We welcome
the efforts by the presidency to set out ways to make
best use of sanctions in a resolution. We strongly
support that work and hope that we will be in a position
to adopt the draft resolution in the very near future.
Effective implementation is crucial. Without it,
sanctions will not achieve their goals. It is worth restating
that sanctions regimes established by the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations place
obligations on all Member States. That is vital, for
example, when it comes to choking off support for ISIL
in line with presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23,
adopted by the Council on 19 November. Assistance
on implementation should be made available to those
unable to comply. Sharing information on challenges
to effective implementation will help Member States
in their own implementation. And we should name
and shame those Member States that do not implement
sanctions properly.

We continue to be strong supporters of fair and
clear procedures for United Nations sanctions regimes.
For instance, we have supported the strengthening of
due process provisions under the 1267 (1999) Al-Qaida
regime. However, no two regimes are alike, so we need
to tailor special solutions for each circumstance, rather
than replicating an identical approach for all regimes.

Sanctions remain a vital part of the Council's
toolbox. It is important that we continue to use
sanctions in an appropriate manner - targeted and
aimed at signalling, constraining or coercing actors
towards peaceful ends. In that way, smart sanctions
can continue to be used in the long term as an effective
tool of the Council in the support of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

