Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2012/538) that the Council just failed to adopt. In
our judgement, that resolution was the best opportunity
and perhaps the only remaining opportunity to put an
end to the mindless violence that affects the Syrian
Arab Republic and to initiate a political transition led
by the Syrians themselves and corresponding to long
repressed popular demands.

As is known, the by-no-means trivial issue that
impeded a consensus today is based on the resistance
that some members have had to invoke Article 41 of
the Charter of the United Nations, which covers the
possibility of applying coercive measures in the event
of non-compliance with the Council's decisions.
That same Article 41 expressly excludes punitive
measures, such as the use of armed force. It is one of
the measures of preventive diplomacy at the disposal
of the Security Council as it seeks to exercise its role
in maintaining international peace. We believe that the
potential application of sanctions on the grounds of
non-compliance was the least we could do, given the
sequence of broken commitments on the part of the
Government of Syria in recent months.

We deplore the fact that the draft resolution was
not approved. We regret the outcome, in the first place,
because ofthe people of Syria, whose children suffer on
a daily basis the horrors of the spiral of violence, which
began with peaceful protests by citizens against their
Government, but has now spawned an armed conflict
where barbaric acts can be attributed to both sides. The
main thing is to put a stop to the violence, no matter
where it comes from, and the key to taking the first step
is in the hands of the Government.

Secondly, we regret that the work of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan has been seriously compromised.
Even the final communique of the so-called Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), adopted just three
weeks ago partly as a result of Mr. Annan's creativity,
has ended up being a dead letter.

Thirdly, we regret this action because of its impact
on the Council and, in more general terms, on the United
Nations, whose prestige has suffered a new blow. Our
inability to adopt a unified position is a serious setback
on this unique occasion, with all that it implies in the
real world.

The larger moral of the scene we have just witnessed
is not that the Security Council is impotent, because the
Council has demonstrated time and again that it can act
decisively and firmly to achieve tangible results. The
important point here is that we were unable to forge
a consensus to fulfil the responsibility entrusted to us
by the Charter, which is a major collective failure for
us all.

The ultimate irony is that what the draft resolution
sought to prevent - an expansion of the wave of
violence - will have the perverse effect of achieving
the exact opposite. For that reason, what we have just
witnessed saddens and disappoints us immensely.

In conclusion, our delegation profoundly regrets
that we have not been able to respond to the calls of
the League of Arab States, the Joint Special Envoy,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the Arab League. We call on all
members of the international community to persevere
with new initiatives to find a solution that responds
to the interests of the Syrian people and especially to
avoid the spread of this conflict to the neighbouring
countries.

