Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela ): On behalf of the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I would like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Japan who is
presiding over the Security Council in the month of
April. We also welcome the initiative of convening this
open debate to consider the implementation of the
measures described in the presidential note on the
working methods of this Council (S/2006/507).
Our delegation associates itself with the
statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt.

The review of the Council's working methods is a
subject of special interest to our Government. This
issue, linked to the wider sphere of the reform of this
organ, is key to the full exercise of the sovereign
equality of nations and to the legitimacy of the United
Nations as a promoter and guarantor of international
peace andjustice.

The most recent rounds of intergovernmental
negotiations on this subject showed that most Member
States agree on the need to make the Security Council
more transparent and accountable. There have also
been repeated calls to reverse the Council's tendency to
take control of issues that have been the exclusive
responsibility of the Economic and Social Council or
the General Assembly; to take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on
questions relating to international peace and security;
and to improve the Council's accountability to the
General Assembly by submitting substantive and
analytical reports to it.

Venezuela has joined in these calls and hereby
reaffirms its support for those proposals. In that regard,
the definitive approval of Security Council rules of
procedure is a crucial step to establish the explicit
procedures necessary for the Council to comply with
its obligations to the General Assembly under the
provisions of the Charter.

We here to stress the need to guarantee that
non-members of the Council enjoy early and timely
access to all resolutions and statements of this organ,
as well as the importance of promoting the access and
participation of non-permanent members in all its
deliberations and consultations. We are certain that the
consideration of different perspectives will make the
Council's work more efficient because it will ensure a
more all-encompassing and balanced treatment of
issues within its authority, effectively and fairly
reflecting the interests and needs of countries of the
North and the South. However, this aspiration can
become reality only if the closed meetings and
briefings of the Security Council are limited and the
number of open sessions is increased.

To conclude, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela would like to recall that, as the
representative of Egypt stated, any effort to improve
the working methods of the Security Council will
require significant political resolve within the Council
itself and the implementation of the diverse and
constructive proposals made by Member States to
make the workings of this organ more transparent and
more legitimate.

