Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): Let me join my
colleagues in thanking Lithuania for organizing
this timely debate and to congratulate you for the
excellent stewardship of this meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his biennial report on small arms
and light weapons (SALW) (S/2015/209) and for the
recommendations contained therein.

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the elements set out in the new draft resolution. We look
forward to its adoption by the Council, thus building on
the provisions on resolution 2117 (2013) with a view to
assisting the countries affected by the illicit trade in
SALW.

While Romania fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to briefly underline a couple of points of national
relevance.

The international community must continue to
mobilize and fight against the scourge of illicit SALW.
At the same time, we must also state that international
efforts to regular the trade in small arms and light
weapons are not aimed at constraining the rights of
States to defend themselves and to use small arms and
light weapons for legitimate purposes in a responsible
manner.

As Council members know, Romania is one of
the 64 States to have ratified the Arms Trade Treaty
(ATT), and we are firmly engaged in the ongoing
process aimed at ensuring its effective implementation
and universalization. My country strongly believes
that arms export control regimes are essential tools
for the maintenance of international and regional
peace and stability, as well as for enabling sustainable
development. Greater responsibility in transfers of
SALW is needed to ensure the effective prevention
of the destabilizing accumulation and misuse of such
weapons.

The Romanian policy on SALW is fully in line
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
presidential statements on the issue and the goals
envisaged in the Arms Trade Treaty, the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, the International Instrument on Marking
and Tracing, the United Nations Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, as well
as with the relevant initiatives of the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Wassenaar Arrangement.

In our view, internationally agreed regulations, as
well as regional agreements, should be implemented
and enforced at the national level in a timely and
comprehensive manner, in particular because these
instruments often facilitate the strengthening of
cooperation. In that regard and based on our experience,
the International Tracing Instrument has proved to be a
very useful and functional mechanism for exchanging
information between countries on tracing SALW in a
suitable and reliable manner.

Transparency in armaments is, in our View, a
substantial confidence-building measure that could
also help assess if an excessive or destabilizing
accumulation of arms is taking place. For Romania, the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms is a very
important practical tool, and we believe that such tools
could also be used for the effective implementation of
the ATT.

Aiming at the full and effective implementation
of arms embargoes established through Council
resolutions, our national export control agency has set
up a speedy mechanism for the enforcement of such
provisions. Our domestic law stipulates the direct
applicability of measures related to arms embargoes. I
assure the Council that efforts to continuously improve
inter-agency collaboration in order to adequately
implement such measures at the national level are not
spared.

More effective cooperation and cohesion should
also be pursued at the regional and international
levels, including within the United Nations system. For
example, national procedures have been developed in
order to warrant efficient cooperation with regional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), including through
facilitating coordination on specific documentation for
export controls. The ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Material should be considered a successful
endeavour that addresses the illicit transfers of SALW
and their destabilizing accumulation and misuse. That
approach, we think, could be implemented in other
regions or subregions as well.

We acknowledge the significant efforts and the role
played by the United Nations agencies, as well as by
civil society organizations, in dealing with all aspects
related to preventing, combating and eradicating the
illicit trade in SALW. I would like therefore to recognize
today some of those actors, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Institute
for Disarmament Research, the International Action
Network on Small Arms, Saferworld, International
Alert, Control Arms, Small Arms Survey and others.
They make a critical contribution to promoting public
understanding, public awareness and public support for
effective arms control policies.

Finally, I would like to underscore our call for the
further strengthening of international cooperation in
this field. It is the only way to develop an integrated
international approach to combat illicit transfers of
SALW. Cooperation is paramount to improving and
consolidating the international community's reaction
against the illicit proliferation of SALW, especially
considering that the heavy cost of conflicts enabled by
irresponsible transfers of SALW is being increasingly
paid by innocent civilians, mostly women and children.

As Bertrand Russell said, "The only thing that
will redeem mankind is cooperation". That is even true
so when working to ensure a safer world for future
generations, as we all try to do so here under this
beautiful roof.
