Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Costa Rica for his participation in this debate, and to
pay tribute to his country's activities on behalf of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the fight
against impunity.

I join with those who have welcomed the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for the very
detailed and specific briefing he made in compliance
with resolution 1593 (2005). I would recall that the
Security Council sought, in adopting that resolution, to
make the fight against impunity and crimes committed
in Darfur essential elements of the solution to the
threat to peace and security in the Sudan and the
region. It was in the spirit of justice, and to accomplish
its mission to re-establish peace and security, that the
Council referred the issue to the ICC and requested the
Prosecutor to investigate the situation in Darfur since
1 July 2002, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter
and his mandate under article 13 of the Rome Statute.
France fully supported that decision, which
demonstrated that the missions of the Security Council
and the International Criminal Court are deeply
complementary. Indeed, resolution 1593 (2005) is
based on the fact that the crimes committed in Darfur
are of such gravity that, according to the preamble of
the Rome Statute, they threaten the peace, security and
well-being of the world.

Unfortunately, the picture painted by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's report is very similar to that of
last December. Crimes that fall under the International
Criminal Court's competence and within the scope of
resolution 1593 (2005) continue to be committed in
Darfur. The Sudanese Government is not cooperating
with the Court and has taken no measures to execute
the arrest warrants of 27 April 2007 against Ahmad
Harun, former Minister of State for the Interior and
current Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs, and
Ali Kushayb, a militia Janjaweed leader, for crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Mr. Harun has even
been given new and important official responsibilities
and is active publicly. Ali Kushayb is under no
investigation and is now back on active duty. Those
two people continue to be involved in operations
against civilians.

In paragraph 2 of resolution 1593 (2005), the
Security Council decided "that the Government of
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur,
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor". The
Prosecutor's report makes it clear that the Sudanese
Government is not complying with that obligation. Its
discussions with the Security Council's mission to the
Sudan in recent days confirm that it intends not to do
so. It thereby not only refuses to bring two major
criminals to international justice, but is also rejecting
the Council's authority and flouting its obligations as a
Member of the United Nations. That is doubly
unacceptable.

The Security Council must support the
Prosecutor's activities in the context of the mission
with which it has entrusted him, especially now that he
has announced the introduction to the Court of new
evidence against those responsible for crimes against
civilians in Darfur. The Security Council must also
firmly defend its authority and that of the Charter of
the United Nations. It must demand respect for
resolution 1593 (2005), cooperation from the Sudanese
Government with the Court, and the execution of the
arrest warrants against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb.
The delegation of France is thus in favour of the
Security Council's adoption of a statement clearly
recalling the Sudan to its obligations. More generally,
we expect the Sudan to implement all the Council's
resolutions that concern it.

Finally, I emphasize that France fully supports
the European Union statement of 31 March, issued on
the anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005), which remains fully valid. I recall that, in its
statement, the European Union called on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate unconditionally
with the International Criminal Court and to hand over
the two individuals subject to arrest. It also affirmed
that, in the case of non-compliance with resolution
1593 (2005), the Union would support the adoption of
further appropriate measures against those responsible
for the Sudan's lack of cooperation with the Court.

