Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): On behalf of the States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences and
deep sympathy to the Government and people of
Turkey on the tragic loss of life due to the earthquake
that hit eastern Turkey yesterday. I would also like to
offer the Movement's condolences and sympathy to the
Government and people of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for their great loss in the passing away of His
Royal Highness Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud
after a long life of achievement for his country, his
region and the world at large.

I have the pleasure of addressing the Security
Council today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
at this critical juncture in the Security Council's
dealings with the situation in the Middle East. I would
like to start by expressing the Movement's appreciation
for today's briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs. The
Non-Aligned Movement believes that the international
community must renew its resolve to uphold its
longstanding commitment to realizing a two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis
of international law and the well-known terms of
reference of the peace process.

There is an international consensus that we must
reach the endgame, the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital - the core
of a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict as a
whole. It is regrettable that all serious efforts to date by
international and regional parties, including the last
Quartet statement of 23 September, to resume and
advance direct negotiations on the Palestinian track
towards that objective have failed. This is mainly due
to the lack of clear parameters for the negotiations and
the insistence of Israel, the occupying Power, on
continuing to illegally, unilaterally and aggressively
change the situation on the ground. Such actions belie
Israel's claims that it accepts the Quartet statements
and that it is indeed acting in good faith to end this
conflict.

It is worth mentioning that around the same time
last year, many of us had high hopes for the new round
of final status negotiations, which began in early
September 2010 under the direct auspices of United
States President Barack Obama, with the participation
of the Quartet, Egypt and Jordan, with the goal of
reaching an agreement within one year. Yet the
negotiations collapsed just a few weeks later, due to
Israel's refusal to renew the moratorium on settlement
activities, cease its illegal settlement campaign and
abide by clear parameters for negotiations to achieve a
just and final solution.

The persistence of such behaviour on the part of
Israel and its refusal to commit to the internationally
endorsed parameters for a two-State solution cast a
dark shadow of doubt over its professed intentions.
Instead, they reinforce the belief that Israel's insistence
on the negotiation path is merely for the sake of
negotiations and not to actually reach any
comprehensive peace settlement.

It is highly condemnable that Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to pursue its illegal
settlement activities, and many other illegal policies
and practices, in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Such illegal actions
undermine peace efforts and are the main obstacle to
efforts to resume negotiations, making it nearly
impossible to realize a two-State solution on the basis
of the 4 June 1967 borders. Recent announcements
regarding the establishment of thousands more

settlement units, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, the continued Israeli demolition of
Palestinian homes and properties, and devious attempts
by the Israeli Government to legitimize its illegitimate
settlement scheme are the true measure of Israel's
alleged commitment to the peace process and a two-
State solution.

All indications at present - from provocative
declarations to accelerated construction on the ground
to the continued revocation of Palestinian residency
rights - are that Israel continues to choose settlement
over peace and to choose occupation and conflict at the
expense of the future of both peoples and the region as
a whole.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
condemnation of Israel's illegal settlement policies and
practices, stressing that all such unlawful attempts to
alter the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, remain rejected and unrecognized by
the international community.

The fact that a majority of NAM. member States
co-sponsored the draft resolution presented to the
Security Council earlier this year (S/2011/24) that
called for the immediate cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory - as
outlined in relevant letters addressed by the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement to the President of the Council - reflects
the international position on this most critical issue.
The Non-Aligned Movement regrets that the Security
Council did not adopt the draft resolution, as we had
hoped and expected.

The Movement therefore reiterates its call for the
Council to be resolute in demanding that Israel abide
by its legal obligations. Moreover, the Movement
believes that calls for compliance must be backed by
credible action, which is incumbent upon this Council
in light of its duties under the Charter and given the
fact that the occupying Power is continuing to
deliberately obstruct the attainment of peace and
security in our region.

Israeli impunity must no longer be tolerated.
Israel must be called upon to abide forthwith by all of
its obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Road Map.
That includes an immediate cessation of all settlement
activities and full respect for the international
consensus on the issue, including the calls from the
United Nations, NAM, the European Union, the
Quartet and all other concerned international and
regional bodies and actors.

The Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes the need
to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to lift fully its
illegal blockade, in accordance with its obligations
under international law, Council resolution 1860
(2009) and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions. The Movement reiterates that this
unacceptable and unsustainable situation must end. The
unresolved crisis continues to pose serious
repercussions on international efforts to promote peace
and continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian people.

In that connection, the Movement reemphasizes
the need for the reconstruction of Gaza, and calls on
Israel to open all of its crossing points with Gaza and
allow for the sustained and regular movement of
persons and goods, including the import of essential
reconstruction materials, which includes those
necessary for the long overdue reconstruction of
United Nations facilities and the schools of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and normal
commercial flows. NAM. also reiterates the need to
empower UNRWA with all financial and human
support necessary to undertake its mission effectively.

NAM. welcomes the prisoner swap deal under
Egyptian auspices that led to the release of Israeli
soldier Gilad Shalit in exchange for more than 1,000
Palestinian prisoners and detainees. NAM. strongly
condemns the continued detention and imprisonment of
thousands of Palestinians in Israeli jails, where ill-
treatment and torture are widely used.

It is the conviction of the members of the
Movement, as stated in the special declaration adopted
by the NAM. ministerial conference in Bali in May, that
those prisoners, who include children and women,
should be immediately released and proper
international inspection of their current condition
should be a priority for the international community,
particularly the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council.

There were three main developments during the
last few months. The first one was the historic speech
given by President Abbas on 23 September in the
General Assembly Hall. The second development was
the agreement on Palestinian national reconciliation
carried out under the auspices of Egypt, the core pillar
of which was the return of power to the people through
legislative and presidential elections within a year. The
third development is the fact that to date, more than
130 countries have recognized the State of Palestine
based on the 1967 borders, including more than 100
members of the Movement, and they comprise more
than the two-thirds majority of the General Assembly.
Those three major developments, coupled with the
recognition of all major international organizations and
institutions including the United Nations, the World
Bank and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, that Palestinian institutions are more than
ready for statehood, clearly indicate that the dream of a
Palestinian State is closer than ever to becoming a
reality.

Indeed, there is unanimous conviction that
Israel's respect for its obligations is imperative for the
resumption of direct negotiations towards achieving
the two-State solution on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid terms of reference,
including the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The international
community must exert all efforts to compel Israel to
abide by its obligations and commitments forthwith
and to resume final status negotiations based on clear
parameters that would include: cessation of all
settlement activities, an agreed timeframe that
recognizes the urgency of the matter and the 4 June
1967 borders as the foundation and starting point for
negotiations, as set out by President Obama in his
19 May speech and as supported by the entire
international community.

In so saying, the Movement stresses the utmost
importance of the efforts of the international
community and the United Nations and of a credible
negotiation process for bringing an end to the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967, as well as the
achievement of an independent State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

Turning now to Lebanon, the NAM. condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches to Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement calls
on all concerned parties to implement fully Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the
current fragility and avoid the recurrence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to
the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

