Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by expressing my thanks
to today's briefers and to the Peruvian presidency.

It is indeed essential that the interaction between
the Council and the troop- and police-contributing
countries proceed in the direction of improved mutual
understanding on the basis of the provisions of the note
of the President contained in document S/2017/507.

Today I would like to focus on a series of concrete
measures that would achieve that objective, first, by
making better use ofexisting mechanisms and, secondly,
by advancing our thinking on other approaches.

First, with regard to making better use of existing
mechanisms, I would like to begin with the issue of
meetings between the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Security Council. Since we became
members of the Council, my delegation has endeavoured
to take full advantage ofthose meetings as opportunities
for sustained and substantial exchanges among the
Council, the Secretariat, the host State, the missions
concerned and contributors. Let us be frank - a
dysfunctional format cannot be publicly deplored in the
General Assembly unless we make the effort to bring
such interactions to life. I would also like to encourage
the penholders in the Council to take into account the
considerations expressed by contributors when drafting
resolutions for mandate renewals.

Furthermore, all meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations are held in open format. We
therefore encourage all troop- and police-contributing

countries, as well as mission host States, to participate.
Small and medium-sized contributors should also make
their voices heard. As a member of the Council, we
have everything to gain from such exchanges as they
highlight operational difficulties and elements on the
ground that countries believe the Council must take into
account. Lastly, we welcome the fact that interpretation
is provided at the majority of the meetings held by those
two forums, thereby addressing multilingualism and
accessibility concerns.
Secondly, with respect to other approaches, while
making good use of existing forums is a useful first
step, we can certainly make a greater effort. We believe
that it is important to hear from financial contributors,
regardless oftheir rank. As a Member State, we provide
human resources for peacekeeping but we all also
invest financial resources to ensure that peacekeeping
functions well. From that perspective therefore, we
have a financial interest in its success. I would like
to quote from a recent report of the Boutros-Ghali
Peacekeeping Observatory.

"The participation of financial contributors in
meetings concerning mission implementation
would, first and foremost, enable the format of the
mandate to be adapted to the financial resources
available and overcome operational difficulties that
hinder its design and conduct."

That would indeed be a useful step in our efforts to
align mandates and resources.

Some mandates are implemented in increasingly
challenging security environments, thereby requiring
greater efficiency, performance and operational
responsibility. We therefore see some merit in spurring
an enhanced dialogue on increasingly technical and
military issues in order to allow for horizontal dialogue
among the experts of the respective contributors.
Consideration should be given to the role that the Military
Staff Committee should play in a triangular structure.

Lastly, Belgium supports the proposal in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions to ensure that information is
available to stakeholders further in advance of planned
Council meetings. We hope that that proposal can be
adopted quickly.

