Mr. Carrilho (spoke in French): Let me first offer
my sincere congratulations to Australia and to all the
members of the Security Council for organizing this
meeting. It is a great honour for me to participate in
the discussion and to be able to brief members of the
Council on our actions on the protection of civilians and
the participation of women in peacekeeping missions
with regard to peace and security.

First, the protection of civilians. Although the
implementation of a strategy for the protection
of civilians is now recognized as a cross-cutting
responsibility applicable to all components of a
mission, my briefing will focus on activities undertaken
by the police components. The police components
represent the front line of protection of, and contact
with, the local populations. The police components
play an important role in the protection of civilians
and in capacity-building for local police. Beyond
their security role, United Nations police (UNPOL)
are involved in restoring trust between the population
and their police. Beyond preventive diplomacy, United
Nations police contribute to the protection of civilians
by working particularly on two fronts: protection from
physical violence and the establishment of a protective
environment.

For the police component, protection from
physical violence means preventing, deterring and, if
necessary, responding to situations in which civilians
find themselves under threat of physical violence.
Police activities include, among other things, patrols,
protection of the freedom of movement and security on
the roads in order to allow for humanitarian aid and aid
to refugees, as well as maintaining public order.

For the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the mandate stipulates that the protection
of civilians is the priority. Specifically, UNPOL
participates directly in the protection of civilians by
offering operational support to the national security
forces and directly to the population. I can cite the
following initiatives as examples. A flash-point matrix
is integrated into all components ofthe Mission. Security
patrols are undertaken 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, by the formed police units, as well as UNPOL,
and there are joint patrols with the international and
Central African security forces. UNPOL has frequently
intervened to extract and protect civilians who found
themselves in dangerous situations.

I turn to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which in the framework
of the fight against organized crime has conducted
significant operations jointly with the Haitian police.
The MINUSTAH police and military components
assist the Haitian police in anti-crime operations, and
that has made possible the apprehension of numerous
criminals and the seizure of significant quantities of
weapons and drugs. MINUSTAH has established a plan
for maintaining order for the camps at risk. Permanent
UNPOL focal points have also been established in the
seven largest camps for displaced persons. With regard
to the restoration of a protective environment, for us
this activity is based on providing assistance to the
national security forces and on promoting respect for
human rights.

In MINUSCA, the police intervene in blatant cases
and also in applying urgent temporary measures. On
7 November, the MINUSCA police, together with
their military colleagues, arrested and handed over
to the national judicial authorities 107 criminals for
serious infractions. In the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), United Nations police provide
support in the form of specialized training, specifically
in the fight against sexual violence.
I will now turn to initiatives already in place. In
New York, there is training in protection of civilians.
In 2011, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
finalized the first programme on the protection of
civilians in the framework of pre-deployment training.
The training modules are aimed at establishing a
common understanding of the protection of civilians.
The MINUSCA police have designated focal points that
work with the other Mission components on protection
of civilian issues, which translates into permanent
action on the ground. At MONUSCO, the Working
Group on Protection has created a manual for police
and military alike, which explains the concept of
protection of civilians and provides concrete examples
ofproblems that police and military might have to face.

I now turn to the issue of women, peace and
security. One of the important measures taken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is that of
increasing the number of female police in the ranks.
The United Nations therefore launched its global effort
in 2000, and then again in 2009. Its goal is to have at
least 20 per cent female police officers in 2014. That
initiative includes dialogues with police-contributing
countries and the creation an international network of
women police. In addition, a pilot training programme
and a selection process for women police officers have
allowed for the nprecedented appointment of 2,000
women. In 2014, three training courses were conducted
in Rwanda, Burkina Faso and Cameroon. The presence
of women in UNPOL teams increases the ability
of missions to build relationships of trust with the
population, especially with women. The role of female
police officers is essential to creating an environment
in which the victims, particularly victims of rape or
sexual violence, feel a sufficient level of trust to come
forward and report the crimes.

The police components throughout all missions
use the female police presence to improve access to
and support of populations, particularly women, and to
raise awareness of gender-related problems among the
national authorities. For example, in MINUSTAH the
police have established a Gender Unit. It is specially
dedicated to the prevention of, and the fight against,

sexual violence in the camps for internally displaced
persons. UNPOL is also working to increase the
recruitment and the deployment of women in the police
stations.

The presence of female police officers in UNPOL
contributes to the acceptance of women by serving as
examples for their male colleagues. In Timor-Leste, the
police component established a Vulnerable Persons Unit
tasked with investigating domestic violence, sexual
abuse and human trafficking and providing protection
to victims of sexual crimes. During the transition, the
Unit was integrated into the Criminal Investigation
Division of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste.

UNPOL and its local counterparts have also
cooperated in order to include women in police
services. Networks for female police officers were
created in peacekeeping operations in the following
missions: the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, MINUSCA, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, MINUSTAH, MONUSCO and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The
UNPOL networks have enabled the establishment of
similar networks in local police services.

With regard to the structural reform of national
police, United Nations police is encouraging local
police to set quotas for the recruitment of women.
Several countries have established such quotas,
including Liberia, which, with the support of UNMIL,
has established a quota of 20 per cent. In Afghanistan,
the police service of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan plays a coordinating role and
provides technical advice for the implementation of
the Afghan Democratic Policing Project, a programme
that aims to strengthen the capacity of female police
officers and improve access to justice for women and
children.

What are the challenges faced by the United Nations
police? With regard to Security Council resolutions,
the best way to guide the missions, including their
police components, is to ensure that the resolutions are
particularly explicit concerning the priority activities
and resources that have been authorized. With regard
to the transition between different peacekeeping
operations - as was the case with the peacekeeping
operations of the African Union and the United Nations
in MINUSCA - there is a need to increase the number
of female police officers. Despite the efforts deployed,
the road ahead remains long. Certain challenges are
tied to recruiting obstacles arising from directives or
existing practices in the Member States in question. It
is important to reiterate our call to Member States to
consider the implementation of a policy aimed at having
20 per cent of its deployed police officers be women.

In conclusion, strong leadership, such as that of
MINUSTAH and MINUSCA, within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and in the United Nations
police is necessary to define and carry out the strategies
that enable the implementation of police mandates
conferred unto UNPOL by the Security Council.
I thank the Council for this opportunity. I would
like to underscore that we will do our utmost to continue
to ensure the credibility of the United Nations police,
including in its protection of civilians mission, and to
maintain the trust of the Security Council.

