Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-
Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her excellent briefing on
the issue of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic.

My delegation's statementwill focus on the following
two points: the progress made in implementing the
destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, in accordance
with resolution 2118 (2013), and the activities of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) regarding the allegations ofthe use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

With regard to the Syrian chemical weapons
programme, my delegation welcomes the progress
made in destroying all of the 27 chemical weapons-
production facilities. We believe that such progress is an
important step towards the complete destruction of the
country's chemical arsenal, and we therefore welcome
the cooperation efforts of the Syrian Government.
Further proof of this positive trend are the replies
made by the Syrian Government to the non-exhaustive
list of questions contained in the correspondence of
the Director-General of the OPCW, dated 10 April.
Those questions concern the initial declaration and the
provision to the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic of documents relating to the four incidents in
which chemical weapons were allegedly used in 2017
in Khirbet Masasnah, Al-Salamiyah and Suran. C6te
d'Ivoire hopes that the results of the analysis of those
documents will allow us to shed light on those incidents
and to identify, where appropriate, the perpetrators of
the use of such chemical weapons so that they are held
to account before the relevant international courts.

My country welcomes the new powers given to the
OPCW, in accordance with the conclusions of the special
session of the Conference of the States Parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention on 26 and 27 June, for
the purpose of identifying the perpetrators of chemical
weapons in Syria. In that regard, my delegation
supports, the decision of the OPCW Executive
Council to take appropriate measures to identify the
perpetrators of Chemical weapons in Syria and to draft
a report on all relevant information on the origin of
those weapons. We also welcome the publication of the
OPCW interim report on the allegations of chemical
weapons use in Douma on 7 April, and we look forward
to the conclusions of the final report.

In conclusion, my delegation calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to focus on negotiations as part of an
inclusive political dialogue, in accordance with the Geneva
process, as mandated for in resolution 2254 (2015).

