I would like to thank our briefers for their comprehensive updates. In addition to continued warfare, Yemen is now facing the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is high time that the Yemeni parties seize the opportunity to make peace by agreeing an immediate and lasting ceasefire and by engaging and agreeing a comprehensive political solution. A global and immediate ceasefire, as called for by the Secretary-General, is indeed required to fight the pandemic. France welcomes in that regard the announcement by Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the coalition, of the unilateral cessation of their attacks for another month. Nevertheless, my country remains preoccupied by the fact that fighting is still ongoing in various areas in Yemen. We reiterate our call on those fighting in Yemen to immediately cease hostilities. It is now more essential than ever that they fully engage with the Special Envoy to reach a lasting nationwide ceasefire. It is also all the more necessary to pursue efforts leading the parties to accept the crisis meeting that the Special Envoy has called for, at least to coordinate efforts to fight the pandemic. France therefore calls on the parties to continue in a more constructive manner and without delay their discussions on Martin Griffiths's proposals for a ceasefire, confidence-building measures and the resumption of a political settlement of the crisis. We would like to reiterate our full support to Martin Griffiths to that end. The participation of women must also be ensured. France also urges the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to fully implement the Riyadh agreement in the south of Yemen, where calm and a cessation of hostilities should prevail. That Council must respect the territorial integrity and unity of Yemen. All parties must respect international humanitarian law, in particular in terms of the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, and ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including the protection of humanitarian and health personnel and facilities. This is more necessary than ever in order to facilitate the response to the COVID-19 crisis. We are, of course, deeply worried by the spread of the pandemic in Yemen. The Yemeni population is extremely vulnerable, as it includes a very high proportion of children, as the Permanent Representative of Belgium recalled. Only half of the medical infrastructure is fully operational, while humanitarian needs have continued to increase in a country where 80 per cent of the population depends on humanitarian assistance for its survival. The financial and economic consequences of the pandemic are also already being felt, further weakening and hurting one of the most deprived peoples in the world. Efforts to prevent and respond to the spread of the pandemic must be scaled up. It is crucial to overcome the shortage of essential supplies and equipment, including tests, protective equipment and ventilators. Coordination between all relevant actors, including the Yemeni parties, is key in this regard, as our briefers have highlighted. Humanitarian and health personnel and facilities must be protected and supported and obtain the access and freedom of movement that they need. Lastly, it is crucial and urgent to ensure United Nations access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which constitutes a serious threat to the environment, as an oil leak could have a dramatic impact on the region. As stressed by previous speakers, continued inaction is dangerous. In conclusion, France remains fully engaged and committed to finding a solution aimed at ending the war in Yemen and, more broadly, to ensure de-escalation in the region.
