Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay and
his country for convening and presiding over today's
debate on medical care in situations of armed conflict.

Our country aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, of which we are a member.
Schools and hospitals are zones of peace that
must be respected by all parties to a conflict. Attacks
against hospitals are all the more cruel as they harm
the population while leaving it without medical
care, which is a vital resource for any society. The
World Humanitarian Summit and the Agenda for
Humanity reaffirmed that the protection of the civilian
population in armed conflict should be a priority and,
in accordance with resolution 2286 (2016), we reiterate
the responsibility that is incumbent upon the parties as
well as the importance of taking action in this regard.

We condemn the attacks and threats of attacks
against schools and hospitals and against protected
persons associated with them, the closing of schools
and hospitals in situations of armed conflict as a result
thereof, and the storage of weapons in these facilities
and their use for military purposes, endangering the
civilian population and the personnel who work in them.
We call on all parties to a conflict, without distinction,
to cease such attacks and refrain from actions that
would obstruct access to health and education services,
pursuant to resolution 2143 (2014). That is why we
support the prevention, protection and accountability
measures proposed in the reports of the Secretary-
General.

In terms of immediate measures, we insist on
including the protection of health and medical facilities
in ceasefire agreements and post-conflict agendas,
and we must train the various actors in this regard.
It is also essential to move forward in prevention, by
harmonizing national legislation with international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions
and their optional Protocols, and we must train all those
to whom the laws and standards apply.

We must also ensure that decisions on foreign
policy, including those related to the sale and transfer
of weapons, respect the provision of medical care in
conflicts. Member States and parties to a conflict
must take precautions to safeguard medical facilities
and personnel in planning and carrying out military
operations, including through advance warnings and
evacuations, among other things. To this end, the action
of security and development bodies on the ground should
be coordinated with national authorities, including
health authorities. Drawing up registries of health
facilities and statistics is crucial in order to implement
these measures. The World Health Organization can
play an important role in guiding this work.

We must continue to make efforts in the fight against
impunity, urging all parties, as well as humanitarian
actors, to work together to shed light on these crimes.
In accordance with resolution 1998 (2011), which was
co-sponsored by my country, we ask the Secretary-
General to include, in the annexes to his reports on
children and armed conflict, all parties to armed
conflicts without any distinction who, in contravention
of international law, carry out attacks against schools
or hospitals. We hope that the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
will enjoy the necessary support to carry out this task.

We reiterate the need to strengthen cooperation
with civil society in this context, as was underscored
by the Council in its 2015 presiidential statement on
inclusive development (S/PRST/2015/3), and we await
with interest those proposals. Both the Council and its
subsidiary bodies should pay particular attention to the
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016) and take it
into account in their deliberations and outcomes.

In conclusion, we extend our solidarity to the
victims and to the civilians affected by these attacks
and we express our gratitude to all the actors dedicated
to their protection, including civil society, and their
efforts in this area.

