Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Danish presidency for having chosen
the subject of post-conflict peacebuilding for the
Council's thematic debate this month.

The international community has taken note of
the enormous growth in United Nations peace
operations over the past two decades. In the case of
every such operation, once hostilities ceased, the
United Nations set in motion an operation that was as
just difficult, if not more so: post-conflict
peacebuilding. This is an enormously complex
challenge that is necessary because of the trauma
inflicted on societies as a result of the often protracted
armed conflicts that have torn them apart.

Peacebuilding demands, first of all, that we take a
multidimensional approach to the search for a solution
to the causes of conflict, generating minimum security
conditions while making it possible to restore law and
order and to lay the foundations for political, social
and economic rehabilitation.

That is why we believe it essential that peace
missions should have a comprehensive, multidimensional,
long-term mandate that provides them with the tools and
resources they need to assist transitional Governments in
the task of institutional and economic reconstruction of
States emerging from conflict. In the context of that
holistic view of a peacebuilding mission, it is of
fundamental importance that we seek inclusive political
processes, involving all sectors of society that are
prepared to renounce violence, so as to achieve a social
contract that makes it possible to generate a sustainable
climate of peace and security. To that end, it is essential to
ensure the creation of a wide-ranging national dialogue
that brings together all the relevant political forces.

Often, the root causes of conflict are poverty,
hunger and underdevelopment. Thus, security and
development are essential components that are mutually
reinforcing. Once a conflict is over, it is vital that the
international community, while helping to create political
stability and a safe environment, provide a level of
resources that makes it possible to tackle the most urgent
needs of the population and help transitional
Governments to prepare quick-impact strategies and
develop medium- and long-term development
programmes and projects. We believe that the Economic
and Social Council, through its ad hoc advisory groups,
can make a substantial long-term contribution to that
effort.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) provides a clear example of such a
situation. The United Nations operation in Haiti is
clearly a fourth-generation peace mission, whose goal
is not merely the suppression of violence. Its task is a
complex one, ranging from creating or strengthening
democratic institutions and ensuring full respect for
human rights to the modernization of legislation, the
consolidation of political parties, the reform of the
judicial and penal systems and, last but not least, the
restructuring and professionalization of the national
police. Such situations can be found elsewhere, too.

Although I do not intend to speak at length on the
Secretary-General's recommendations in the context of
the United Nations reform process, we must point to
the desirability of creating a Peacebuilding
Commission designed to help countries go beyond the
transitional phase between armed conflict and the
restoration of national institutions and to help them
overcome the trauma of conflict. In addition, the
initiative to create within the Secretariat a Rule of Law
Assistance Unit to cooperate with national initiatives to
restore the rule of law in societies that have been or are
still in conflict is a very positive one that will make it
possible to enhance our approach to issues of the rule
of law and reconciliation in the post-conflict phase.

We also believe that involving local people in the
elaboration and implementation of post-conflict
strategies at an early stage is decisive in making such
strategies more acceptable, viable and sustainable. That
not only achieves the vital goal of involving the
beneficiaries themselves in the process, but also
optimizes its implementation, since this depends on
local experience and knowledge.

We also believe that we must keep in mind the
regional context of a conflict. Thus, from its inception,
a mission must factor regional synergies into the
peacebuilding process. In this context, we should bear
in mind the increasingly important complementary
contribution that various regional organizations can
make in ensuring stable solutions.

Along with those elements, it is essential to be
able to rely on sufficient financial and human resources
to carry out the peace missions mandated by the
Security Council. Those resources are all the more
necessary in the first phases of a mission, when there is
especially urgent need among the population. That
initial encounter will determine the level of trust
between the members of the peace mission and the
population as regards the task ahead. Once the
emergency phase is over, it is sometimes difficult to
rely on the resources pledged by the international
community to implement ongoing projects; such a
situation can ultimately undermine the timely and
successful outcome of those projects.

It is precisely because we are convinced about the
tremendous importance of post-conflict peacebuilding
missions that we believe that we must continue to do
all we can to improve them, starting with the planning,
deployment and execution phases. Each success helps
lay the foundations for the political, economic and
social development of peoples, for the establishment of
the rule of law and for respect for human rights; this
paves the road for long-desired peace and stability in
countries and regions previously torn by violence.

