Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We have
had a bitter briefing on the work programme for Iraq,
presented to us by the inspectors. One can read only
with sorrow what might have been when what might
have been was peace. Everyone in this Chamber knows
that Chile hoped that this inspections programme
would be carried out. Our Government consulted social
organizations and political parties spanning the
ideological spectrum that makes up our democracy.
Our National Congress almost unanimously adopted
the option for peace.

Chile had the conviction, which we reaffirm here
today, that the inspections programme - strengthened,
zealous and investigative, carried to its logical
conclusion and accompanied by growing and persistent
military pressure - was capable of achieving the
objective that the international community wished for:
the peaceful disarmament of Iraq. That was what led
us, up to the last moment, to propose formulas for
Council agreement.

To achieve that purpose, the Council and the
Governments that constitute it should have built up an
attitude of persistence in the task of inspections and
should have made them daily more incisive. We needed
to make clear to the regime of Saddam Hussain that the
United Nations would move towards the disarmament
of Iraq at any cost. The Council should have cultivated
its internal unity - a convergence of its perceptions -
but, above all, it should have considered that the
objective of disarmament was as valuable as the
objective of peace.

That was not possible. We fear that the
consequences will be serious for humanity. The Iraqi
regime never understood the dimension of its lethargy
and did not appreciate the gravity of the punishment to
which it was exposing its own people. Perhaps it had
only begun to understand when it was already too late.
To set out the demands and the disciplines that the
situation in Iraq required, the Council was unable to
find among its members the flexibility needed to set
deadlines and to define a path of collective action that
would have enabled it to shoulder the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations.
Today, every one of us must assume his part of the
responsibility. The time will come when the fruit of our
actions will be made evident.

Today is not the time for recriminations. We
believe that we should now commend the role that the
inspectors of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have played in this story. We should like to pay
tribute to Mr. Hans Blix and to Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei and to the members of their work teams.
Immersed in a challenge characterized by technical
complexity and political tension, they knew how to
extract the truth that they came across in order to bring
it to the Security Council, boldly recounting at this
table the way in which their inspections process was
starting to overcome Iraqi resistance and to show
substantive instances of disarmament.

Nothing could be more serious today than
suspending the inspections process. That could create
doubts concerning the validity of this instrument for
international peace and security. If confidence in
disarmament institutions erodes, those institutions will
lose their value and will no longer be a guarantor of
peace, which is their ultimate purpose.

Chile today reaffirms its commitment to what the
General Assembly, in its first special session on
disarmament, declared 25 years ago:

"Genuine and lasting peace can only be created
through the effective implementation of the
security system provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations and the speedy and substantial
reduction of arms and armed forces, by
international agreement and mutual example,
leading ultimately to general and complete
disarmament under effective international
control." (General Assembly resolution S-10/2, para. 13)

We take note of this report on the UNMOVIC
work programme, prepared in accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 1284 (1999), with the
purpose of emphasizing the value of the arms
inspection process conducted by the United Nations. At
this very difficult moment, we reaffirm our faith in the
Organization and in the Security Council. Chile will
resolutely defend international law and the principles
established in the Charter of the United Nations. In the
coming weeks, we should like to dedicate ourselves,
loyally and constructively, to facing the horrific cost
that the war will bring to millions of Iraqis.

The Security Council, committed, as the Charter
says, to preserving peace, must now work tirelessly,
inspired by the objective of preserving life and
restoring peace. Perhaps if we do everything that we
can and save as many lives as we can, the millions of
people in the world who have now lost faith in our
capacity to make the world a civilized place may again
lend their inspiration to our tasks.

