Ms. Gunnarsdottir (Iceland): During the reopening
of the Security Council Chamber last week, it was
noted that the Chamber is possibly the most important
room in the world. That is because of the Council's
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. In the case of Syria and the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, however, it is clear that the Council
has not been able to live up to its responsibility. In those
two cases the Council has been sidelined, owing to
its own inaction. That not only reflects negatively on
the United Nations and the members of the Council,
it is also bad for world peace. In that regard, Iceland
wholeheartedly supports the sentiments expressed by
the leaders of various United Nations agencies in an
article published in the New York Times on 15 April,
which ended with the words "Enough! Summon and use
your influence, now, to save the Syrian people and save
the region from disaster." The Council does not have
the luxury of waiting while Syria is destroyed in front
of our eyes. A political solution has to be found.

That brings me to the unresolved question of
Palestinian refugees, since they are being uprooted
once again as a result of the civil war in Syria. Of the
half-million Palestinian refugees in Syria, 400,000
are currently in need of humanitarian assistance.
Approximately 200,000 are internally displaced in
Syria, and 42,000 have fled to Lebanon, where the
situation in the Palestinian camps is, to say the least,
very difficult to begin with. That turn of events should
be a wake-up call for the international community to
realize how urgent it is that we find a just and lasting
solution to the plight of Palestinian refugees, as is called
for in General Assembly resolution 194 (III). They have
been waiting for 65 years. The civil war has also drawn
attention to the unresolved question of the occupied
Syrian Golan, which also needs a plan of action from
the Security Council in the light of the developments
on the ground.

As there has been no progress in the peace process
since the last open debate (see S/PV.6906), I will
focus on the role of the Security Council and some of
the activities taking place in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which clearly demonstrate the dire realities
of the occupation and that the situation on the ground is
far from being stagnant, unlike the peace process.

In this regard, we call attention to the deteriorating
security situation for the Palestinians, with notable
increases in fatalities and injuries caused by Israeli
forces, as well as continued settler's violence;
continued demolitions of Palestinian property, with a
total of 192 structures having been demolished since
the beginning ofthis year, resulting in the displacement
of 355 people, according to information provided by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
continued and accelerated settlement activities, which
are illegal under international humanitarian law and
should be stopped altogether; the high number of
Palestinian children between the ages of 12 and 17
who are arrested, interrogated and detained each year
by the Israelis, amounting altogether to approximately
700 children every year, according to UNICEF; and the
fact that there appears to be a pattern of ill treatment of
child detainees.

Finally, Iceland would like to take this opportunity
to urge the Palestinians to reinforce their efforts
towards reconciliation, which is largely in their own
power to achieve.

Iceland would once again like to reiterate its calls
on Security Council to take on a more active role in
solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, considering the
extreme asymmetry between the two parties and the
need for impartial intervention, including by visiting
the State of Palestine, reaffirming the illegality of the
settlements, and accepting the application of the State
of Palestine for United Nations membership in light of
the overwhelming support of the membership for the
Palestinians' inalienable right to self-determination.

Finally, as regards Syria, Iceland would like to
reiterate its calls on the Council to refer the situation
since March 2011 to the International Criminal Court,
and to come to a common position on how to address the
civil war in Syria and its humanitarian consequences.

