I join my colleagues in extending our deepest condolences to the fallen Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMD), for her informative briefing. I would also like to welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq at our meeting today. Amid the continued complexities with respect to the situation in the country, we very much welcome the appointment of the first formal Government of Iraq since December, under the leadership of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi. We take note of the recent decision of the Supreme Judicial Council to release protesters, and of the Prime Minister's statement that all pensions would be paid in the days ahead. Given the difficulties over the last few months in reaching agreement on this critical position, it is of the utmost importance that all parties in Iraq work closely together, taking in account each other's concerns. We are also pleased to note that the measures that the Government has undertaken to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are working. As with many other countries, the stringent steps taken, severe though they may be, have helped limit the country's number of COVID-19 cases and deaths, which is one of the lowest in the region. While these achievements contributed to the easing of curfew and lockdown in the last few days, it is necessary to continue applying the required measures to ensure that a second wave of infections does not occur in the weeks ahead. While the pandemic is an immediate and severe challenge for Iraq, long- standing issues remain to be addressed. The pandemic has wreaked devastating consequences on every single Iraqi. The collapsing price of oil has further limited the scarce resources at the Government's disposal. Such tools are now increasingly overwhelmed by the magnitude of economic hardship and social instability that have been roiling the governorates and regions of Iraq. These difficulties threaten to reverse hard-won achievements in the country's economic development over the last few years. Recently, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast that Iraq's gross domestic product would fall by 4.7 per cent this year. The Government had to ask IMF for debt deferment as budget deficit have grown exponentially. Economic instability has been further compounded by political and security uncertainties. As the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2020/363), there have been an increasing number of incidents caused by terrorists, including by those from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The pandemic and the temporary suspension by the global coalition to defeat ISIS of some of its activities has created a breeding ground for the surge of terrorist acts. In this regard, we share the call for continued resources, attention and political will so as to sustain counter-terrorism efforts in Iraq. We call upon all parties in Iraq to commit to sustained efforts aimed at achieving national reconciliation and at working together to come up with a comprehensive, long-term plan to address legitimate economic and political aspirations of the Iraqi people. It is important to engage in sincere dialogue that takes into account the interests and views of all parties, be they political or religious. Indeed, there would be more political certainty if the electoral law were officially promulgated. We hope that efforts with regard to the return of Kuwaiti missing persons and properties, including the national archives, will be resumed as soon as the pandemic is properly addressed. For the people and the Government of Iraq to address the aforementioned challenges, the international community must remain committed to providing further assistance and support to Iraq. Iraq's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity must be respected. We share the Secretary-General's call for international and regional partners to exercise restraint, pursue immediate de-escalation and support Iraq in its efforts to maintain security and stability. Addressing the humanitarian situation in Iraq also remains a priority. We call for continued assistance by the United Nations, international organizations and Member States in this regard. We welcome the valuable contributions of a number of assistance partners and donors in the past few months. Last but not least, we would like to express our appreciation for the efforts made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI in assisting the people and the Government of Iraq. Despite numerous difficulties, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMI have carried out a range of much-needed activities. Given the continuing instabilities in Iraq, we support the extension of the Mission's mandate in the days ahead.
