Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks the presidency of the Council for
having organized this debate.

My delegation recognizes the Security Council's
key role in promoting and strengthening the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since the Secretary-General made recommendations
to the Council in his report contained in document
S/2004/616 to include the issue of the rule of law in its
resolutions and mandates, the Council has demonstrated
and reiterated its commitment to the establishment and
strengthening of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations. That has been clear in its inclusion,
in resolutions on peacekeeping, of issues such as
security for civilians, institutional reforms and greater
respect for human rights. Moreover, since the rule of
law was established as an agenda item, in 2003, almost
all peacekeeping operations have included rule-of-
law and human rights components. But how can we
get peacekeeping operations to effectively support
and strengthen the rule of law in the host country in a
sustainable manner? That poses a significant challenge.

To achieve true peace, our interventions must
adopt a holistic and coherent approach that is focused
on people and takes into account the issues of security,
justice, human rights, the rule of law and, of course,
development. Costa Rica believes that, in addition
to including those elements in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, the United Nations must take
the necessary follow-up measures to ensure compliance
with those elements, starting with mission officials,
who have the responsibility to respect the law and
the rights of the people whome they are charged with
protecting.

In that respect, we welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to implement a "Delivering as one"
approach by assigning the responsibility of aligning
and monitoring strategies for the rule of law, resolving
potential political obstacles to its implementation and
coordinating on-site assistance to some of the most
experienced United Nations administrators in the field.
We also welcome the designation of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as the global focal point
on police, justice and prison systems in post-conflict
situations.

My delegation believes it is crucial for missions
to work in close coordination and collaboration with
national authorities from the very beginning of their
mandates, thus promoting national ownership and the
national identity of the peace process. We should not
forget that one of the main objectives of such missions
is strengthening national capacities in order to lay the
foundations for a successful transition and conclusion
of the operation's mandate. Without that, the mission's
work will not be sustainable over time.

Costa Rica believes that, with that support, missions
can play an important role in building the necessary
national capacity to comply with the responsibility to
protect. In particular, they can improve operational
links between the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of atrocities within the structures responsible
for promoting human rights, the rule of law, prevention
and mediation and the protection of civilians, among
others.

Experience has shown that there cannot be lasting
peace without justice. To fully exercise its responsibility
for the "maintenance of international peace and
security", the Security Council has a duty to promote
the full realization of international justice. Its role is
crucial when it comes to bringing justice to the victims
of the worst crimes against humanity, as impunity for
such crimes should never be an option.

The Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), of 24 September 2012, clearly states that
accountability is an integral part of the rule of law and
that impunity will not be tolerated in cases of genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity, violations
of international humanitarian law and systematic
violations of human rights law. Such violations will be
investigated and punished, in the first instance through
domestic mechanisms but, if necessary, using regional
or international mechanisms pursuant to international
law. That is consistent with the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/l) adopted by the Council at its most
recent open debate on the rule of law (see S/PV.6705),
on 19 January 2012, in which the Council reiterates
its opposition to impunity for serious Violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

A crucially important part of the Council's work in
maintaining international peace and security and in the
fight against impunity is its power and responsibility
to refer situations to the International Criminal Court,
pursuant to article 13 of the Rome Statute. Such action
can be undertaken while peacekeeping operations are
deployed.

In that regard and with reference to what is perhaps
the most serious humanitarian situation at this time,
we call once again for the Security Council to take the
necessary measures to protect the civilian population
in Syria by referring the situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court, as it was urged to do by
Switzerland and 57 other States, including Costa Rica,
in the note sent to the Council on 14 January 2013.

Furthermore, we underscore the proposal presented
by the Group of Five Small Nations requesting that the
permanent members of the Security Council commit to
refraining from using the veto on draft resolutions that
address atrocity crimes.
Let us not forget that it is equally important for
there to be due follow-up to referrals once made. The
Council should take the actions needed to enforce the
decisions of the Court, in particular its arrest warrants.

In that regard, we recall the presidential statement
of 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21) that called on officials of the
Sudanese Government to comply with arrest warrants
against them, so that the legal proceedings under way
against them could proceed.

In the debate organized by Guatemala on
17 October 2012 on cooperation between the Council
and the International Criminal Court (see S/PV.6849),
more than 50 States made suggestions to the Council.
On 20 November 2012, together with Liechtenstein
and Jordan, we sent a note formally proposing
the establishment of a subsidiary body to deal
systematically with issues related to the relationship
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court and the extension of the mandate of the informal
working group. That proposal remains valid.

Another recent topic of the utmost importance
relating to United Nations missions is that of the
authorization of the use of force. Although both cases
were in response to calls from African countries, which
enhances their legitimacy, if the trend of deploying
peacekeepers with more robust mandates continues, it
will be necessary to work on a new definition of the
limits of such mandates.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to state that
it agrees with the report of the Secretary-General on the
importance of an independent and robust monitoring
and evaluation system for peacekeeping operations.
That would undoubtedly enhance the design and
implementation of operations.

