The Secretary-General: It is a great pleasure to
be here at this Security Council meeting on the
conclusion of the United Nations missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in Prevlaka. Both these missions
have successfully completed their mandates.

My report on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) describes in detail
what the mission has achieved and how it was done. It
has completed successfully the most extensive police
reform and restructuring project ever undertaken by the
United Nations. In doing so, it broke new ground in the
techniques of United Nations civilian-police
operations. Bosnia and Herzegovina has now a police
"fit for Europe"; this is the orientation of the country's
leaders, and they will continue to pursue it. The
presence of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at today's session is a demonstration of their common
determination to assume full responsibility for meeting
the challenges ahead.

The United Nations Mission of Observers in
Prevlaka (UNMOP) had a more modest objective. By
monitoring the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula, it helped to shield this strategically
important area from the fighting and tensions in the
vicinity. In this way, it maintained a favourable
situation for an eventual negotiated settlement. I am
encouraged by the signing, on 10 December, of a
protocol between Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on an interim agreement along their
southern border. While this protocol does not pre-judge
the terms of the final settlement, it is a tangible
expression of willingness, on both sides, to settle the
dispute in a good-neighbourly manner.
Our mission continues in Kosovo. But with the

end of these two missions - both, in their way,
successors to the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) - an era of United Nations

involvement in the former Yugoslavia comes to an end.
This era has seen some of peacekeeping's bitterest
moments, which have left a lasting impression on the
Organization and on all of us who were personally
involved.

I believe that, over time, we have drawn
important conclusions about the nature, scope and role
of United Nations peacekeeping and have made it a
better instrument for the international community.
UNMIBH and UNMOP have shown that, with the right
mandate, the cooperation of the parties and the strong
support of the Security Council and United Nations
Member States in general, United Nations
peacekeeping operations can make an important
difference.

The United Nations will, of course, stay engaged
in the Balkans. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo is carrying out a
complex mandate, together with our partners: the
European Union (EU), the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

In doing so, it makes use of many of the lessons
learned from Bosnia and Herzegovina. And in Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, the United Nations family will
continue to support the Government and the people.

In conclusion, I want to thank Jacques Klein and
Rodolfo Sergio Mujica for the leadership they have
provided; the men and women of the two missions for
their devoted service; the contributing Governments,
for making their personnel available; the leaders of the
host countries for their cooperation; and finally, this
Council itself, for the steadfast support it has given.

Without all of you, the good work would not have
been possible.

