Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I wish to say that my
delegation appreciates the enormous sense of duty and
the enthusiasm with which Ambassador Nestor Osorio
has conducted the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I want to assure
him that my delegation supports him with the same
level of enthusiasm and responsibility.

Nigeria remains committed to the ideal of a
nuclear-free world. We regard the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery as a serious threat to our collective security.
Indeed, it is a global challenge that requires concerted
and sustained effort on the part of the international
community, including the Security Council. The
Committee must therefore remain vigilant, as its
actions and decisions will guide the international
response to this potent threat.

We welcome the role and the work of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts during the
reporting period. In particular, we commend the
reported increase in the reporting of sanctions
violations by Member States. It is edifying to note that
the Panel of Experts made tremendous progress during
the first eight weeks of its activities. For its part,
Nigeria will continue to cooperate with and
demonstrate strong support for the work of the
Committee.

We are concerned that little progress was made in
the interaction between the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and Iran on the outstanding
issues relating to Iran's nuclear activities. It is also
distressing to note that the Istanbul and Geneva talks
were unable to yield the desired results. These are
developments of grave concern, which underscore the
need for sustained engagement with Iran on its nuclear
activities.

We are, however, confident that, despite the
challenges, diplomatic negotiation, which has served us
relatively well in the past, still remains relevant - and
perhaps the only sustainable mechanism to resolve all
outstanding issues relating to Iran's nuclear activities.

We call on the IAEA to be unrelenting in its effort
to explore measures to build confidence in consonance
with the resolutions of the Security Council. We call
for efforts to be stepped up by all actors, including the
E3+3, towards facilitating a negotiated solution. It is
absolutely vital that Iran attempt to build confidence
among the international community with regard to the
peaceful nature of its nuclear activities. But in order to
achieve this, it must follow through on its commitment
to engage in talks on its nuclear programme by more
strident and substantive engagement in the process.

