Mr. Ging: Last week, during the monthly briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8322),
I briefed the Security Council recent developments in
Idlib, our current response, the planning under way and
preparations should the situation escalate further. Today
I will provide an additional update on the situation and
on the humanitarian response.

As the Special Envoy stated, ofthe nearly 3 million
people living in the Idlib de-escalation zone - which
includes parts of Idlib, Aleppo, Latakia, and Hama
governorates ~ 2.1 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance, including 1.4 million people who are
internally displaced. While our humanitarian response
currently focuses on supporting the 2.1 million people
in need, we are concerned for the protection and
safety of all civilians living in the area should the
hostilities intensify.

On 4 September, renewed air and ground-based
strikes in western and southern rural Idlib, as well
as northern rural Hama, led to civilian casualties
and displacement. Heavy bombardment of the Jisr
al-Shughour area of western rural Idlib led to some 13
civilian deaths, including at least four children, injuring
another 20 civilians. On 6 September, a hospital near
Kafr Zita, in northern Hama, was reportedly hit by an
air strike, despite the fact that it had been deconflicted.
We also continue to receive reports of improvised
explosive devices and other attacks killing and maiming
civilians in populated areas throughout Idlib, including
humanitarian aid workers. At least three doctors were
killed in August alone.

As a result ofthe insecurity, schools in western Idlib
around Jisr al-Shughour and surrounding communities
have been suspended. Key crossing points between
Government- and opposition-controlled areas are also
reportedly closed, some by the destruction of bridges
by non-State armed opposition groups. In addition to
restricting freedom of movement for the population, that
has also contributed to rising food prices and shortages.

At the request of humanitarian organizations, the
United Nations has provided deconfliction information
for 125 humanitarian sites in Idlib to the military
actors. That information was submitted to facilitate
the parties' identification of humanitarian facilities,
warehouses, offices and sites where humanitarian
assistance is being provided to people in need. In their
military operations, all parties bear the obligation to
take constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects,
including humanitarian workers and humanitarian
facilities. Any deconflicted sites that are reported to
have been targeted must be immediately investigated.
The United Nations and non-governmental
organizations continue to implement a major
humanitarian operation throughout Idlib, with an
average of 2 million people reached every month with
cross-border assistance from Turkey.

Beyond the provision of assistance, efforts are
ongoing to ensure that people in need can be supported
in the event of an increase in hostilities. Our teams
in Damascus and Gaziantep have together developed
a readiness plan that sets out a coordinated, flexible
response for the affected population in the coming
period. Plans are in place to support up to 900,000
women, children and men who could be affected by
conflict, including for up to 700,000 people who may
be displaced within Idlib and beyond due to potential
hostilities. We also estimate that up to 100,000 people
may cross into Government-controlled areas. In
addition, if the conflict spreads to the Tal Rifaat area,
we estimate that another 100,000 people may seek to
move towards other areas in Aleppo governorate or to
north-east Syria.

Humanitarian aid is already being positioned inside
Idlib, as well as in surrounding areas in Aleppo, Latakia
and Hama. That includes ready-to-eat food rations
sufficient for one week to cover as many as 850,000
people - both through cross-border operations via
Turkey and from inside Syria. Additionally, non-food
items, shelter, water, sanitation, hygiene and medical
supplies are also being positioned. The World Health
Organization has dispatched more than 25 tons of
supplies to Aleppo in the past month alone.

The United Nations has released $20 million
from the Tureky humanitarian fund. Approximately
$10 million of that allocation is focused on ensuring
shelter, and non-food items will be available should
an increase in violence force people to be displaced.
While some donors, including the United Kingdom and
Germany, have recently provided additional resources,
for which we are most grateful, the amount received
falls woefully short of the $311 million that we estimate
is required if there is an increase in violence resulting
in mass displacement. Simply put, that is funding that
we do not currently have, as multiple crises over the
past period, in eastern Ghouta, Afrin, southern Syria
and Idlib earlier this year, have strained our already
limited pool of resources.

Civilians in the de-escalation zone have borne the
impact of fighting throughout the years of the Syria
conflict. Vulnerable populations have displaced to the
area from eastern Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, northern
rural Homs and southern Syria. Communities and
humanitarian responders have been stretched to their
limits to support those who arrive, often with nothing.
The humanitarian impact on civilians of any increase
in fighting will therefore be most severe. And the
worst-case scenario in Idlib, where millions would
flee fighting, will overwhelm all capacity to respond
regardless ofplans or funding made available. It has the
potential to create a humanitarian emergency at a scale
not yet seen during the crisis.

In conclusion, let me highlight five key asks to the
Council, and through it to all parties to the conflict and
those who have influence over them.

First, there must be a cessation of hostilities
in the area and, at a minimum, we must ensure that
there is no escalation. Secondly, we must ensure the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including humanitarian and medical personnel and
assets, in compliance with the parties' obligations
under international humanitarian law. Thirdly, we must
respect and enable freedom of movement for people
who wish to move in any direction. Additionally,
civilians who choose to stay must be allowed to do so
and must remain protected. Fourthly, we must allow
and facilitate safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to the people in need through the
most direct routes, including to areas that have changed
control. Fifthly, there must be increased funding for
priority response and readiness activities, given that
the humanitarian response is already overstretched.

