Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Sir, and your country
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing this morning.

The right of conquest is viewed as an offence to
human rights, to the sovereignty and self-determination
of peoples and to the norms governing relations among
nations, including the inadmissibility of the seizure of
territory by force. We thought it had been eliminated
with the end of the age of colonization by the Western
Powers and with the drafting of the Charter of the
United Nations, but in the twenty-first century it
appears still to be enjoyed by Israel in the Middle East.
A colonial Power had only to put a handful of men on
the territory to be colonized to view itself as endowed
with the right of conquest - a right that, even before it
was actually exercised, made that Power the master of
the territory to be conquered. The natural inhabitants of
the territory, once the owners of their ancestral lands,
came to live in utterly precarious, depressing and
miserable conditions 4 if they survived the
conquering Power's genocide.

That is the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. The Israeli violations that flout the very
basis of the modern-day international legal order are a
fundamental transgression of the basic norms of
international law, which possess the character of jus
cogens. These basic norms are the legitimate concern
of the entire community of nations; all peoples can
appeal to them and have an interest in safeguarding
them and ensuring their implementation.

Early last week, in defiance of the international
community and in particular the Security Council, the
Government of Israel asserted a unified Jerusalem as
the capital of the Jewish people and of the State of
Israel and that its sovereignty in Jerusalem was not a
matter for discussion.
During the Six-Day War of 1967, Israel seized
East Jerusalem as war booty. Then, in 1980, it adopted
national legislation encompassing the eastern and
western parts of the city, proclaiming this as its eternal
and invisible capital. That measure is illegal under
resolution 478 (1980) and illegal in the eyes of the
General Assembly, which has reaffirmed that all
legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, that have altered
or purported to alter the character, legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem are null and
void and have no validity whatsoever, in particular the
so-called Basic Law on Jerusalem and the proclamation
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and that such
measures must be reversed.

Nonetheless, and in spite of United Nations
resolutions declaring the illegality of Israeli actions in
East Jerusalem, tension has continued to rise after more
than 40 years of occupation. This is a result of Israel's
destructive and provocative policies and actions,
through its settlement campaign throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. This is under way
primarily in Jerusalem, where Israel continues fiercely
to wage its final conquest and colonization of the city
and the neighbouring areas. The isolation of Jerusalem
from the remainder of the occupied Palestinian territory,
the Judaization of the city and the destruction of its
original demographic composition and its historical
and cultural heritage, along with the expansion of
illegal settlements at an unprecedented pace, constitute
an ongoing violation of articles 49 and 53 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

The continued occupation has further exacerbated
the situation of the Palestinian people, which has
already been precarious since the construction of the
wall that has dismembered its territory, isolated its
various areas and separated East Jerusalem from the
rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. This has led to
a serious physical, economic, cultural and social
disaster.

The building of the wall was the subject of an
International Court of Justice advisory opinion of
9 July 2004, which stated that the wall being erected by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and its
environs, was counter to international law and that
Israel was obligated to end its non-compliance with
international law and to immediately halt construction
work on the wall and to immediately dismantle existing
structures.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, there has been no
progress since the end of the Israeli military operation
seven months ago. The inhabitants of Gaza cannot
rebuild their lives. The majority of the population of
1.5 million is having extreme difficulty making it to
the end of the month. Seriously ill people are suffering
because they cannot access medical treatment. Many
children are suffering from serious psychological
problems. Civilians whose homes and possessions were
destroyed during the conflict cannot recover. In short,
the blockade imposed by Israel three years ago remains
unchanged and the United Nations does nothing.
Poverty in Gaza is directly related to the blockade.

In order to prevent the misery from increasing
with every passing day and to enable people to rebuild
their lives, the restrictions on movement and goods
must be lifted. The uninterrupted occupation of Arab
territories by Israel in implementation of its policy of
conquest and expansion is an ongoing violation of the
United Nations Charter. Unfortunately, the Security
Council has adopted no effective measures to put an
end to Israel's illegal actions. It has permitted
continued violation of the status of the city and its
residents and helped dim the prospects for peace,
which is essential to the future of Jerusalem. An
agreement between both interested parties that
recognizes East Jerusalem as the capital of the new
Palestinian State is essential to achieving lasting peace.

We must underscore the extreme urgency of these
matters and once again reiterate that the Council, on
the basis of its own as yet unimplemented resolutions,
must comply with its obligations under the Charter and
act against the illegal actions of the occupying Power,
Israel, in the occupied Palestinian territories.

We hope that the day is coming when Israeli
actions with regard to Jerusalem will respect and
recognize the etymology of the city, whose name
derives from the Hebrew for "house of peace" or from
the Arabic, Al-Quds, which means "sacred site".
Nicaragua calls for a politically just solution to the
Palestinian problem based on numerous United Nations
resolutions, including the resolution establishing the
right of return for Palestinian refugees and those
resolutions calling for Israel's withdrawal from all
Arab territories occupied since 1967, in accordance
with the principle of land for peace, established at the
Madrid conference and in the Arab Peace Initiative,
which will allow for the creation of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

There is universal consensus that the Palestinian
people must not remain under occupation. Israeli
colonialism must end. The Palestinian people must
exercise their inalienable rights and the State of
Palestine must be established immediately. We reiterate
that only with the establishment of the two States,
Palestine and Israel, and with an end to Israeli
occupation of occupied Arab territories will there be
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

Once again, Nicaragua wishes to express its
support for and solidarity with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Government of Lebanon
as they seek territorial unity for their respective States
and consequently an end to Israeli occupation in those
territories.

