Mr. Apata (Nigeria): Nigeria conveys its
gratitude to you, Sir, for personally presiding over the
deliberations ofthe Council this afternoon. We want to
thank the delegation of Singapore and Ambassador
Mahbubani, whose interest in Africa has always been
outstanding. Up until last January, he was the Co-
Chairman of the Open-Ended Ad Hoc Working Group
of the General Assembly on the Causes of Conflict and
the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable
Development in Africa, and he has brought that
commitment into the work of the Security Council. We
thank him very much.

We also want to thank the Ambassador of
Mauritius for the outstanding work he has been
carrying on in the Council since the election of his
country to membership, and in particular in his
capacity as Chairman of the ad hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

This morning, we listened to Ambassador Ke'be'
speak about the involvement and role of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and cooperation
with the United Nations. We heard his proposals and
briefing about what the OAU is trying to do in the
establishment of peace and security. We agree with the
thrust of his statement.

These issues are not new to Assistant Secretary-
General Ibrahima Fall. For over 30 years, he has been
very active on all these issues in Africa Hall in Addis
Ababa, in Geneva and here in New York. He has
always brought clarity and focus to all the issues he has
dealt with and we are sure that he will bring all this to
his new responsibilities as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa. There could be
no better appointment, because he is known in West
Africa. The doors will open to him in all capitals and
that will facilitate his assignment.

I want to depart from my written statement in
order to react to some of the comments that were made
this morning, particularly by Assistant Secretary-
General Ibrahima Fall, Ambassador Koonjul and the
Ambassador of France. Let me start by saying that the
format that the Council has adopted today is extremely
useful to our deliberations in order for us to listen to
non-Council members and, as appropriate, for Council
members to react. In this manner, we can have a
dialogue and exchange of views, which will hopefully
reach the Council's informal consultations and its
future decisions in matters relating to conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.

Therefore, let me focus on a few issues that
Ambassador Koonjul asked us in his letter to focus on.
The first issue I want to deal with is the role of
subregional leaders and organizations. I am separating
them into two categories - regional and subregional
leaders and regional organizations - because they are
not one and the same. They interlock but they are
different. The Ambassador of France, Ambassador
Kebe and Assistant Secretary-General Fall extensively
covered this issue in its different aspects this morning.

Let us say first that most conflicts are resolved by
the efforts of African leaders themselves, without
prompting by anybody. This has been going on for
years; it is going on now and will continue. A number
of regional leaders in Africa - Presidents Mbeki,
Konare and Bongo and even my own President - have
always been active in continuously trying to solve
different problems in Africa. Some of them are
resolved without anyone noticing, without even
reaching the public's eye. Because of the nature of this
open meeting, one cannot name countries, soldiers or
the nature of such conflicts, but these leaders have been
successful in persuading other leaders before elections
that they should not run for office but should instead
allow for an easy transition in their country. That is
part ofthe ongoing efforts that they are making.

With respect to their quiet interventions, the
challenge we need to face is how do we feed
information on such interventions into the work of the
Council? How do we get what they are doing on an
ongoing basis fed back to the Council. I amjust raising
these questions for the reflection of Council members.
One role the ad hoc Working Group on Africa will
have is to feed ongoing work in Africa into the work of
the Council.

If we do this, we can avoid the type of problem
that Ambassador Levitte mentioned this morning,
where African leaders are active, planning efforts in
one particular direction, and the Council is acting in
another. We then have to resolve the contradiction. So,
the challenge for the ad hoc Working Group is to work
in collaboration with the Secretary-General and to
identify the particular leaders across Africa who are
actively engaged in some of these issues and feed
whatever they are doing into the work of the Council.
Nigeria is willing to assist the ad hoc Working Group,
at least in regard to what we are doing, to feed the
Council information ofthis kind.

The second point is in relation to the
collaboration between the United Nations and
subregional organizations. Ambassador Ke'be' focused
on the OAU. I will not focus on that. We are happy that
the United Nations has been able to establish a
framework for cooperation with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It is
working very well. Only a couple of weeks ago, the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS was here to hold
discussions with members of the United Nations
Secretariat. What one would have loved to see is for
the leaders of these organizations to be involved in this
type of meeting today because they play a role. If, in
the future, the Executive Secretaries of ECOWAS,
SADC and others can be invited to participate in this
type of deliberation, it will be extremely useful.

Let us briefly discuss the question of preventing
conflict following elections. Ambassador Levitte raised
that question this morning. He stated that the
immediate cause of conflict can be the holding of
elections and the acceptance or non-acceptance of
election results. He suggested that perhaps it is
necessary for the United Nations and the OAU to have
joint election monitoring units in place. I would
support that initiative. I would even suggest that we
start not three months but six months before the
election and increase the number of United Nations and
OAU officials we send into the field as the election
approaches. Let us start working on that because it is
surely cheaper for us to spend the type of money
needed to prevent conflict than to mount a
peacekeeping operation in the aftermath of an election.
We do not know what will happen in Madagascar.
Because peacekeeping operations are full-fledged
operations, if we mount one, we will spend an
enormous amount of resources doing so. It is crucial
for the ad hoc Working Group of the Security Council
and the advisory group of the Economic and Social
Council to work together in planning this type of
election monitoring support and observation,
particularly as some of the aspects will impact on
human rights, freedom ofthe press and so forth.

On the question of drawing down peacekeeping
operations, in places where we have peacekeeping
operations, peacekeeping forces have been rapidly
drawn down immediately after elections were held. We
need to exercise caution and be patient because the
holding of elections does not guarantee peace. It is just
the beginning of a process: a process of peace-building.
We must try to avoid war in the Central African
Republic. I say this also with reference to Sierra Leone,
where an election was recently concluded. We in
Nigeria see that as the beginning of a process. We urge
the Council not to precipitately withdraw or draw down
forces. One should draw them down as the situation
improves, while doing so in consultation with national
and subregional leaders, who are involved in the peace-
building process there. We urge you do so. To use a
British saying, we should not be penny wise and pound
foolish.

On the question of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), to which Ambassador
Baali and Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa
referred earlier on, I will flag only one aspect of
NEPAD. The African leaders have committed
themselves to not accepting in their midst those who
take power by unconstitutional means. They will only
accept democratic leaders. In this regard, they have
established what they call peer review: if you do not
behave well, you are not welcome in our midst. I think
they have introduced an important concept. They have
also said that African leaders will not be accepted if
they are seen to be manipulating the constitutional
process in order to extend their time in office. That is
one of the problems that brings about the conflicts that
the Council is concerned with. African leaders need to
be commended for that initiative.

Lastly, on the role of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in resolving conflict, the
choice of Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall, as
I stated earlier, is commendable because he knows the
terrain. All doors will be open to him. He will be able
to interact with the various heads of State in our
subregion. He will, therefore, be able to propose
solutions to some ofthe conflicts.

I want to make some practical suggestions to the
Council. There are a number of Representatives and
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General in
West Africa: in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau,
and of course the Office recently established in West
Africa. It would be useful for all of them to meet
occasionally to compare notes on what is happening
there, because the conflicts seem to be interrelated. The
situation in Sierra Leone is related to the situation in
Liberia. Liberia is related to Sierra Leone and to the
Mano River Union. The Representatives can bring their
collective wisdom to bear, share information and then
decide what needs to be done. I think it will be useful.

I also believe it is necessary for the Special
Representative for West Africa to regularly consult, not
only with the ECOWAS secretariat and the chairman of
the authority of ECOWAS, but also with ECOWAS
leaders who have plans to act on a particular conflict. I
am referring to timely intervention. As I said earlier,
the Special Representative has many contacts, which
will help him accomplish these tasks for the Council.

Let me briefly explain what I thought should be
part of the role of the ad hoc Working Group. I am not
trying to define its mandate, but I think we should draw
a lesson from the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose
working methods would be useful for the ad hoc
Working Group. Because we cannot meet all the time
with Council members in this type of forum, it would
be useful for the ad hoc Working Group to meet
occasionally outside the Chamber with members of the
African Group and with the general membership of the
United Nations as the situation demands.

