Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to begin by
joining others in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive briefing. Let me take
this opportunity to comment on the situation in the
Sudan and the recent positive developments with
regard to the situation in Northern Uganda. All the
while, I would like to underline that the humanitarian
situations in a number of other countries in Africa also
require the close attention of the international
community.

One of the purposes of these humanitarian
briefings is to have an opportunity for early warning
regarding looming international crisis. In this
perspective, it is deeply disturbing that today we are
again receiving a briefing from Mr. Egeland, which

concludes that the situation facing the civilian
population in Darfur is still largely the same as three
years ago. Only today, we have over 3 million people
dependent on humanitarian assistance, an increase of
more than 2 million over the past three years.

The situation in Darfur is unacceptable and
cannot be allowed to continue. A robust and efficient
international force on the ground is the only way
forward - a fact that has to be accepted by all. All
efforts towards this goal must continue with a strong
sense of urgency. The high-level consultation on the
situation in Darfur, held last Thursday in Addis-Ababa,
was a very important step to break the impasse with the
Government of the Sudan regarding resolution 1706
(2006) and we look forward to being briefed in detail
about the discussions at that meeting this afternoon.

The time between now and the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, to be held
on 29 November in Abuja, must be used to intensify
efforts to clear any additional issues standing in the
way of our common goal, namely, to protect the lives
of civilians in Darfur. We urge the regional Powers to
stay engaged and to do their utmost to curb this
threatening expansion of the conflict to a full-fledged
regional conflict. All parties to the Tripoli and
N'Djamena agreements must adhere to commitments
made in these agreements.

Simultaneously, we must do everything possible
to speed up the political process. Everyone with
particular influence on key players must use their
influence to the fullest. Broad acceptance of the Darfur
Peace Agreement is a prerequisite for true progress and
substantial improvement in the security situation.

On a much more positive note, I would like to
welcome the cessation of hostilities agreement between
Uganda and the rebels - the Lord's Resistance Army.
The Juba peace talks represent an unprecedented
opportunity to end the conflict, to bring a just and
lasting peace to northern Uganda and to improve
security throughout the region. We urge the parties to
agree on a comprehensive settlement as soon as
possible. We would like to commend the Government
of the Southern Sudan for facilitating the peace talks
and, likewise, to commend the Government of Uganda
for the role it has played.
The negotiations will be difficult and setbacks are
to be expected, but the international community should
try everything to keep the talks alive by supporting the

mediators, by contributing to a conducive environment,
which includes financial contributions, and by making
sure that neither side will be given an alibi for walking
away from the negotiation table.

To secure lasting peace, impunity must be
addressed. As stated by Mr. Egeland, it is a delicate
issue and one that will need our continued attention.
The Government of Uganda must live up to its
responsibility to find a solution consistent with its
obligations under international law. The Security
Council's adoption last week of a presidential
statement on this matter (S/PRST/2006/45) is an
important step in the right direction. We believe strong
engagement by the United Nations will further
stimulate the peace process.

Let me conclude by commending the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
Mr. Egeland in particular for the active advocacy role
they have played and they continue to play.

