Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We express our gratitude for the convening of this
meeting and thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her
briefing on the situation in Darfur and the valuable
work that she is carrying out with her team. Pursuant
to resolution 2363 (2017), Peru supports the political
process in that country and action to address the root
causes of the conflict and to ensure the safe return
of the approximately 1.8 million internally displaced
persons, among other urgent measures.

It is fitting to recall that, shortly after the Rome
Statute's entry into force and the assumption of its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council demonstrated its trust in the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court for
the first time by referring the situation in Darfur to it.
That was a necessary step in efforts to guarantee access
to justice and accountability. We therefore renew our
support for the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
today, but we are aware of its complex nature and that
it requires the full cooperation of States, beginning
with national authorities directly concerned. In that
regard, it is appropriate to remind the authorities of the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan of their duty to
execute arrest warrants issued by the Court. Similarly,
we regret that some States parties to the Rome Statute
have not lived up to their obligation to cooperate with
regard to the investigation and prosecution of crimes
that fall under its jurisdiction and especially the
obligation to detain and surrender to the Court persons
subject to an arrest warrant who enter their territory.
Likewise, we urge all States to act in accordance with
their obligations pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

While instances ofnon-compliance with the Court's
orders clearly undermine its credibility, it is also true
that failure to take measures to address such situations
affects the credibility of the Council. In that regard, as
the non-cooperation focal point of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, Peru welcomed the
New Zealand initiative of December 2016 to address
that problem.

We must also remember that, while the Court is
essential for preventing the most serious crimes from
going unpunished, its jurisdiction is complementary
to the responsibility of every State to protect its
people. Similarly, cooperation with the Court should
be understood as an opportunity to strengthen justice
and the rule of law in domestic and international areas.
That is predicated upon promoting greater confidence
in legal institutions and effective deterrence. Trust in
the justice system and the predictability of its response
to atrocity crimes is particularly relevant for a country
like the Sudan, which has been affected by conflict.
Nothing justifies impunity.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
important work being done by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the exercise of
its mandate in all areas of Darfur, and reaffirm our
support for the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

