The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

Japan welcomes the Council's unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2391 (2017). I pay tribute to France's
efforts in bringing our partners together to work for
the restoration of peace and stability in Mali and the
Sahel region. Japan supported the resolution because
we recognize that Mali needs support ifit is to speedily
deliver on the remaining key provisions ofthe Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is a critical time
for the country, and resolution 2391 (2017) recognizes
that. It provides innovative arrangements for United
Nations support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali by using a European Union-coordinated financing
mechanism. The success of the efforts of the G-5
Sahel, including those made through this arrangement,
requires the support of international communities.
We would like to call on our international partners to
mobilize efforts that support the G-5 Sahel States in
implementing the new resolution.

I would like to conclude by saying that Japan
underlines the importance of addressing the drivers of
violent extremism in the Sahel. The consequences and
impact of the activities of the terrorist organizations
present there, including those that benefit from
transnational organized crime in Mali and the Sahel,
cannot be solved by security-focused intervention
alone. We strongly believe that it is becoming ever-
more crucial to ensure that the response to the violent
extremism in the Sahel is a comprehensive one. The
growing insecurity in central Mali and its border areas
requires more than simply containing the violence.
We must build a resilient society and institutions that
ensure human security. Japan will continue to work
closely with the G-5 Sahel States, the United Nations
and our international partners in order to make progress
towards achieving security and stability in Mali and
the Sahel.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.

