Mr. Tanaka: I would like to thank you for
convening this timely and important open debate.
While the dangers arising from the global proliferation
of terrorist acquisition of weapons of mass destruction
are now widely recognized, much work remains to be
done to reduce such threats. In this respect, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is continuing efforts to promote
the full implementation of the resolution, including
through enhanced outreach, dialogue, assistance and
cooperation throughout the international community.

I particularly welcome the participation of
representatives from the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the World Customs
Organization (WCO). These three international
organizations play crucial roles in the implementation
of the process, especially through their practical
experience and lessons learned in the areas covered by
resolution 1540 (2004), and through their assistance
programmes to facilitate the implementation of the
resolution.

The threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in fact represents a most urgent task. In the
past year, I have seen to it that this issue is at the
forefront of the work of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs. Last year, the Department
organized three regional outreach seminars on the
07-24806
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) involving
more than 70 participating countries from the regions.
Seminars were held in Beijing for the Asia-Pacific
region, in Accra for the African region and in Lima for
Latin America and the Caribbean region. I attended all
of those seminars personally. I would like to thank all
three organizations for participating in them. The
presentations by experts greatly contributed to the
success of these seminars. I also appreciate
Ambassador Peter Burian's able leadership in
organizing them. After three seminars, I believe that
we are now getting into the next phase of the
implementation of the resolution. We need more
tailored approaches to meet the requirements of the
regions, sub-regions and even Member States.

This cooperation among inter-governmental
bodies is essential in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) and in building support for it throughout the
international community. I believe this cooperation is
an effective illustration of how sustained multilateral
cooperation can work to advance the national security
interests of all States and strengthen international
peace and security.

