Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is profoundly gratified at
the fact that Angola is moving step by step towards a new,
peaceful stage in its national life. A considerable political,
material and financial contribution to promoting national
reconciliation in that country was and continues to be made
by the international community.

Just two weeks ago it appeared that the peace process,
encountering new difficulties, had once again been
stalemated. However, the firm position of the international
community, the resolutions of the Security Council, the visit
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to Angola
and the intensive work carried out by his Special
Representative made it possible to get things moving again.

After lengthy and completely unwarranted
procrastination, UNITA finally did what was expected of it
under the Lusaka Protocol. As a result, important and
positive changes took place. The question of the status of
Mr. Savimbi was resolved, the deputies from UNITA were
sworn into the National Assembly and, most importantly,
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation was
formed. Thus, a new political basis has been provided for
the dialogue between the Government and UNITA, and
the peace process has ascended to a new level. We hope
that this will help the parties in Angola rise above any
possible recurrence of their past mistrust and to make
further progress towards durable peace in that country.

At the same time, we cannot fail to be concerned
about the situation relating to completing the
implementation of the political and particularly the
military aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. Although there
has been a certain amount of movement, the incorporation
of selected troops into the Angolan Armed Forces and the
National Police is going quite slowly. Instances of
desertion among former UNITA soldiers number in the
hundreds, and the checkpoints are only slowly being
dismantled.

The failure to resolve military issues might in the
future serve as a source of new difficulties and
destabilization. It is precisely for that reason that we
attach particular importance to the appeal contained in the
draft resolution before the Council to fulfil the remaining
aspects of the peace process precisely and promptly. We
believe that promoting their implementation will continue
to be the most important part of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III. As military and political questions are
tackled, and as the military contingent of the Verification
Mission is withdrawn, it will be possible to undertake
transitional measures in order to ensure a further United
Nations presence in Angola beyond 30 June 1997.

We would like to pay tribute to the people of
Angola for their patience and persistence and their resolve
to achieve peace and concord in their land. We appreciate
that in order to consolidate the process of national
reconciliation, further international assistance will be
required. On the whole, we can support the proposals of
the Secretary-General in this regard, and we will be
prepared, in the context of the competencies of the
Security Council, to consider any specific
recommendations he may present later.

As a member of the troika of observer countries
monitoring the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, the
Russian Federation will continue its efforts, both
multilaterally and bilaterally with all interested parties, to
bring the process of national reconciliation to a successful
conclusion, and to restore stability in Angola.

 

