Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for arranging for this
opportunity to have an exchange. I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Didier Burkhalter, President of the
Swiss Confederation and Head of the Swiss Federal
Department for Foreign Affairs. I commend him on
his assumption of the chairmanship-in-offfice of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I also thank him for his briefing on the
Swiss priorities during his chairmanship and on the
possibilities for cooperation between the OSCE and the
United Nations.

Argentina appreciates the cooperation that regional
and subregional organizations make to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Debates such as
the one we are having today enable us to reflect on the
various dimensions of the links between regional and
subregional organizations and the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is a subject to which my country attaches great
importance, and we welcome the trend that we have seen
in the Council to maintain dialogues of this kind. We
hope this will be built upon further as a good practice
and will be extended to other regional and subregional
organizations on the same footing with equal treatment.

Regional and subregional organizations are key to
strengthening the multilateral system. They give greater
legitimacy to, and render more effective the actions of,
the international community in addressing challenges
to peace and in promoting dialogue and cooperation.
Their contribution complements the work of the
United Nations and builds on their knowledge of their
own regions, as well with regard to the causes of the
conflicts. Such irreplaceable comparative advantages
are of great value to efforts for conflict prevention and
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In that
context, I reiterate my country's appreciation for the
important work carried out by the OSCE in the areas of
early warning, conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict situations.

The cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE, characterized by its scope both in
geographical terms and in content, has made it possible
to achieve a more coordinated approach among various
international actors. It is fitting to underscore, among
other examples, OSCE cooperation with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
which has contributed to the work undertaken towards
normalizing relations and advancing stability in the
region.

We also believe it to be important to again
underscore the close cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia. Such cooperation certainly
indicates the important contribution of the Regional
Centre in dealing with both national issues that
affect regional stability and the cross-border impact
of the threat of terrorism, organized crime and drug
trafficking, as well as environmental degradation and
water-resource management.

With regard to Switzerland's priorities during its
chairmanship, we welcome its close alignment with
Serbia, which will succeed it in the OSCE chairmanship
in 2015, in the context of a two-year work plan in order
to ensure the continuity of activities and to increase the
organization's effectiveness.

We welcome the emphasis on regional cooperation
in the Western Balkans, the promotion of dialogue
among the Kosovo communities and support for
OSCE activities and institutions on the ground. We
also welcome the dialogue and rapprochement in
the Southern Caucasus through participation in the
Geneva talks on regional stability with a view to
promoting security and stability. We are also pleased by
Switzerland's readiness to support the role of the OSCE
as a platform for the exchange of ideas and conventional
arms control talks in Europe.

For Argentina, based on our institutional definition
of human rights as a State policy and our social culture
founded on the principles, norms and practices of
equality, non-discrimination, individual freedom and
social justice, it is particularly appreciated that the
implementation of obligations of a human dimension
focused in areas such as the fight against torture, respect
for human rights and the rule of law in combating
terrorism, the protection of human rights defenders,
the promotion of democratic elections and respect for
the rights of those belonging to the various different
minorities are at the heart of the Swiss chairmanship. For
its part, bearing in mind the importance of cooperation
in the fight against transnational threats, such as
terrorism, we welcome the holding of a conference to
address the response to such threats, while at the same
time ensuring respect for human rights.

With regard to a topic on the Security Council
agenda, as is the case with Afghanistan, we welcome
the OSCE decision to send, at the request of the
Government of Afghanistan, a support team for the
presidential and provincial council elections that will
take place in April. That decision is an important
contribution to the international community's efforts to
promote democracy and greater stability in the country
in the context of its transition and the withdrawal of the
international security forces during this year. It is proof
of the positive synergies that are possible between the
United Nations and the OSCE.

Finally, we appreciate the high-level dialogue
proposed by Switzerland in order to advance the reform
process of the OSCE in line with the mandate entrusted
by the OSCE Ministerial Council to the chairmanship
at the end of 2012 with a view to improving the
organization's ability to act. We agree with and support
the vision and the priorities set by Switzerland for the
work of the OSCE this year. We highlight the emphasis
on the participation of young people. We share and
appreciate Switzerland's commitment towards gender
equality in all decision-making processes related to
inclusive and fair democracies.

We therefore trust that the Security Council and
the entire United Nations system will strengthen
cooperation efforts with the OSCE during the current
chairmanship and with other regional and subregional
organizations so as to find together the best answers
to the challenges facing us in order to ensure human
rights, democracy, peace and security.

I could not conclude without expressing Argentina's
conviction and support because we believe that, in
the situation facing Ukraine today, only dialogue, not
violence, between the people and the various political
and social movements in Ukraine will lead to a peaceful
and democratic settlement of their differences.

