Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I join in others in congratulating and welcoming Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, to whom I wish every success. I also wish to join in expressing condolences, through the Somali authorities, to the families of the victims of the attack on the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu last weekend, which we very strongly condemn, of course. I would also like to thank our briefers and make three points. First, on the political level, France believes that Somalia remains at a critical juncture. We are closely following the ongoing discussions between the Federal Government and the federated member States. We note that those discussions led last month to an agreement to hold elections on time, but without specifying the modalities of the elections. For France, it is imperative that all Somali actors continue to work constructively in preparing for presidential and legislative elections that are peaceful, inclusive, free and transparent and that enjoy the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. It is also essential for the stability of Somalia that these elections be held as soon as possible, in early 2021. We regret the removal of Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre by the Somali Parliament, whose vote did not respect the institutional rules that we support. Unfortunately, this decision is not conducive to reconciliation in the country. Secondly, on the security front, France also believes that Somalia remains at a critical juncture, since the Somalis themselves will have to assume responsibility for the security of their country by the end of 2021. In that context, it is necessary that the transfer of security responsibilities from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the Somali federal and regional security forces continue. The Somali authorities must also update their transition plan for September, with a view to fully engaging in that process by 2021. We expect the authorities to accelerate the implementation of a plan for the generation of additional forces and to integrate the regional forces into the Somali National Army. Thirdly, France calls on the Somali authorities and their main partners, including the European Union, the United Nations, the African Union and AMISOM troop-contributing countries, as well as bilateral donors involved in the security sector in Somalia, to seriously engage in discussions on international support to the Somali security sector after 2021. The European Union has shown its readiness to actively participate in such discussions. For our part, we would like to see a more proactive approach to the issue. It is critical that the Somali authorities implement the benchmarks established by the Security Council in resolution 2520 (2020), adopted in May. Decisions on international support for the security sector in Somalia after 2021 must indeed be directly linked to the progress made on those benchmarks. Finally, France would like to recall that the current model of support for Somalia cannot be taken for granted. All options must be considered, including alternatives to AMISOM. In particular, we recall that the European Union's current financing model for AMISOM is not sustainable. If the European Union is to continue to support the security sector in Somalia, that support will be dependent on the establishment of accountability mechanisms, the participation of the European Union in AMISOM's strategic decisions and the financial contribution of other partners. Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our concern about the humanitarian situation in Somalia, which is exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. I also fully share the concerns expressed by the representatives of Germany and Belgium over sexual violence and violations committed against children. The protection of civilian populations and respect for their rights are key requirements that must be fully taken into account in the reform process in Somalia. We commend the efforts of United Nations, in coordination with other partners, to adapt their action and support the response of the Somali authorities.
