Mr. Zebari (Iraq): In accordance with the
political process endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004),
Iraq's general elections were successfully held on
30 January, initiating a peaceful transfer of power to
the National Assembly, which convened on 16 March,
and a Transitional Government, which was formed on
3 May. The national unity Government constitutes the
most broadly representative Government in Iraq's
history in terms of ethnicity, faith and political
affiliation. Thirty-one per cent of Assembly members
are women.

The priority of this phase of our political
transition has been to draft a new permanent
Constitution for Iraq. That historic document will
provide the foundation on which to rebuild our country
as a peaceful, stable, united and federal Iraq, and the
only way to realize that vision is with the input and the
consensus of the entire constituency. The Constitution
Drafting Committee was therefore expanded to better
represent Iraqi society by including communities that
did not take part or that did not fare well in the January
elections.

Every Iraqi must have a sense of ownership of
our country's future, and we have a responsibility to
future generations of Iraqis to craft a democratic
Constitution based on public consent. There was a
short delay in presenting the draft charter to the
National Assembly while all parties tried to reach
broader agreement on some of the key issues. But this
is the first time in 80 years that a constitution has been
so openly and publicly debated. It is important that we
stick to the timetable set out in resolution 1546 (2004),
but in this case too much was at stake to rush through
an unfinished or unworkable charter.

The Charter enshrines human rights, minority
rights and equal rights before the law regardless of
ethnicity, religion or beliefs. It protects freedom of
speech and conscience, the sovereignty of law, the
peaceful transfer of power and full political rights in a
parliamentary, federal and democratic Iraq. It upholds
our historical tradition of the peaceful coexistence of
diverse faiths and guarantees religious freedoms.
Power is separated between the legislature, the
executive and an independent judiciary, within a
federation devolving power and resources to the
regional and local levels.

What we have produced does not satisfy all the
demands of any group, but it is the best deal that could
be delivered based on negotiation and consensus. We
demonstrated a commitment to compromise instead of
exerting individual maximalist demands. That sends an
important message: there will be no will of the
majority without the consent of the minority.

The draft Constitution is the most progressive in
the region. It provides a framework for democracy to
thrive, and we are very proud of what we have
produced, particularly in such a difficult security
environment.

The next step is to ratify the draft Constitution in
a national referendum on 15 October, when the people
of Iraq will have the final say. In order to build
national consensus, the draft remains open for debate.
A vigorous public awareness campaign is under way,
and the United Nations is printing 5 million copies to
be distributed to Iraqi households. If ratified, the
referendum will be followed by nationwide general
elections in December for a constitutionally elected
Government. The National Assembly has adopted a
new electoral law based on a system according to
which Iraq's 18 governorates will each elect its own
representatives, thus creating a broader coalition and
representative Government. Forty-eight Assembly seats
are allocated as compensatory seats for minority
groups that are unable to meet the electoral quota.

Encouragingly, voter registration has surged in all
areas of the country, the latest figures and assessment
indicating about 14 million people so far. If
constituents are registering to vote in peaceful political
opposition, then that is democracy at work.

We are committed to meeting the remaining
deadlines mandated in the Transitional Administrative
Law and endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004), but we
need greater international assistance in order to do so.

Iraq welcomes and appreciates the United
Nations role in Iraq, especially the work of the
Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Ambassador Ashraf Qazi, who played an important
part in consensus-building in the constitutional
process. The United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) contributed important advice to the
Constitutional Committee and to the Electoral
Commission, and we welcome their efforts to increase
their presence on the ground by setting up offices in
Erbil and Basra.

Iraq will be heading into a critical phase in the
next three months, and we call upon UNAMI to fulfil
its mandate fully, according to resolution 1546 (2004),
broadening its physical outreach and providing more
personnel support. While the political transition is an
Iraqi-led process, we ask the United Nations to play a
more vocal and more Visible role in Iraq. No
international organization does a better job of
organizing credible, honest elections in emerging
democracies than the United Nations.

We again urge Member States to adhere to their
obligations under resolution 1546 (2004) to provide
protection and funding for United Nations facilities in
Iraq so that UNAMI can contribute more effectively to
democracy-building in our country.
Democracy cannot flourish without social
development and reconstruction. We note the United
Nations efforts regarding reconstruction, development
and humanitarian assistance, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. We also welcome the
United Nations coordination activities with donor
countries, through the International Reconstruction
Fund Facility for Iraq, in partnership with Iraq's
national development strategy. Now is the time to
accelerate the mechanisms to implement the
international commitments made in Madrid and
reinforced in Brussels and Amman.

The level of disbursement from the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq has improved,
compared with 2004, but we are looking with concern
at the spending level managed by the World Bank. We
also support the Secretary-General's call to donor
countries to provide the $107 million required for
Iraq's elections, in addition to the amount set aside by
the Iraqi Government.

We urgently need to improve basic services and
the everyday standard of living. We need to accelerate
capacity-building in the ministries, based on the
principles of good governance and public
accountability. We require a more concerted
international effort, led by the United Nations, to speed
up the distribution of donor funds and reduce system
bottlenecks.

We are rebuilding our nation on the principles of
human rights and equality, rather than on the mass
graves and genocides of the past. But to succeed we
must be self-appraising in our progress and, after two
and a half years of freedom from dictatorship, we must
also recognize that human rights development - the
heart of a free and democratic nation - takes time. It
requires constant education and the establishment of
practices and institutions to uphold and protect
individual, minority and public rights.

We acknowledge that there are some difficulties
in the process of human rights development in Iraq. We
are taking proactive measures to investigate any
reported human rights violations through independent
inquiries and parliamentary committees. We remind the
Security Council that the ability of the United Nations
and human rights non-governmental organizations to
be able to work in our country and compile human
rights reports is in itself a positive achievement. We
welcome all international human rights organizations,
and encourage them to have a presence in our country.

We salute the European Union's JUST LEX
initiative aimed at bringing our security and police
forces and penal and legal officers up to international
human rights standards of practice.

But as we enshrine our human rights in a new
Constitution, we know that our future cannot be
determined in ink. What happens on the ground will
determine how far we can translate our vision into a
more promising reality.

The gravest human rights Violations in Iraq today
are the senseless atrocities inflicted upon us by
terrorists. We are bearing the brunt of thousands of our
people being slaughtered by foreign extremists or thugs
of the former regime, bitter for having lost their iron
grip on Iraq's riches. They have only a nihilistic
message, but no agenda, for Iraq or for the region,
except to prevent, through a deadly cycle of Violence
and terror, democratic ideals from taking root.

Our efforts to rebuild and stabilize Iraq are being
challenged at every step, and we expect terrorists to
step up their attempts to create civil tension and
prevent national unity ahead of the constitutional
referendum. The battle being fought in Iraq is not ours
alone, but a fight to protect the freedoms of the rest of
the civilized world. Many Security Council members
present today have been affected by terrorism. There is
a moral obligation to relieve the Iraqi people of their
burden, and we appreciate the sacrifices and the work
of those multinational forces that support us in Iraq.
Despite the bravery of our own fledgling forces, we
cannot do it alone.

The more we build our security and military
capabilities, the sooner the multinational troops can go
home. Increasingly, Iraqi forces are successfully taking
over areas of responsibility from the multinational
forces, as we saw recently in Tal Afar, Najaf and other
bases in the country. But this is a multifaceted effort.
We need more training, better intelligence, better
forces and better coordination. There is an ongoing
need for continued support from the multinational
forces to complete the job and to help us to build a
professional, non-politicized force answerable to a
democratically elected Government.

We again ask our neighbours to root out elements
of terror and join us in regional strategic cooperation.
Neighbouring countries have responsibilities towards
Iraq that they have agreed to through bilateral or
ministerial meetings, and which fall under resolution
1546 (2004) and the more recent resolution 1618
(2005). But there are differences in the way in which
neighbouring countries respond. We feel strongly that,
unfortunately, there is a lack of political will in Syria
with regard to its commitments to Iraq. Regrettably, the
bulk of foreign fighters are coming across the Iraqi-
Syrian border, and the Syrian Government has yet to
demonstrate serious cooperation in helping us to stop
that transit.

We repeat our call upon our neighbours to tighten
border controls, act forcefully against hateful
propaganda and demonstrate clear action to stem the
tide of terror. The alternative to peace is bloodshed and
endless violence by an emboldened enemy with an
established base from which to export its murderous
campaign. The terrorists know that, and so do we.

Global terror has never been more of a threat.
Iraq stands alongside New York, attacked on
11 September 2001, Madrid, Beslan, London and
Sharm el-Sheikh as a wake-up call. We must show no
sign of weakness. We are determined to rebuild our
country. We are ready to fight anyone who seeks to
return us to tyranny through the barrel of a gun or a
suicide mission.

I wish to reiterate to the Security Council that as
long as conditions require it, we need the help of the
Multinational Force. To rebuild, we also need the
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq to
continue. To lead the international effort, we need
UNAMI to increasingly fulfil the role outlined in
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).

Finally, Iraq is proud to stand with the other
nations of the world as a country that upholds the core
values of the United Nations Charter. But Iraq also
provides the test case for success or failure. Nowhere
are the goals of freedom, democracy and progress more
at stake. We know our clear way forward, but we need
your help. We need the help of every Member nation
and of the Organization to win this fight. We must stick
together, or we will lose together. Now is the time
when determination and perseverance are most needed.
The more intense the engagement now, the sooner we
will be able to stand on our own feet and defend a
democratic, united, prosperous and free Iraq. There is
surely no worthier goal.

