Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando, and the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber of Switzerland,
for their insightful briefings. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Burundi, Ambassador
Albert Shingiro, to the Chamber.

As a member observer of the African Union, we
associate ourselves with the statements made by the
African troika - Ethiopia, Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea - whose representatives have already spoken
before us today.

On the political front, we positively note the recent
achievements in Burundi, notably the political forum
held in Kayanza on 3 August and the appointment of
the members of the Independent National Electoral
Commission. The adoption of the 2018 Kayanza
road map is a positive indicator of the constructive
engagement of the Government and other political
stakeholders. We hope that the signed road map
will be followed by collective actions on the part of
all Burundians.

We commend the decision of the His Excellency
Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of Burundi, not
to run for another term in 2020, thereby helping to
ease the political strain. That measure will certainly
assist in sustaining peace, security and democracy in
the country. We encourage the national authorities to
continue their efforts to preserve the constitutional
order in the country and build democratic institutions
in the spirit and letter of the Arusha Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation.

We express concern over the slow progress in the
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue and urge all political
actors to pursue it further, with meaningful engagement.
That nationally owned process should be held in an
environment of confidence and nationwide consensus,
with the participation of all political stakeholders,
in order to ensure durable peace. Constructive and
inclusive political dialogue is the most important and
only viable means for the peaceful resolution of the
political situation in Burundi. It should be conducted in
an environment of tolerance and restraint.

We further stress the importance of the committed
efforts of the African Union and the East African
Community in facilitating the political process in
Burundi. We encourage regional and subregional
organizations and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts and contribute to
a political solution, while respecting the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity and unity
of Burundi.

We commend the activities of the facilitator, His
Excellency Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, the third
and former President of Tanzania, and the mediator, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, President of Uganda,
as well as the team of the joint technical working group
in promoting confidence-building measures. We need to
continue to encourage African-led and African-owned
solutions to African problems. We also emphasize the
importance of respecting the fundamental rights and
freedoms of all citizens, and reaffirm the primary
responsibility of the Burundian Government to provide
security to and thereby protect its population.

At the same time, while the security situation is
generally calm in Burundi, the issues ofa large number
of internally displaced persons, refugees and people in
need of assistance must be addressed by the international
community. They also need the attention of bilateral
and multilateral partners and financial institutions.
Such collective effort is needed for investments in
development, which must be rigorously undertaken.
There is no security without development and there is
no development without security. We propose utilizing
that nexus as one of the major three elements of the
combined strategy to prevent and address conflicts in
Africa and elsewhere, along with a revamped regional
approach and the One United Nations principle.

We also commend the regional host countries for
their assistance in the repatriation of refugees, which
must be voluntary and in accordance with the principles
of respect and dignity, as enshrined in international
law and human rights law. Close coordination
among the United Nations, the African Union and
other subregional structures can, if effectively
implemented, have a significant impact on political and
humanitarian dimensions.

Finally, we note the committed efforts of the
Government of Burundi to stabilizing the economic
situation in the country, including the adoption of
the national development plan. We need to assist the
nation to overcome existing economic challenges. That
platform may become the basis for confidence-building
between Burundi and its partners. We also acknowledge
the significant role of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Burundi configuration and the United Nations system
in addressing existing challenges in Burundi, for which
the support of international partners is critical.

