Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am pleased to
be here today to brief the Council on the situation in
Darfur and on the implementation of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General dated 12 October 2011
(S/2011/643). In addition, I should like to highlight
some key points related to the peace process and the
humanitarian and security situation in Darfur.

Progress has been achieved in the implementation
of the Agreement on the adoption of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The head of the
Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM), Eltigani
Seisi, arrived in the Sudan on 22 October, together
with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Qatar, Sheikh Ahmad bin Abdullah
Al-Mahmoud. On 23 October, Mr. Seisi took the oath
as Chair of the Darfur Regional Authority, and the
following day began a weeklong visit to Darfur, which
is still under way. His arrival in the Sudan, as all are
2

aware, was awaited in order to accelerate the next stage
of the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur, including, inter alia, the establishment of
committees and commissions under the authority of the
Darfur Regional Authority, as well as the confirmation
by President Omer Al-Bashir of the LJM. candidates for
posts within the Regional Authority and other offices.

The intention of the parties is to rebuild the
institutions established in the context of the Darfur
peace process, whose operations were suspended by
the Government following a breakdown in relations
with the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni
Minawi earlier this year. The parties intend to integrate
these elements into the committees and commissions of
the Darfur Regional Authority in order to avoid any
duplication or overlap.

At the fourth and fifth meetings held in
El-Fasher, on 3 and 17 October, the Ceasefire
Commission discussed the need for the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Liberation and Justice
Movement to submit to the process of the verification
of maps and information relating to the position of
their forces. A subcommittee including representatives
of UNAMID and the LJM. was set up at the 3 October
meeting to assist the LJM. in producing a graphic
representation of the location of its forces. The
Sudanese Armed Forces have already submitted the
required information, and the LJM. is expected to also
provide, at the next meeting of the Commission, on
31 October, a list showing the current location of its
forces, so as to enable the process of the verification of
all forces by UNAMID to begin.

UNAMID is helping community leaders and civil
society organizations to devise a plan aimed at the
dissemination of information on the Doha Document
throughout Darfur. Regular contacts have been made
with the actors in Darfur from 3 to 19 October.
UNAMID has also held meetings in the larger camps
and towns to assess the first impressions of the people
with regard to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
The mission noted broad support in principle for the
Document among internally displaced persons,
political opposition parties, civil society organizations
and local authorities. UNAMID also noted that many
of them deplore the lack of support for the Doha
Document by the Justice and Equality Movement, the
SLA-Abdul Wahid and the SLA-Minni Minawi, and
understand that the success of the Doha Document will
11-56243
depend to a large extent on the willingness of the
Government to implement its provisions.

While we commend the first steps taken by the
Government and the LJM. in terms of implementing the
Doha Document, we must also continue to do
everything in our power to help the Sudanese people to
reach an inclusive and final agreement on this conflict.
As the Security Council is aware, the United Nations
and the African Union are working with the parties to
develop a new road map for peace in Darfur, whose
aim is to put an end to hostilities and to make the peace
process more inclusive.

(spoke in English)

Following extensive consultations between the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as with
the parties to the conflict and the members of the
Implementation Follow-Up Commission, UNAMID
presented the main elements of the road map to
international partners at the fourth retreat of special
envoys, held in El Geneina on 19 October. Those
elements were: first, support for the implementation of
the Doha Document; secondly, sustained engagement
with those movements that were holding out; and
thirdly, support, in principle, for internal dialogue
among the people of Darfur on the peace process.

Final consultations are needed within the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as with
international partners, before the road map can be
finalized. In addition, provision will be made for the
outcome of a workshop set to take place in
Washington, D.C., on 16 and 17 November to be
reflected in the road map. The development of the road
map as a whole will be completed by the end of the
year.

At the retreat for special envoys I mentioned
earlier, participants reviewed recent developments in
Darfur and discussed the way forward. The retreat
provided a useful forum for enhancing coordination
and the engagement of the international community in
the Darfur peace process. In the outcome statement of
19 October, participants, among other things,
welcomed the signing of the Agreement for the
Adoption of the Doha Document, took note of the
progress made towards the implementation of the
Agreement, and called on all parties to cease military
hostilities and pursue a negotiated settlement to the
conflict.
11-56243

While the security situation in Darfur was
relatively calm between 1 July and the end of
September, it subsequently deteriorated in El Taweisha,
in North Darfur, and in Nertiti, in the West, due to
sporadic fighting between Government forces and
armed groups. Since the issuance of the Secretary-
General's report on 5 October, an unidentified armed
group attacked the compound of the Nertiti Locality
Commissioner. A Government police unit guarding the
compound repelled the attack, and there were no
reported casualties. Also in Nertiti, an unidentified
armed group attacked a Sudanese Armed Forces
observation post on 12 October. Again, no casualties
were reported. UNAMID increased patrolling in the
area and engaged community leaders, local
Government officials and movement commanders to
promote security and stability.

In North Darfur, an unidentified armed group
attacked a Sudanese Armed Forces unit in Kroya
Laban, 25 kilometres west of E1 Taweisha, on
6 October, killing - according to Sudanese Armed
Forces sources - three of SAF soldiers and injuring
nine. Local interlocutors informed UNAMID that the
Sudanese Armed Forces then attacked Kroya Laban
and nearby Ushandumah villages on 9 October. On
11 October, at the camp for internally displaced
persons (IDP) in Neem 60 kilometres south of
ElTaweisha, a UNAMID verification patrol
encountered approximately 80 households recently
displaced from Kroya Laban and Ushandumah. The
Mission is working with humanitarian agencies to
ensure that these persons receive aid.

As I have mentioned, with regard to recent
attacks involving UNAMID patrols, on 30 September,
as a UNAMID patrol passed by a Sudanese Armed
Forces position in Foro Baranga, in West Darfur, a man
dressed in civilian clothing ran towards the convoy,
climbed on top of a UNAMID armed personnel carrier
and attempted to enter it through the top hatch. The
man was being pursued and fired upon by Sudanese
Armed Forces personnel, who shot him dead.
Approximately 40 Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers
then surrounded the convoy and took custody of the
body. I have to stress that UNAMID takes such
situations seriously, and an investigation into the
incident, including into whether patrol members
followed proper drills and procedures, is under way.
The case of the person in charge is presently being
scrutinized. UNAMID human rights officers are also
3
following up with Sudanese Armed Forces authorities
to investigate the circumstances that led to the victim
being pursued by Government soldiers.

As I reported to the Council on 11 October during
a briefing on Abyei, a UNAMID patrol was ambushed
by unidentified armed men near Zam Zam camp on
10 October. Tragically, three UNAMID peacekeepers
were killed and six injured. One of the attackers was
also killed in the exchange of fire that ensued. A
UNAMID investigation into the incident is ongoing.
The investigation will aim to establish, among other
things, the source of the attack and the steps that
UNAMID can take to deter and enhance its response to
such attacks.

In accordance with resolution 2003 (2011) and
with a view to enhancing the efficiency of the
operations of the Mission, the Secretary-General is
planning to undertake a review of UNAMID uniformed
personnel. The review will be led by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on behalf of the Secretary-
General, working in conjunction with the African
Union, UNAMID and relevant Secretariat departments.
It is our intention to undertake a comprehensive review
of mission resources for mandate implementation,
with, as I said, a particular focus on uniformed
personnel. The Secretary-General expects to be able to
provide preliminary recommendations to the Council in
the first quarter of next year.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that while
important progress has been made in the peace process,
more work is required to reach an inclusive settlement
to the conflict. It will be crucial in this regard for the
signatory parties to broaden support for the Doha
Document by working to ensure that peace dividends
reach the people of Darfur. I therefore call on the
parties to implement the DDPD faithfully and in a
timely manner. I also urge international partners to
support the parties' efforts in this regard.

The attainment of an inclusive settlement to the
conflict also requires the Government and holdout
movements to agree to cease hostilities and enter into
dialogue. The effects of clashes like those in Nertiti
and El Taweisha show that protection and humanitarian
challenges will remain so long as the Sudanese Armed
Forces and armed groups engage each other militarily.
I call on those parties that have not yet done so to
cease hostilities and enter into peace negotiations
immediately and without precondition.
In addition, UNAMID peacekeepers and aid
workers continue to face serious risks in Darfur. Of
course, I strongly condemn those responsible for the
cowardly attack on our peacekeepers at Zam Zam. I
call on the Government to fully investigate the incident
and to spare no effort in bringing those responsible to
justice. I also call on the Government to fully
investigate the 30 September shooting incident in Foro
Baranga.

The continued support of the Council remains
vital to enabling UNAMID to improve the security
situation in Darfur, support the delivery of aid and
advance the peace process. Despite the challenges, the
many dedicated women and men of UNAMID are
contributing to the creation of a more secure
environment for civilians, safer humanitarian
operations and more inclusive peace process in what
remain very difficult and demanding circumstances.

