Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The resolution that the Council has just adopted
unanimously establishes an International Commission of
Inquiry whose mandate it will be to establish the facts
relating to the assassination of the President of Burundi
on 21 October 1993 and the massacres and other grave
acts of violence that followed. Above all, its mandate will
be to make recommendations so that, on the one hand, the
guilty are brought to justice and, on the other, that such
acts do not recur.

 

Since the death of President Melchior Ndadaye,
Burundi has entered a spiral of violence, still with no end
in sight. As everyone is aware, the primary causes of this
violence are political. Burundi now finds itself in a very
delicate position in which extremists are trying to take
advantage of institutional weakness. This violence is also
encouraged by the absence in Burundi of an effective
judicial system that would make it possible to bring before
the courts those guilty of flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law.

My delegation hopes that the establishment of this
International Commission of Inquiry will make it possible
to identify the perpetrators of these crimes. We recall that
the report of the preparatory fact-finding mission to
Burundi, led by Ambassador Martin Huslid and
Ambassador Simeon Ake, made it clear that certain
individuals behind the coup d'e'tat were in the country and
could be identified. We now ask that they be clearly
identified and that light be shed on the tragic events that
occurred after 21 October 1993.

None the less, my Government considers that
attempting to break the cycle of impunity will not be
enough to restore stability to Burundi and the rest of the
region. It seems to us that the disease festering in central
Africa goes much deeper than that, a point that did not
escape the authors of the report to which I have just
referred.

National reconciliation of the whole populace, in
Burundi as in other countries of the region, really requires
the implementation of measures on a vaster scale. The
questions of refugees, regional overarmament, economic
development and institutional consolidation in all these
countries must all, in our View, be viewed in a larger
framework.
My Government has stated repeatedly that the
organization of a regional conference on peace, stability and
development for the countries of the Great Lakes region
should be the first step towards making it possible for this
part of Africa to heal its wounds. We hope that the Council
will soon be considering ideas regarding the organization of
such a conference, ideas that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General will bring back from his mission to the
region, as requested in resolution 1011 (1995).

This initiative must be able to take shape rapidly, for
the region has recently undergone new upheavals. We must
at all costs prevent a repetition of the tragic events
experienced by millions of men and women in the past. We
must, instead, offer them the means of regaining the road
of democracy, progress and tolerance. My Government
will be ready to play an active part in any initiative to
that end.

