Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have taken note the briefing of Ms. Joanna
Wronecka, Permanent Representative of Poland, on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.

We note the overall positive trend in the military
and political situation and the settlement of the conflict
in Darfur. The security situation is stable. Armed
violence is on the decline. Large-scale clashes and
intercommunal conflicts have ceased. Refugees and
internally displaced persons are returning home.

We see no alternative to the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur as the basis for a political settlement in
the region, and we welcome the measures being taken by
Khartoum to implement it. The signing on 6 December
in Berlin of a preliminary agreement on the resumption
of the peace process speaks to the commitment of the
parties to achieving a lasting peace in the region through
negotiations. In that context, we were disappointed by
the unconstructive negotiating position of Abdul Wahid
Al Nur. We have to acknowledge that attempts to woo
intransigent actors are damaging to the peace process.
We believe that the external sponsors of the Sudanese
opposition should be more proactive in urging their
proteges to take more realistic positions.

As has repeatedly said here in this Chamber,
sanctions are not an end in themselves but rather one of
the tools in the Council's arsenal for advancing peace
processes and encouraging political dialogue. The
positive developments we have seen in Darfur suggest
that the sanctions introduced 14 years ago have already
served their purpose.

There is an evident need a clear road map for lifting
the Security Council sanctions on the Sudan. In the
context of the planned drawdown of the peacekeeping
contingent of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, we would like to point out that
the previous Chair of the 1591 Committee made the
very logical and timely recommendation that easing
the sanctions regime should go hand in hand with
withdrawing the Blue Helmets. Our experience in
Eritrea has shown that when there is corresponding
political will on the part of the Western members of
the Council, it is quite possible to make substantive
progress in lifting sanctions. Unfortunately, we have
not seen any of that here so far. What is more, we
are already hearing so-called human rights activists
sending signals in support of a de facto toughening of
the Council's sanctions regime on the Sudan by making
sexual and gender-based violence a separate listing
criterion, expanding the capacity and powers of the
Panel ofExperts ofthe 1591 Committee in this area, and
linking the eventual lifting of sanctions on the Sudan
to a resolution of the problem of sexual violence in
Darfur. In our view, such a transformation threatens to
turn on its head the whole point of the Sudan sanctions
regime, which was introduced with a view to protecting
international peace and security. The initiators of such
so-called innovations are not acting based on the trends
in the real situation on the ground but on their own
narrow national agendas, which are often far removed
from the interests of establishing peace in Darfur.

A number of our colleagues today raised the topic
of the protests in the Sudan. I would like to underscore
that this subject is not related to the subject of our
meeting. The objective of these kinds of tactics is clear.
It is to create an impression that the Security Council
has a mandate to discuss a purely national Sudanese
issue in the context of the sanctions regime. I want to
emphasize that this is no way corresponds to reality
and nobody should be misled on the matter. In general,
it is hard to shake the feeling that raising the issue of
anti-Government protests in Khartoum, which in itself
constitutes interference in the country's internal affairs,
comes under the rubric of geopolitical engineering and
the West's well-known policies aimed at replacing
regimes that it does not like. We all know what that led
to in Libya, South Sudan and various other countries.
We do not wish to hold the Security Council and the
1591 Committee hostage to our Western colleagues'
geopolitical agenda.

In conclusion, I want to once again underscore
that any Security Council sanctions regime must be
reviewed so that it can adapt to the realities on the
ground. It was with that in mind that we agreed on
resolution 2400 (2018), which clearly established the
importance of holding such reviews regularly. We hope
that concrete parameters for lifting sanctions will soon
be developed. They are obviously long overdue.
