Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): We
should like to wish you welcome, Mr. Minister, and to
assure you of our cooperation during your country's
presidency. I should also like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for the valuable information that he has
just given us.

The regular consideration of the question of
Kosovo stems from the Council's interest in ensuring
the effective implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
My delegation welcomes the substantial progress made
since the beginning of this year in certain areas, which
deserves to be pointed out.

On the political level, that progress includes the
establishment of democratic institutions, the effective
formation of a multi-ethnic Government, the principle
of tolerance among Albanians, and the improvement of
relations between Kosovo, on the one hand, and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, on the other.

In the security area, achievements include the
increasingly multi-ethnic composition of the Kosovo
Protection Force and the programme to collect
weapons and munitions held illegally by Kosovars.

On the judicial level, there is cooperation
between the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the provisional authorities of the
province, the transfer of Albanian detainees from
Serbia to Kosovo, and consideration by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) department of justice of the legal cases
concerning the majority of the remaining detainees.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
achievements include the gradual settlement of the
question of missing, detained and repatriated persons
and the appointment of an UNMIK official responsible
for the issues of repatriation and reintegration of ethnic
minorities.

My delegation is encouraged by the information
just provided by Mr. Annabi regarding UNMIK's
initiatives to enforce the rule of law, to prepare for the
municipal elections in October and to create the
necessary conditions for the return and reintegration of
minorities. Those initiatives must be robustly
supported. Mr. Steiner's tireless efforts to consolidate
them deserve to be particularly commended. We
condemn the defamatory and inciting statements of
certain Kosovar authorities following the arrests by
UNMIK last August in its efforts to enforce the law.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that it is
now up to all the actors engaged in the process of
implementing resolution 1244 (1999) to redouble their
efforts in order to resolve the remaining problems and
to finish the job.

