Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. We
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his comprehensive briefing. Viet Nam highly
appreciates his efforts to reduce tensions in the area.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As we meet today, hundreds of Palestinians, many
of them women and children, have been killed in the
latest indiscriminate attacks against the population of
Gaza. Thousands of people have been displaced, years
of social and economic gains have again been undone,
and hope for peace in the region has once again been
shattered. Viet Nam is extremely concerned over
the escalation of violence and strongly deplores the
unacceptable level of civilian casualties. We endorse
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's remarks on the
atrocious action in Gaza and join him and others in
calling on Israel to cease the violence against and take
action to protect the Palestinian civilians.

We call for an immediate ceasefire, an end to
the violence against civilians and a resumption of
negotiations between the parties concerned. We call
for intensified efforts by the international community,
in particular the Security Council and the Quartet,
to achieve such a ceasefire and address the current
political and humanitarian crisis, including the
facilitation of humanitarian relief in Gaza. We extend
our full support to those and any other efforts of the
international community aimed at bringing peace and
stability to the region.

The cycle of violence has plagued and will continue
to plague the region unless ajust and peaceful solution
is found to the almost seven-decade-long Palestinian
question, as well as to the broader conflict in the
Middle East. In that regard, Viet Nam supports efforts
towards the peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle ofland for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, with a View to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution that will
ensure the legitimate interests of all parties concerned.
Urgent and decisive actions are now needed to resume
direct talks between Israel and Palestine and the
broader Middle East peace process. Viet Nam once
again reaffirms its principled support for the two-State
solution, including the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine existing in peace with
the State of Israel.

While such a resolution to the Palestine-Israel
conflict would have a profound impact on the Middle
East, peace in the region also requires forward movement
on the other crises. We are deeply troubled by the recent
rise of violence in Iraq and support the efforts of the
international community and the Iraqi Government to
restore stability and secure the country's sovereignty
and territorial integrity in the interests of peace and
stability in the region. We are also concerned about the
situation in Syria, and call on all parties to refrain from
the use of force and to settle disputes through peaceful
negotiations to bring stability to Syria and avoid any
civilian casualties.

Peace in the Middle East can be achieved only
if Palestinians are guaranteed a better life and their
fundamental rights, including the sacred right to self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
and sovereign State. We also share the Secretary-
General's view that both Palestinians and Israelis
need to feel a sense of security and to see a horizon of
hope. The root causes of the conflict must therefore be
addressed. The only way to do that is through peaceful
negotiations.

