Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting to address the
grave situation with respect to the murder of the martyr
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin. Furthermore, I express the
thanks of the delegation of the Republic of Yemen for
your work within the Council and for the wise policy
being pursued by the friendly French Republic. I also
thank your predecessor, the Permanent representative
of China.

The request of the Group of Arab States to
convene this meeting reflects the desire and will of the
Arab people that the United Nations and the Security
Council fully assume their responsibilities and play
their full role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. In conveying this to the Security Council,
the Arab delegations are clearly demonstrating their
respect for international legality and the role of the
Organization, despite Israel's flagrant flouting of the
resolutions of the international community and the
arrogant assumption of its leaders that they are above
international law.

We must condemn the criminal act carried out
yesterday by the Government of Mr. Sharon. We have
heard the unanimous reaction of countries against that
barbarous assassination. We believe, first, that it is a
flagrant violation of international law and human
morality and that, secondly, it undermines any
remaining possibility of reaching a peaceful solution in
the Middle East in the framework of the road map, a
central aim of the Israeli Government.

The martyr Sheikh Yassin was one of the most
important symbols of the Palestinian people's struggle
against occupation. The demonstrations of unanimous
condemnation of the assassination in the streets of
Palestine and throughout the Arab world reflect that
belief. Israel knows better than anyone that the
assassination of Sheikh Yassin and Palestinian leaders
can only lead to further bloodshed and chaos and
undermine opportunities to achieve peace. We feel that
that is precisely what the leaders of Likud want. They
are blinding themselves to the truth in their pursuit of
their objectives, while the international community and
the Security Council are putting out the fires and
seeking to ease the ever-worsening tensions in the
region.

The Palestinian resistance groups have not
attacked the territories of others or occupied them by
force. They have not waged war or aggression against
others, but have sought heroically to defend their own
lands and people against injustice. Their defence of
their land was recognized by the laws of God before
being recognized by the laws of humankind and
international law. We cannot allow the cycle of
violence to continue, because we would thereby be
laying the foundations of a world in which violence
reigns.

As European leaders have noted, how, in the face
of Israel's policy of assassination and destruction of the
Palestinian people and its murder of Sheikh Yassin, can
we speak of peace and the road map? We should ask
ourselves how, given the ongoing aggression on the
part of Israel, we can harbour hope for a secure Middle
East in which its peoples can work for human
development and for the preservation of justice?
Today we are witnessing a global condemnation
of this criminal act and of the policy of extrajudicial
killings. In the context of the provisions of
international law, we have to stress more than ever the
role of the International Criminal Court.

No right-thinking person could fail to support the
just struggle of the Palestinian people to free
themselves from occupation and to establish an
independent State. The Republic of Yemen has always
been, and will always be, on the side of that people,
which is fighting to put an end to occupation and
terrorism, wherever it may take place. Today we
reiterate even more strongly that we are on the side of
that people and of those movements and organizations.

We call on the members of the Council to adopt a
resolution that would protect the Palestinians from the
policy of liquidation and assassination that is causing
them to suffer on a daily basis.

