Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): This meeting comes
in the wake of the meeting of foreign ministers of the
"six plus two" group yesterday and the important
declaration they adopted. I am confident that our
deliberations this morning will take the ongoing efforts
at resolving the Afghan crisis a decisive step forward.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Ambassador Brahimi, for
their dedication and commitment to monitoring and to
advancing solutions to the critical situation in
Afghanistan. The Secretary-General set out this
morning the basic parameters of the international
community's involvement in Afghanistan and the
choices facing us. Ambassador Brahimi has outlined
comprehensive suggestions on a possible road map. We
are in broad agreement with their assessment and
views. As we meet in this Chamber, the situation on the
ground is evolving from moment to moment. We need
to be seized of this dynamic and to adjust our response
quickly and effectively.

Afghanistan's decades of suffering are all-
pervasive. Afghans remain mired in a web of conflict,
famine, hunger, displacement and endemic poverty in
which women, children and the elderly, marginalized as
they are, suffer even more. The current phase of the
crisis has only exacerbated this precarious situation in
various dimensions.

As we work towards a comprehensive solution to
the Afghan crisis, the Council needs to focus attention
on the key building blocks of such a solution - ending
conflict, providing humanitarian assistance, reconciling
and arriving at a balanced political settlement, and
establishing a broad-based Government structure. The
immediate objectives, of course, remain ending
hostilities, ensuring security and establishing the rule
of law. The long-term goals are massive reconstruction,
rehabilitation and development, and plans to facilitate
the ultimate return of 4 million people. It is the long-
term goals which ultimately provide the international
community with a sustainable exit strategy in
Afghanistan, hopefully within an early time-frame.

A number of critical aspects relating to these
building blocks need therefore to be addressed.

The first aspect is the central role of the United
Nations in the post-conflict configuration. This
morning, Ambassador Brahimi mapped out a
persuasive scenario emphasizing the important
convening role of the Organization in bringing together
all those concerned with Afghanistan, including the
"six plus two" group, the Rome and Cyprus processes
and the Peshawar meeting.

The second aspect is reaching a common
framework for a transitional Government. Key to this
aspect is to quickly set in place a provisional council
which is broadly representative of all ethnic, religious
and political groups, hopefully including women.

The third aspect is the convening of an
emergency Loya Jirgah to approve administrative
actions, security arrangements and a draft constitution.

Finally, after this transitional phase, a second
Loya Jirgah would approve the constitution.

The overall goal is to find what Mr. Brahimi
called a "home-grown" solution - one which is
credible, legitimate and sustainable and leads to a
broad-based Government which is responsible,
representative, stable and accountable; enjoys both
internal and external stability; respects the human
rights of the Afghan people; and will never again allow
the country to be used as a breeding ground for terror
or drug trafficking.

The second building block is a security
framework for a post-Taliban governance structure. We
are aware of the volatile situation on the ground, and
the Secretary-General has outlined it. There is an
urgent need for what he called action to avoid a
security vacuum. We call upon all the Afghan parties to
firmly commit themselves to protecting civilians,
particularly women, and to avoid reprisal killings and
other forms of abuse. Ensuring respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law will be
critical for sustaining the new political dispensation in
Afghanistan.

In this regard, we would like to call attention to
the special emphasis that the Special Rapporteur on
human rights in Afghanistan placed, last week in the
Arria Formula meeting, on repealing all repressive
laws and practices in Afghanistan. We have also noted
the valuable suggestions of Ambassador Brahimi
regarding credible security arrangements and
assessments, and the essential choice that now faces us
between the establishment of an all-Afghan security
force and the deployment of a multinational security
presence.

The third building block, in our opinion, is a
robust public information campaign. Although the
majority of Afghans have access to radio, today's
Afghanistan is an information-starved territory. Access
to objective public information remains poor. From a
longer perspective, a wider flow of public information
could help address many social ills and other issues.

The fourth building block, of crucial importance,
is the humanitarian situation. Six million Afghans are
directly affected by this crisis. It remains a major
concern for all of us to alleviate the suffering both
inside Afghanistan and in the refugee camps of
neighbouring countries. While there is now uncertainty
as to how long hostilities will continue, ensuring that
aid reaches civilians - especially millions of women,
children and the elderly, many of them trapped deep
inside villages - appears even more difficult than
before, with both the holy month of Ramadan and the
Central Asian winter fast approaching. There is a great
need to help the neighbouring countries, especially Iran
and Pakistan, with cross-border deliveries of food and
non-food items.

The early disbursement of humanitarian aid and
well-coordinated distribution of aid materials have
assumed critical importance. This is a moment when
international humanitarian aid workers on the ground
can improve coordination of the distribution of aid,
especially food. As the Irish Foreign Minister has
stressed, quick-impact projects are vital in laying the
groundwork for reconstruction and development.

Bangladesh continues to pledge its fullest support
of concerted efforts to restore freedom and peace in
Afghanistan.

