Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would also
like to thank the briefers for their informative briefings.

I appreciate Mr. Mladenov's briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), which
deals with prominent obstacles to achieving just
and sustainable peace in the region. I would like to
stress that the resolution must be taken as a whole,
and all efforts must contribute to the re-launching of
political dialogue, which is a fundamental method of
conflict resolution.

Japan continues to support a two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed swaps,
in a way that will achieve the peaceful co-existence of
a viable Palestinian State and Israel within secure and
recognized borders. The obstacles mentioned in the
resolutioncontinueto existandhamperthepeaceprocess.
In the last three months, we heard announcements of
the building of a new settlement, and the expansion of
housing units within existing settlements in the West
Bank. Japan remains firm in its position that settlement
activities are in violation of international law, and has
repeatedly called upon the Government of Israel to
fully freeze settlement activities.

Cases of violence, such as the shooting and stabbing
attack in the vicinity of the Old City of Jerusalem last
week, cannot be justified for any reason. Such attacks
intensify the cycle of violence, and Japan is concerned
about the further cases of violence that followed. Japan
condemns all acts of violence and rejects incitement and
the glorification of violence, as they are fundamentally
incompatible with a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
In that regard, Japan is increasingly concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Gaza, which was mentioned
by Mr. Mladenov in his briefing. Extreme power
shortages in Gaza are affecting every aspect of human
life, including health, water, sanitation and municipal
services. Desperation and frustration felt on the ground
may cause a further unstable security situation, and the
risk is increasing as we speak today. The crisis points to
the importance of promoting reconciliation among the
Palestinians. Furthermore, it points to the importance
of working towards easing and eventually lifting the
Gaza blockade, while duly taking security concerns
into account.

Japan, for its part, has provided economic
assistance worth $34 million to Palestine so far this
year, half of which is used to assist the livelihood of the
people of Gaza. Resolution 2334 (2016) also calls upon
the parties to exert collective efforts to launch credible
negotiations on final-status issues. Japan appreciates
the efforts made by various parties to promote dialogue
between the parties. We are especially encouraged by
the dialogue between the United States and the relevant
parties at the highest levels, and believe that it is
essential to promoting the peace process.

Japan is contributing to confidence-building efforts
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, which will
form the basis for credible negotiations. The Jericho
Agro-Industrial Park, which is celebrating its tenth
anniversary, currently hosts six Palestinian firms,
creating jobs on the ground. This was only possible
because of cooperation among Japan, Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. Through cooperation, mutual trust is
fostered and the know-how of economic development is
gained. There is potential to enhance the collaborative
nature of the project. We are currently encouraging
other States to visit the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park
and to consider the participation ofprivate-sector firms
in the project.

Fifty years of occupation and nearly 70 years of
unresolved conflict should remind all of us of the heavy
cost incurred in the region and of the opportunities
that were missed. Japan reiterates that peace would
unlock new political, economic, security and cultural
opportunities, to the benefit of the region and beyond.
To that end, Japan will continue its engagement through
political dialogue with the parties, confidence-building
in the region and economic assistance to the Palestinians.

