Ms. Bangura: From 5 to 11 October, I conducted
my first visit to the Republic of South Sudan. The
circumstances that I witnessed, in particular in the
fiercely contested town of Bentiu in Unity state, are
among the worst I have ever experienced. The internally
displaced persons (IDPs) seeking refuge there face
a devastating combination of chronic insecurity,
unimaginable living conditions, acute day-to-day
protection concerns and rampant sexual violence. The
character of sexual violent crimes shocked me to my
core, captured in the words of one survivor who told me,
"It is notjust about rape. It is to break your dignity; it is
done to cause unimaginable suffering and destruction".

My visit bears out reports that sexual violence in
South Sudan is widespread, including acts of rape, gang
rape, abductions, forced marriage and sexual slavery,
and mutilation of sexual organs. These violations are
being perpetrated by all sides in the conflict. Sexual
violence predates the December 2013 crisis. However
since the crisis, sexual violence attacks have reached
an alarming level, expressed in a vicious cycle of
retribution and revenge. I am gravely concerned about
the ethnic dimensions, manifest particularly in targeting
and reprisals between Dinka and Nuer communities.

Across the country, women live in appalling
conditions. They have little or no access to medical
services let alone access to justice. They have few
opportunities to secure a livelihood for themselves
and their families. Their views are not represented
in Government or other crucial decision-making
processes. One woman activist told me: "We are living
under the rule of men, not under the rule of law". When
I visited the Juba Teaching Hospital, I was told that
75 per cent of survivors of sexual violence are girls
under the age of 18. Their youngest victim is 2 years
old, a girl completely destroyed by the rape she suffered.
Civil society groups made me aware also of the acute
vulnerability to sexual violence faced by women with
disabilities.

The challenge of addressing sexual violence is
complicated by a prevailing culture of silence and
blame-game. This exacerbates other critical challenges
such as acute lack of medical, psychosocial and legal
services for survivors, lack of capacity of the police and
the military to investigate sexual violence allegations,
and a lack of capacity of the judiciary to prosecute
perpetrators. At the legislative level, it is essential to
harmonize customary and statutory law. As it stands,
most sexual violence offences are decided under
customary law systems, most often to the detriment of
the survivors.

I believe that national Governments hold the
primary legal and moral responsibility to protect
their citizens from sexual violence and other grave
violations. I am pleased therefore to announce that at
the end of my visit President Salva Kiir and I signed
a joint communique on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence, in line with resolution 2106 (2013). I
am encouraged by this expression ofpolitical will at the
highest level, and pledge the support of my Office and
the United Nations System to the Government of South
Sudan to implement the commitments outlined in that
agreement. That includes the issuance and enforcement
of clear orders through the military and police chains
of command prohibiting sexual violence; developing
concrete action plans specific to the Sudan People's
Liberation Army and the South Sudan National Police
Service; fighting the impunity of perpetrators and
ensuring survivors' access to justice through reform
and capacity-building in thejustice sector; and ensuring
the provision of appropriate services for survivors of
sexual violence.

I urge the opposition to show a similar commitment
and remind Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement in opposition, of the
command responsibility he bears to prevent sexual
violence being committed by the forces under his
command. I urge Mr. Machar to issue without delay
a communique that clearly outlines the prevention
measures that they will put in place. In the name of the
women and children that I met during my visit, I say
this to the leaders of South Sudan: You cannot wage
war against your own people. You cannot wage war on
the bodies of the women and children of South Sudan.
You must put people, not politics, at the centre of your
relationships.

Although the international community can
accompany the peace process, ultimately only the
leadership of South Sudan can make peace. I implore
them to stand in solidarity with the women and children
of South Sudan, whose lives are being devastated every
moment that they fail to reach a resolution to this crisis.
I implore them to stand on the right side of history, and
surely the international community will continue to
stand with them.

