Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to express thanks for this
morning's statement in this Chamber by His
Excellency John Howard, Prime Minister of Australia.
Australia has been at the forefront in supporting the
independence process in East Timor. We all recognize
this.

We also welcome Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta and the
Minister of Ireland, Liz O'Donnell. We are also
grateful for the information presented by Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, whom we congratulate once again for
the work he has done.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the efforts
by the Indonesian Government aimed at cooperating
constructively in the solution of the problems in East
Timor. We express the wish that Indonesia and East
Timor will be able to develop mutually beneficial
neighbourly relations.

This morning, in this Chamber, we heard
Mr. Hamid Karzai, Chairman of the Interim
Administration of Afghanistan. Mutatis mutandis, I
believe that one can engage in a certain parallel
between the role of the Security Council and the
international community in the political processes of
both situations. Both cases are in the limelight of
international attention and there are great expectations
that the near future for both will be one of well-being,
prosperity and independence for their populations.
Both cases have undergone a process of transformation
in which the Security Council has played a critical role.
In both cases, hopes for a better future emerge from the
catharsis of having known violence. Both cases
represent the expectations as to what the international
community can and should do to create a better world.

In East Timor, the countdown has begun. The
Constituent Assembly decided that direct elections
should be held to choose the first President of East
Timor on 14 April 2002. That date is only 73 days from
today. The Constituent Assembly finished the process
of considering the draft Constitution, and subsequently,
20 May was chosen as the date of independence for
East Timor. That ceremony will enjoy the presence of
numerous presidents and heads of State, as well as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, thus marking the great
significance of that occasion and its truly historic
import. I would like to suggest that we seek a
mechanism so that the Security Council can be
represented at that ceremony through its President,
which at that time will be Singapore, or through the
presence of one of its highest-ranking members.

Following the recommendations of the Secretary-
General in the report before us, the Council members
have decided to wait for his next report in order to take
a decision with respect to the successor mission.
However, I would like to offer a few comments based
on our View on this matter.

First, we firmly believe that the international
community must continue supporting East Timor after
independence in order to consolidate the process and
not jeopardize the excellent work done by UNTAET in
preparing the new East Timorese Administration.
Secondly, we support the basic components of the plan
for the successor mission, which proposes a
continuation of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation, appropriately downsized, including military,
civilian police and small civilian components and a
group of experts to provide assistance to the new
Administration in East Timor. It is clear that the new
Administration will need to be consistent with these
proposals.

Thirdly, we would stress that all the operational
responsibilities must be transferred to the East
Timorese authorities, taking due care not to endanger
stability and the progress achieved. This is a critical
stage. It will be necessary to be on the alert and to
evaluate each step in order to avoid setbacks in the
process.

Finally, we reiterate that there cannot be full
reconciliation unless those responsible for atrocities are
brought to justice. To that end, progress must be made
without delay.

