Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and Mr. Mansour Alotaibi for their briefings.

The Dominican Republic welcomes President
Tshisekedi's decision to launch initiatives aimed at
implementing the national emergency programme,
opening political space and improving security
conditions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that he will continue to act in that spirit.

Despite the relative stability, the security situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains worrisome. Attacks on civilians and the
armed forces by Congolese and foreign armed groups
continue to lead to a loss of lives and displacement.
We urge the Congolese authorities to join efforts to
neutralize armed groups and prosecute human rights
violations without exception; to advance in the fight
against corruption; and to promote the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Greater attention should
be paid to justice reform, the fight against impunity,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We encourage the promotion of development zones
that generate jobs for young people, provide greater
opportunities for women's participation, secure the
border and eliminate trafficking in natural resources
and firearms.

We must continue to support the Congolese people
in implementing their stability initiatives and provide
resources to alleviate the worrisome humanitarian
situation and create the material conditions for
sustainable development.

We are concerned about the spread of Ebola. With
more than 1,600 confirmed deaths, it is considered to
be the second deadliest outbreak in history. The World
Health Organization has declared it a global emergency.
We urge the international community to support the
efforts and plans of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) to combat the outbreak and its spread
and to provide the economic resources necessary to
contain it.

In that regard, we condemn attacks on Ebola
response personnel and health infrastructure and
call for respect for international humanitarian law
and access for response teams to evaluate the sick in
affected areas. We also demand the strengthening of
public awareness campaigns on the Ebola situation.

We commend the work done by MONUSCO in
supporting measures taken by the Congolese authorities
in the fight against impunity in cases of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other human rights
violations. In addition, we deplore the persistence of
cases of sexual violence against women and children.
We welcome the signing of the declarations and road
maps by the commanders of six armed groups to put
an end to the recruitment of child soldiers and other
serious violations perpetrated against children. We
hope that other groups will sign those declarations and
implement them as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we are pleased that MONUSCO is
focusing its resources on areas affected by armed groups
that threaten civilians. We congratulate MONUSCO,
all United Nations personnel in the field and all local,
regional and international actors for their efforts and
dedication in the search for lasting peace and political,
social and economic stability for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Progress, in cooperation with
the countries of the Great Lakes region, especially
in the fight against armed groups and the search for
economic reintegration, provides an opportunity to
ease tensions and to implement regional initiatives that
will make it possible to address conflicts together and
offer the Congolese and the subregion the progress and
stability they so deserve.

