Mr. Lamamra (Algeria): I would like to express
my deep appreciation to President Obama and to you,
Madam President, personally for the initiative to hold a
summit meeting of the Security Council, with an open
debate, on the crucial issue of foreign terrorist fighters.

This phenomenon is not new to Algeria. Having
harshly endured and steadfastly confronted it in the
19905, we have pioneered in the call for an international
comprehensive approach to tackle terrorism. We
rightfully foresaw the harm and dire consequences that
the unleashed complacent policies would eventually
cause to all societies. This phenomenon knows no
boundary, country or religion. It is a kind of world
business whose stocks are always faster and easier to
trade between criminals, whose overgrowing profit is
counted in bloodshed, insecurity and the global threat
it poses.

We take the floor at a time when my country has
just welcomed the safe return of two of our diplomats,
who were kept in harsh captivity for nearly three years
after being kidnapped in Gao, Mali, but also at a time of
sadness and mourning after the murder and death of two
others, who we will never forget. This very morning we
have received the news of the cowardly assassination
in Algeria of a French national, Pierre Herve Gourdel.
We express our deep condolences and sympathy to the
family and friends of the victim, as well as to the French
Government. We assure them all that we will spare no
effort in making sure that the perpetrators are brought
to justice. Algeria will never, ever, bend to terrorism
and justice will be done. Our commitment to fight this
scourge will grow even stronger.

We could not but welcome today's meeting, and
we have co-sponsored resolution 2178 (2014), which
sets the political, legal and operational aspects of
the appropriate international response to terrorism.
Algeria believes, nevertheless, that it would be a
dreadful mistake to consider that the job is done with
the adoption of today's important resolution and the
new obligations that come with it. President Bouteflika
has always been of the view that fighting and defeating
terrorism means holding firm to a long-haul, long-term
and staunch approach in implementing a multifaceted
effective strategy.

We should not be caught unaware. The phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters is a serious issue to be
specifically addressed, but it remains merely one aspect
of terrorism or, ifI might say, one of the tentacles of
terrorism. Addressing terrorism means bearing in mind
all the other tentacles of this behemoth phenomenon,
by setting up comprehensive strategies to address it at
the local, regional and multilateral levels. It certainly
means looking at all the measures that can be taken to
curb terrorism - stemming recruitment; disrupting its
means of financial support, including kidnapping for
ransom; countering violent extremism and preventing
radicalization - and never losing sight of the necessity
of conflict prevention and conflict resolution. In
that regard, the conflict in the Middle East will
definitely remain a persistent disruption of the world's
tranquillity if the international community does not
address generally the questions of illegal occupation,
continuous and violent injustice, denial of freedom and
the right to self-determination that constantly feed stiff
resentment.

Let us be very clear. Algeria condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, and we are actively
engaged in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. In addition, we are a committed
participant in the Global Counterterrorism Forum.
We strongly believe, likewise, that our multifaceted
response must always be respectful ofhuman rights and
international humanitarian law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

Resolution 2178 (2014) clearly has more weight
than what appears on its face because it was adopted
by unanimity. Because it comes at a very challenging
moment, it gives the right signal and draws us towards
a more action-oriented effort involving all Member
States and all regional organizations.

