Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Herve Ladsous for
his concise and comprehensive briefing of the Council
on the situation in Afghanistan and on the prospects for
the transition process. I welcome Mr. Jawed Ludin,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
and thank him for his analysis today. A special
welcome goes to our friend Staffan de Mistura. I would
like to praise his work, because his competence, his
commitment and the personal dedication he has shown
deserve all our recognition and gratitude. He will
assume new responsibilities in his Government, and we
wish him the best.

We are heartened by the progress of the transition
process towards Afghan responsibility and leadership
with respect to security. There has been a significant
broadening of the areas where work is under way to
enable the Afghan forces to assume control functions
as 2014 approaches. It is essential to make firm
progress in the transition to Afghan responsibility in
security matters within the agreed timetable. Here, the
endeavours of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO Training Mission for Afghanistan
constitute an important contribution to increase the
capacity and professionalism of the Afghan police and
security forces.

Colombia again acknowledges of the contribution
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) to the stabilization and
democratization process and its determination to work
in coordination with the Government to establish the
bases for sustainable peace and development in
Afghanistan.

In the framework of its mandate, UNAMA must
continue to focus its efforts on critical aspects to
facilitate the political process for peace and
reconciliation, security, governance, economic
development and regional cooperation. The United
Nations must continue its central role in coordinating
international efforts with the national authorities to
ensure consistency with the identified priorities for
Afghanistan and to avoid duplication of efforts.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
scope of the transition process must be broadened. It
must be acknowledged that the progress in security
could be affected by weaknesses in socio-economic
development, governance and rule of law. It is
therefore imperative to maintain a balanced focus that
takes into account not only security, but also improving
the living conditions of the Afghan people.

Unfortunately, violence remains one of the main
factors affecting the Afghan people. Although the
number of security incidents has declined, we are
concerned by the increased number of civilian victims
and of humanitarian needs. We reiterate our call on all
parties to the conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights and to
take all measures necessary to ensure the protection of
civilians. Selective killings and the use of improvised
explosive devices do not contribute to the process of
dialogue and reconciliation. It is important that all
parties to show clear signs of commitment to the
process to which the Afghan Government is
committed.

In the recent conference held in Bonn, referred to
by my colleagues and the speakers, the international
community renewed its resolve to work for a stable,
democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. We welcome
the many commitments reached on issues of
governance, security, the peace process, economic
development and regional cooperation. We agree that
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process must be
based on principles of Afghan leadership and
ownership, respect for the sovereignty and unity of
Afghanistan, respect for the Constitution and the
rejection of violence and terrorism.

Here, regional cooperation is of vital importance.
We emphasize the many bilateral and subregional
initiatives to resolve in a friendly fashion the various
humanitarian and security problems besetting
Afghanistan and its neighbours.

The consensus on deepening and broadening the
relation between Afghanistan and the international
community, which will guide the 2015-2024
Transformation Decade adopted in Bonn, must
contribute to strengthening the State and its ability to
meet the aspirations and needs of its people. The
international commitment towards Afghanistan in the
medium- and long-term should include the
strengthening of institutions, the creation of jobs and
economic opportunities and both the implementation of
justice and access to it. A sustainable transition
requires a State structure capable of guaranteeing
governability and economic stability at both the
regional and the national levels. Those are the
fundamental elements to guarantee a definitive
transition, which should be the goal of international
cooperation in Afghanistan.

Lastly, I would like to welcome to Mr. Jan Kubis,
to whom we offer all our support as he assumes his
new duties.
