Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinatinal State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I
would like to warmly congratulate and thank you,
Mr. President, for your professional, effective and
proactive work in guiding the Security Council's work
this month. We commend your leadership, and that of
your entire delegation, during your presidency.

The vision and perspectives brought by
Kazakhstan have been instrumental in the preparation
of the programme of work for this month, in which
the Security Council placed primary and needed
emphasis on the challenges facing Afghanistan and its
relationship with the Central Asian region. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/2, adopted on 19 January, and
the debate held on the same day (see S/PV.8162), at
which the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan
was present, served to lay the groundwork for the
Security Council's debate on the existing ties between
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link
security and development.

In that regard, I would like to emphasize that
cooperation between the Central Asian States and
Afghanistan is fundamental for the stabilization of that
country, particularly with regard to the fight against
transnational crime and terrorism. Proof that this
issue is essential to the country and the region is the
perpetration of four terrorist attacks in the past week,
which resulted in the deaths of almost 200 people. We
reiterate our gratitude for the bravery and sacrifice
that Afghanistan's people, Government and security
forces continue to make in the fight against terrorism
on behalf of all of us.

In addition, the need for cooperation in the
fight against transnational crime and terrorism
was demonstrated during the consultations held on
22 January on the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. During those
consultations, we were once again able to stress the
importance of intraregional cooperation and Central
Asia's cooperation with Afghanistan. We also highlight
the Council's adoption of a press release (SC/13179) in
support of the work of the Regional Centre, which had
not happened since 2015.

Another event that we would like to underscore is
the Security Council's visit to Kabul, which allowed
us to have a closer look on the ground of the political
reality and security in Afghanistan. We highlight
the work done by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in support of the political
process in the country. In that regard, for us Security
Council members who had the opportunity to travel
to Afghanistan with you, Mr. President, the incidents
that I described earlier - I am referring to the
terrorist attacks perpetrated and suffered in Kabul in
recent days - not only are news that one reads with
sadness and pain but also become very close personal
experiences. That is why we applaud your personal
insistence, Mr. President, and that of your delegation
that the trip should take place.

We would also like to highlight the emphasis that
the presidency placed on the issue of non-proliferation
with the holding of the high-level briefing on
confidence-building measures (see S/PV.8160), at
which the President of Kazakhstan was present. In that
context, we highlight the decision of countries such
as Kazakhstan to eliminate the possession of nuclear
weapons from their defence doctrines and their national
security policies. That is a clear example of how, with

political will, leadership and resolve, it is possible to
achieve that goal.

As a member of the first densely populated area
declared free of nuclear weapons and of the first region
to declare itselfa zone ofpeace, Bolivia reiterates that it
is ready to launch a call for that example to be replicated
in other regions. We believe that the best prevention
measure is the elimination of all nuclear weapons and
other weapons of massive destruction.

In that regard, we highlight the presidential
statement on preventive diplomacy (S/PRST/2018/1),
adopted on 18 January, which reiterates the need for
the Security Council to focus on the prevention of
armed conflicts by making effective use of tools such
as negotiation, mediation, conciliation, and recourse to
regional organizations or arrangements, among others,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
It also highlights the importance of taking into account
the participation of regional and subregional actors in
mutual confidence-building measures.

We would also like to highlight the briefing on
the peace process in Colombia (see S/PV.8154), which
took place on 10 January. It is important to highlight
the commitment of the Government of Colombia and
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace. Although there are significant challenges in the
reintegration of former combatants into civilian life, in
the strengthening of security in the areas abandoned by
the FARC and in specific measures to move forward with
comprehensive rural reform, the willingness shown by
the parties and by the people of Colombia demonstrate
that the peace process is irreversible. With regard to
the negotiation process with the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional, we regret that it has been suspended. We
hope that the talks can be resumed as soon as possible.

To conclude, we highlight the holding of the open
debate on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question (see S/PV.8167). We believe that the monthly
holding of such a meeting and the focus of our efforts
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are fundamental to
bringing us closer to resolving it. We reiterate that the
only way to guarantee ajust and lasting peace is through
the two-State solution, whereby a free, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State can finally be established
within the pre-1967 international borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

In addition to once again congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the way in which Kazakhstan carried
out the work of the presidency, we pledge all our efforts
so that, likewise, the presidency of Kuwait has the
same success.

