Mr. Motoc (Romania): During this first debate,
Sir, let me start by expressing delight at your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. We wish most sincerely to commend
Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo for his very able and
distinguished presidency in September.
Since Romania fully aligns itself with the
statement to be made shortly by the representative of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union, I can
afford to be very brief.

Romania is extremely concerned at the recent
escalation of acts of violence in Israel and the
Palestinian territories. We condemn the repeated
terrorist rocket attacks on Israeli civilian targets. The
Palestinian Authority must take decisive action against
the planners and perpetrators of all such terrorist acts,
for which there can be no justification.

At the same time, we are disturbed by reports
noting that the Israeli military incursion in northern
Gaza, in response to those attacks, has led to victims
among the civilian population, many of them children.
As we have stated on numerous occasions, the State of
Israel must exercise its inherent right of self-defence in
strict compliance with the relevant norms of
international law, which prohibit actions amounting to
the excessive use of force or collective punishment.

Israel must consider carefully the consequences
of its actions in Gaza. Such operations are not likely to
bring greater security to Israel. On the contrary, they
will only increase tension in the region and generate a
new pretext for extremists to resort to violence.

In the present situation, which is extremely
difficult, we call on both Israelis and Palestinians to
prevent the conflict from escalating and to start
implementing their obligations under the road map, in
order to revive the prospects for peace.

The first step taken by the Palestinian Authority
should be to fight terrorism unequivocally and to work
towards the effective dismantling of its infrastructure
and capabilities. The Palestinians must end public
incitement to violence and do their utmost to stop
militants from attacking Israel and thus provoking its
response.

Any survey of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
would clearly show that the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinian people cannot be fulfilled through
violent means. On the other hand, the Israeli
Government should step up its efforts to prepare for the
execution of its proposed disengagement from Gaza,
which must be full, complete and undertaken in a
manner consistent with the road map.

Moreover, the Israeli Government must freeze
settlement activities, take all possible steps to ease the
humanitarian and economic situation of the Palestinian
people, and refrain from taking unilateral actions that
could prejudge the final outcome of negotiations.

There is no alternative to the peaceful settlement
of the Middle East conflict. Let me reiterate that a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace can be achieved only
through direct negotiations between the parties, as
envisaged in the road map and in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

