Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Let me begin, Mr. President,
by commending you for organizing this open briefing,
which is a step in the right direction in our common
endeavour to bring greater transparency to the work of the
Security Council.

My delegation would like to join previous speakers
in expressing our sincere gratitude to Ambassador Fowler
and the entire Canadian delegation for giving a new lease
of life to the "Angolan sanctions" Committee - a
misnomer, as Ambassador Fowler has said. As Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola, Ambassador Fowler's practical approach to the
issue of sanctions has given a new sense of direction and
purpose to that Committee. We salute his dynamism,
sincerity, resolve, courage and effective leadership in
rekindling interest in the Angolan civil war and in
exploring ways and means of making the sanctions more
effective in order to yield the desired results.

The people of Angola have suffered for too long,
and the time has now come to renew our collective
commitment to putting an end to this protracted conflict.
As Ambassador Fowler has said, this is an area where the
Council speaks with one voice. Since we see eye to eye
on this question, it is our view that with renewed resolve
we can undoubtedly succeed in extinguishing one of the
fiercest hot spots on the African continent. We also look
forward to the establishment of the expert panels.

 

But in the final analysis, Ambassador Fowler's
statement before the seventieth ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
says it all:

"African States are by no means alone in bearing
responsibility for respecting and enforcing the
sanctions against UNITA. Supply and demand must
both be addressed Africans are not buying
UNITA's diamonds, and Africans are not producing
tanks and armoured personnel carriers and vast
quantities of heavy ammunition for Mr. Savimbi' s use,
but it is African States that will in large part
determine, through their actions, whether the Security
Council sanctions against UNITA succeed or fail. And
it is clearly African States that would bear the brunt of
failure." (S/1999/829, appendix 1, p. 9)

It is our fervent hope also that other members of the
international community, in particular Council members,
will emulate the good example of the delegation of the
United Kingdom and donate generously towards the work
of these panels.

