Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and your
entire delegation for the excellent work carried out
during the month of August. In addition, I also take
this opportunity to wish New Zealand a successful
presidency during the month of September and to assure
it of our readiness to collaborate to ensure its success.

I would like to begin by thanking you, Sir,
for convening this formal wrap-up session and for
circulating the concept note yesterday. In line with that
note, I promise that I will not exceed the 5-minute limit.
As my delegation has said on past occasions, this
is a format that enables us to make a formal statement
during the meeting, and it is also an opportunity for
anyone who would like to hear our statement but is
unable to attend to do so through our website, regardless
of where they are. this is therefore an exercise in
transparency, which I must highlight. My delegation
has pointed out on more than one occasion that it would
represent a step towards transparency if, whenever
we have a format that includes a briefing followed by
consultations, delegations could make their statements
here in the Chamber. I must admit that, to some degree,
we have already begun to do that in dealing with the
Syrian humanitarian track. We must therefore highlight
that as a notable development during August. However,
we hope that in the near future that practice can also be
extended to many other issues.

August was not a productive month when it comes
to humanitarian issues. The situations in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan and other areas have been showing us
that we have not yet been able to find the necessary
solutions to alleviate the suffering of the people who
are victims of armed conflicts. I would like to pause for
a moment to reflect on what the Council was not able to
do - or, rather, failed to do.

Although there is clear awareness in the Council
of the serious humanitarian crises - or rather
catastrophes - in Syria and Yemen, we were unable
to agree on the text of a press release following
consultations on Yemen on 3 August, nor were we able to
do so on Syria on 9 and 22 August. It is hard to imagine
what civilians in a besieged area in Syria might think
if one of us were to try to explain to them the reasons
why we were unable to issue a statement condemning
the situation, or what a child who has nothing to eat
and no medicines to treat their ailments might think of
us; or if that child cannot go to school because of the
conflict, or was recruited by the terrorists or suffered
sexual violence at their hands.

Unfortunately, the month of August once again saw
a blockage in the Security Council's ability in the face
of issues for which it bears inescapable responsibility.

