The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/39, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on securing peace and development:
the role of the United Nations in supporting security
sector reform.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President of 21 February 2007
(S/PRST/2007/3) and emphasizes that security
sector reform is an essential element of any
stabilization and reconstruction process in post-
conflict environments. The Security Council
recognizes that the establishment of an effective,
professional and accountable security sector is
one of the necessary elements for laying the
foundations for peace and sustainable
development.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's efforts on security sector
reform and takes note of his report entitled
'Securing peace and development: the role of the
United Nations in supporting security sector
reform' of 23 January 2008 (S/2008/39).

"The Security Council commends Slovakia
and South Africa for their joint initiative in
holding the International Workshop on Enhancing
United Nations Support for Security Sector
Reform in Africa on 7-8 November 2007 and
takes note of the letter dated 20 November 2007
from the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia
and South Africa (S/2007/687). The Security
Council encourages further similar activities.

"The Security Council recognizes that
security sector reform is a long-term process and
reiterates that it is the sovereign right and
primary responsibility of the country concerned
to determine its national approach and priorities
for security sector reform. It should be a
nationally owned process that is rooted in the
particular needs and conditions of the country in
question. The Security Council underlines that
the strong support of the United Nations and
international community is also critical in
strengthening national capacities thereby
reinforcing national ownership, which is crucial
for the sustainability of the process.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role that the United Nations has played
in supporting national security sector reform
efforts and underlines the need for its continued
engagement. In this regard, the Security Council
emphasizes the need to develop a holistic and
coherent United Nations approach to security
sector reform as recommended by the Secretary-
General, in close consultation with Member States.

"The Security Council underlines that
United Nations support to security sector reform
must take place within a broad framework of the
rule of law and should contribute to the overall
strengthening of the United Nations rule of law
activities as well as wider reconstruction and
development efforts. This will require
coordination with all relevant United Nations
actors, in particular the Rule of Law Coordination
and Resource Group, to ensure coherence of
approach.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
important role that the Peacebuilding Commission,
through its integrated peacebuilding strategies, can
play in ensuring continuous international support
to countries emerging from conflict. The Security
Council also recognizes the importance of
continued close cooperation and partnerships with
non-United Nations actors, in particular regional,
subregional and other intergoverninental
organizations, including international financial
08-33606
institutions and bilateral donors, as well as
non-governmental organizations.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to include,
wherever appropriate, recommendations related
to security sector reform in his periodic reports
on United Nations operations mandated by the
Security Council."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.
