The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Kenya.

My delegation joins the consensus in extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) for another six months, until 15
November 1998. In so doing, we reconfirm our
commitment to the peaceful settlement of the military and
political crisis that Tajikistan still faces. After years of
conflict and suffering, the parties to the crisis in
Tajikistan signed the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan,
as well as the Protocol on military issues. We believe that
this Agreement and the Protocol constitute a viable
framework within which the people of Tajikistan can
work to establish lasting peace, security and prosperity for
all.

After so many years of strife, it is also obvious that
a vigorous and sustained process of national reconciliation
must be put in place and nourished. The Commission on
National Reconciliation in Tajikistan has begun working
on a critical healing process, which we think will, in the
long term, bring the people of Tajikistan together and
ensure a common national focus and a common
attainment of national objectives. We therefore welcome
the elements in this draft resolution that call upon the
parties to undertake vigorous efforts to implement the
General Agreement, the Protocol on military issues and,
as a matter of priority, the timetable of measures adopted
by the Commission on National Reconciliation on 29
April 1998. May I also take this opportunity to commend
the delegation of the Russian Federation for its excellent
work in coordinating the negotiations on this draft
resolution.

As my delegation has consistently stated, there is a
clear linkage between peace, security and development.
We are therefore encouraged that quick action is to be
taken, during a consultative group meeting to be held by
the World Bank on 20 May 1998, to address some of the
post-conflict economic issues that face Tajikistan. We
also encourage Member States and others with means to
respond promptly to the consolidated appeal for Tajikistan
launched last March.

Although we are still quite concerned about the
precarious security situation and continued violations of
the ceasefire in some parts of Tajikistan, we welcome the
efforts being made by the Government of Tajikistan and
the United Tajik Opposition to address not only the day-
to-day security problems, but also the long-term goal of

 

sustaining a viable peace process. In this connection, we
warmly welcome the support that UNMOT continues to
provide to this process, together with those of the
Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Russian border forces, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Contact Group of countries which are involved in this
process.

In conclusion, we warmly associate ourselves with the
words of high commendation for Mr. Gerd Merrem, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, who will be
retiring soon. We also congratulate all the personnel of
UNMOT for their good work and Brigadier-General
Izydorczyk, who has recently returned to his national
service, for his efforts aimed at assisting the parties in the
implementation of the General Agreement and the Protocol
on military issues.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1998/390.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The

draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1167 (1998).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the voting.


