Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me express my
satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President, preside over
this Council during the month of July. Let me also
congratulate you on promoting this historic meeting on
the recommendation for admission of a new Member
State, the Republic of South Sudan, to the United
Nations. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his intervention and Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his briefing, and extend my warm greetings to
His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhugon, Vice-
President of the Republic of South Sudan, and to His
Excellency Ambassador Ali Osman, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of the Sudan.

In expressing support for South Sudan's
application for United Nations membership, Brazil
renews its historical and cultural bonds with Africa, as
well as its commitment to the continent's economic,
social and political development. We look forward to
the promotion of solid relations with the South
Sudanese authorities and people, which we believe will
yield benefits for both our nations. Brazil is ready to
cooperate with South Sudan in areas that may
contribute to its sustainable development.

An important step was taken with the visit of the
official representative of President Dilma Rousseff, the
Under-Secretary in charge of African Affairs, to the
Independence Day ceremonies that took place in Juba
on 9 July and the establishment of diplomatic relations
between our two countries that very day. Our
representative was honoured to have participated in an
historic event that reflected the self-confidence of the
South Sudanese people as they celebrated the hard-
earned opportunity to build a brighter future.

It is an honour for me to address the Security
Council on an occasion in which the United Nations,
including the Council, played a significant role. That
accomplishment builds on a track record of
involvement in the region, comprising the Sudan and
South Sudan, of often creative and courageous
undertakings. I particularly recall Operation Lifeline
Sudan, which brought relief to many thousands of
civilians in need. As Brazil understands, that operation
is a lasting example of the concept of responsibility to
protect put to use with a broader perspective that does
not necessarily involve military means.

Brazil presided over this Council in March 2005,
when the United Nations Mission in the Sudan was
established (see S/PV.5151) to assist the parties in
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). More recently, also under the Brazilian
presidency, the Council held a meeting to welcome the
peaceful conduct of the referendum, in which the South
Sudanese people chose to establish an independent
State (see S/PV.6468).

Today, we meet to celebrate the implementation
of that decision. Tribute must be paid, first and
foremost, to the two parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. The authorities and the peoples of
the Republic of South Sudan and of the Republic of the

Sudan demonstrated political courage in working
towards this moment. They proved wrong those who
thought they could not work together for common
goals. They remind the Council that it can effectively
fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter through
negotiated diplomatic solutions.

We must also recognize the leadership role played
in the early negotiations by the African Union and the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development. The
African Union has given proof of its ability to engage
actors in a complex, lengthy process, one that tested
the resilience of its institutions. We believe that the
African Union is an example of political coordination
and integration that offers important lessons to other
areas of the world. In South America, attention is
certainly being paid to the African example by
members of the Union of South American Nations,
including my own country, Brazil.

Many other international actors, including
non-governmental organizations, deserve credit for
their contribution to the implementation of the CPA, in
particular the referendum and the transition to an
independent South Sudan.

As we celebrate South Sudan's independence, we
must not forget the many challenges that still lie ahead.
Brazil strongly encourages the leaders to settle their
remaining differences through peaceful means and to
put their long-term interests ahead of other
considerations.

We encourage the parties to redouble their efforts
to reach agreements on all outstanding issues,
particularly on the final status of Abyei, on settling the
North-South border, on wealth-sharing arrangements
and on the immediate and unconditional cessation of
hostilities in Southern Kordofan.

Brazil believes that the vision of a democratically
transformed Sudan can continue to inspire both
countries. The leaders of South Sudan, who have
endured a long struggle for autonomy, will certainly
see the importance of ensuring that this achievement is
translated into improved political participation and
improved conditions for all South Sudanese.

As the Security Council stated on 11 February
(see S/PRST/2011/4), security and development are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing for the
attainment of durable peace. As both the Sudan and
South Sudan continue to face the challenges of nation-
building, the international community should increase
its support to both Juba and Khartoum.

We are glad to note that the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission have
started to consider how best to assist the Sudanese
people. We are also pleased that resolution 1996
(2011), which established the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, envisages the kind of
coherent and integrated support to post-conflict
countries called for in the presidential statement to
which I just referred, during whose adoption I had the
honour to preside over the Council.

I must also refer to the appointment of Ms. Hilde
Johnson as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who I believe is particularly well-positioned,
given her wide-ranging experience, to provide
expertise and leadership.

Brazil encourages those who have not yet done so
to take steps to normalize economic relations with the
Sudanese. We support calls for debt relief. We also
urge all development partners to step up bilateral and
multilateral support. In the context of the India, Brazil
and South Africa (IBSA) group, these three countries
are negotiating three cooperation projects that we
believe will benefit the people of South Sudan. Our
countries also intend to work with the Sudan in the
framework of the IBSA fund.

As part of Brazil's renewed engagement with the
African continent, our relations with the Republic of
the Sudan have intensified in the past few years.
Bilateral cooperation projects and private partnerships,
which aim at developing the country's potential in the
area of agriculture, are showing impressive results. In
2009, the Sudan became the first country in its region
to produce and export ethanol with Brazilian
technology. Other promising projects involve cotton
and soy.

We are also convinced that agriculture can play a
pivotal role in the future of South Sudan. As we are all
aware, the country has immense potential in terms of
land, climate, water and human resources. In our
bilateral meetings, the authorities of South Sudan have
indicated that agriculture will be a priority. Given the
potential of both countries, efforts towards promoting
rural development in the Sudan and South Sudan can
benefit the whole north-east of Africa, where food
security remains a challenge, thereby generating a
series of positive economic and social spin-offs.

The independence of South Sudan is an event that
evokes many of the traits of the African spirit, which
we have come to respect and admire: endurance,
courage and wisdom. As the new nation embarks on a
journey to build a free, democratic, prosperous and
peaceful home for its deserving people, South Sudan
will require the active support of the United Nations
and its individual Members. Brazil looks forward to
playing its part in that process.

