Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing and appreciate his views. We also
thank Ms. Blakemore for her briefing and her
emotional testimony.

Peacebuilding is unquestionably one of the main
pillars of the United Nations, and peacekeeping
operations are an irreplaceable part of the maintenance
of international peace and security through conflict
resolution. That is why issues related to improving
peacekeeping missions and increasing the efficiency and
security of Blue Helmets are always a focus of attention
for Member States and the Secretariat. We appreciate
the Secretary-General's initiative and personal efforts
in this area, including his proposal for a Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. Many of the provisions of this document
deserve support. We have endorsed it, but with
reservations. For example, we do not support equating
the tasks of monitoring human rights and protecting
civilians, since the latter could involve the use of force
by peacekeepers. Nevertheless, it is important that close
attention be paid to peacekeeping's effectiveness, which
means ultimately that Member States, with the help of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(C-34), should be able to reach a consensus solution.

One of the issues that should be resolved is that of
increasing the effectiveness ofthe work ofpeacekeepers
and civilian personnel and strengthening discipline.
We believe that requires a complex and comprehensive
approach, based on cooperation between the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries, the host
countries and the Secretariat. It is important not only to
have an honest, constructive conversation, but to ensure
that all the links in the chain fulfil their obligations in
good faith.

Needless to say, where improving the overall
effectiveness of peacekeeping efforts is concerned, only
extremely clear and well-defined mission mandates,
with an emphasis on political solutions, can help to
achieve substantive results. During strategic reviews
of missions their mandates should be systematically
purged and their peripheral human rights, humanitarian
and social tasks handed over to their host Governments.
Of course, the effectiveness of the Blue Helmets
depends directly on transparent, comprehensible
work by the Secretariat. Training aids, concepts and
guidelines should correspond fully with the parameters
defined by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and should make implementation clear
and understandable. Unfortunately, not everything is
perfect in that regard. One of the most vivid examples
of disregard for Member States' decisions is the
collection and analysis of information, or so-called
intelligence in peacebuilding. The first version of
the concept document contradicted States' decisions.
And as we understand, it is proposed that the second,
reworked version be implemented without the C-34's
full consideration and approval. Needless to say, we do
not share this approach to such a sensitive issue.

With regard to performance standards, they
should include an assessment of the performance of
all the components of peacekeeping missions, as well
as of the Secretariat in New York. The corresponding
methodology should be based on clear and precise
benchmarks and should therefore exclude any possibility
of a biased or subjective approach to determining
whether contingents are ineffective.

There is another tough issue that I cannot avoid.
Unfortunately, the statistics on sexual crimes are not
a cause for optimism. The problem deserves close
attention, and we heard emotional evidence to that effect
today from Ms. Blakemore. But the notion of entire
contingents' collective responsibility for individual,
though inexcusable crimes raises reasonable questions.
However, this is not just about crimes where the accused
are Blue Helmets. The zero-tolerance policy should
apply equally to non-United Nations peacekeepers and
representatives of non-governmental organizations
accredited to the United Nations.

In general, we assume that the parameters for
reform of United Nations peacekeeping activities
should be determined in a format organized among
States. That is how it has been established in the reports
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
that the General Assembly approves by consensus
every year. And the implementation of initiatives
should also be carried out with full consideration for
the opinions and concerns of Member States. However,
unconditional compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping - the
consent of the parties, impartiality, refraining from
the use of force except in self-defence and protection
of the mandate - is central to these reform processes.
Any flexible interpretation of them, even for the most
benign reasons, is unacceptable.

These basic principles should govern every aspect
of missions' work, including the protection of civilians
where that is enshrined in the mandate. There can be
no possibility that peacekeepers can suddenly draw
their swords and become aggressors in a conflict,
let alone use force against host Governments, which
have the primary responsibility for the security of
their populations. And we also have questions about
the proposals to transform peacekeeping into a tool for
the use of force or discussions about introducing Blue
Helmets into offensive or counter-terrorist operations.
That approach would turn them into targets. We should
pay attention to the fact that the rising numbers of
deaths among peacekeepers in the past few years
has been taking place just when the mandates of
certain missions have been being strengthened. At the
same time, we fully concur with the importance of
increasing peacekeepers' safety, which could be done
by improving their professional equipment and material
and technical training.

In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
proposal of the United States on the draft Security
Council document on peacekeeping performance.
During the discussion on it we will of course be guided
by the approaches I have just described. However, with
regard to the general nature of the issue, we believe
that whatever the decisions we make, it is important
that they have the full support not only of Council
members but also of the troop-contributing countries.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is
best suited for that, as it provides an effective platform
for this kind of trilateral cooperation format. We do
not believe that the Council should try to bypass the
C-34 and get involved in micromanagement, although
it will unquestionably be important to send a political
signal about the importance of improving peacekeeping
performance. That can be done in a separate
presidential statement.

