Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy
and Mr. Simonovie for their briefings.

The issue of the protection of civilians holds a
prominent place on the Security Council's agenda. We
welcome regular discussion of the topic and the close
attention to the various aspects of the protection of
civilians when setting up and extending country
mandates. We also consider useful the recent initiative
of Brazil on holding consultations on all questions of
protection on the Council's agenda. In our View, that
helps the Security Council to develop a comprehensive
approach to the issue of protecting civilians and to
avoid duplication in the work of the various bodies of
the Secretariat.

Despite all the efforts to protect civilians,
thousands of people die during conflicts, as before.
Moreover, the majority of civilian casualties are
children, women and the elderly, who are generally
considered vulnerable groups. Recently, our attention
has focused on a number of country situations where
the issue of the protection of civilians is particularly
acute. I am referring primarily to Afghanistan, Libya
and Cote d'Ivoire.

We resolutely condemn premeditated attacks on
civilians, as well as civilian deaths resulting from the
indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force, which
is a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law. We advocate thorough investigation of such
incidents and punishment of the perpetrators. That also
applies to the activities of private security groups,
which quite often violate the rights of the civilian
population. Under the norms of international law, the
responsibility for the actions of such groups lies with
the States that hire them. In that regard, we welcome
the recent decision of the United Nations Human
Rights Council on drawing up a draft international
legal document on the human rights aspects of the
activities of such security groups.

Certainly, the Governments of States involved in
conflicts bear the primary responsibility for protecting
the population living on their territory. At the same
time, all parties to armed conflict are responsible for
the security of civilians. The activities of the
international community should assist national efforts
in that area. Moreover, undertaking such international
measures, in particular those involving the use of force,
is possible only with the authorization of the Security
Council, in strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter and within the framework established by the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

In the light of the ambiguous experiences in
protecting civilians during peacekeeping operations
sanctioned by the Security Council, we believe that it
is necessary once again to clearly reaffirm that it is
unacceptable for United Nations peacekeepers to be
drawn into armed conflict and, in effect, to take the
side of one of the parties when implementing their
mandate.

The noble goal of protecting civilians should not
be compromised by attempts to resolve in parallel any
unrelated issues. In that regard, we share the concern
expressed today by Ms. Amos with regard to the
situation in Libya. The statement by a representative of
the coalition with regard to resolution 1973 (2011) is
not in line with the reality.

In conclusion, we would like to mention one
other issue that, in our view, is important. We believe
that the protection of civilians is crucial not only
during the acute phase of an armed conflict. Following
the cessation of active hostilities, the phase of political
settlement and peacebuilding begins. At that time,
civilians frequently fall victim to various armed
groups, looters and forces that have not yet disarmed.
We believe it extremely important to avoid the
emergence of distinct security vacuums during the
period of transition from armed conflict to
peacebuilding. Ensuring the security of the civilian
population during the peacebuilding period is primarily
the responsibility of the relevant State. The task for the
United Nations is to provide active support in
establishing law-enforcement structures to counter
crime.
