President Chiluba: In beginning to respond to the
many observations and questions posed by the
representatives of various Governments, let me say without
any sense of pride that I was here 26 years ago. I was a
trade unionist, but in the delegation of my Government.

I say this to try and state how difficult it is to expect
any conflict to end immediately after the signing has taken
place. In fact, in some conflicts, other citizens of the world
have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize while the
conflicts still continue. I would have thought that, after they
had been made recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize, those
conflicts would have been consigned to history, but they
have survived. The Nobel Peace Prizes have gone one way,
the peace process another.

I say this to try and tell the Council that it is not only
in Africa that we can say that we will not be sure. In 1973,
in fact, there was a bit of drama. I was in the General
Assembly when the Chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, Yasser Arafat, came with an olive branch. He
offered it the Israelis and said: "I am ready to negotiate
peace with Israel. But if they refuse ..." He touched the
pocket where he keeps his gun and said: "I will offer them
this gun."

Those problems still continue. There have been the
Wye River and other agreements in the process, and they

still continue.

To come down to this problem of the Congo, let me
say this one thing. I got involved in the peace negotiation
between UNITA and the Government of Angola in what is
known today as the Lusaka Protocol. It will be
appreciated - I am not trying to run away from any
responsibility or the mistakes and difficulties that may have
been seen in this; I associate myself fully with them - that
these are the difficulties I am trying to talk about regarding
all such difficult situations. When we got involved in the
Angola situation, it had already been dealt with by the
United Nations at various forums, at different times with
different countries and different facilitators and helpers in
the process.

The case of the Congo, may I say, is very different
in many ways. The first item that was talked about by the
representative of Bahrain was the commitment of parties
to the Agreement. I can tell the Council frankly that this
Agreement, signed by all the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is a product of many
hours spent by them, although chaired by us. If we look
back to the signing of the Agreement, not one of the
parties to this Agreement has ever expressed concern or
even doubt about the contents of the Agreement. This is
basically their own Agreement. The peculiar way in
which it was negotiated gives me not only hope and
optimism, but a tremendous sense of conviction that they,
the people who negotiated this Agreement - particularly
the Congolese people, the rebels and the countries that
assisted either side - will always hold this as their very
own home-bred Agreement. I have no doubt that they are
committed and they will be committed. No one has
expressed concern at all.

Canada spoke about the participation in the internal
debate, among other things, and the United Nations role
in this. In this Agreement, there is a provision for that
internal debate and even the timetable has been laid. Of
course, because of the delay in completing the signing of
the Agreement, I can say we are one or almost two
months behind, but this does not take away the
commitment of the parties to this Agreement. Internal
debate, in fact, is a matter that the rebels advanced when
they first made known their presence on the scene. They
said that they wanted the Government to broaden the
political space; they wanted broader participation by all
the Congolese people; they wanted the Congolese people
to democratize the system of Government; and so on.

And so, I can safely say that the internal debate or
internal dialogue is a matter that all the Congolese
people - the Government, the rebels and everybody -
will be concerned with. It may have already been heard
that President Kabila was trying to contact some former
head of State to try and start organizing internal debate,
but the Council must have also heard that the rebels said
no, they would not accept that.

The choice of facilitator or moderator of these
discussions is another one that requires the agreement of
the parties concerned. We believe that the Organization of

 

African Unity (OAU) will play its very important role in
this to ensure that whoever they pick has both the respect
and integrity that will make him acceptable to the parties to
this conflict.

I appealed to the United Nations to play a role in
ensuring that this is done. There are various levels at which
it can be done - technically, by working with the OAU in
providing the experts who will help to make internal
dialogue successful. The Congo is ravaged by war. The
Congo, as we all know, is a country with vast resources
which have yet to be exploited. So, indeed, the United
Nations will play a role to ensure that the development in
the Congo takes a certain path, particularly after the
political debate has taken place and succeeded.

The safety of those who will be involved in
peacekeeping in the Congo and the safety of those who will
be attending to humanitarian questions or bringing
humanitarian aid to the Congo is assured. I liken the joint
Political Committee and the Joint Military Commission to
the International Labour Organization. I have been a trade
unionist almost all my life, and I know that in most
countries where there are stable industrial relations, this is
because the spirit of tripartism does work effectively. And
when it works, it commits the parties - labourer, employer
and Government - to a matter that they may have adopted
on their own.

I cannot see the Joint Military Commission or even the
joint Political Committee working any differently from this.
The spirit of collective responsibility is enshrined in it. It
will not be used as a bargaining forum for the parties in
this joint Political Committee or Joint Military Commission
to try to sort out - "Oh, maybe I lost that point in the
process, and now I can regain it here." No, their roles are
provided for in the modalities; they will be working in
order to support and give guidance to the peacekeeping
forces on the ground.

So there will be safety, because the people who are
members of the joint Political Committee and the Joint
Military Commission are onetime foes, people who fought
but who have now decided to work for peace. They will
work to identify the obstacles and areas of concern to make
the peace operation exercise successful. I cannot fail to
mention that the safety of the peacekeepers, the safety even
of those engaged in humanitarian efforts to provide aid will
be assured.

First and foremost, those of us who have been right
there in the Congo see war fatigue in the faces of many
people. You might say, "But it is not the ordinary people
who are fighting." Indeed, the forces on both sides are
realistic today. They know that the Congolese people are
war-fatigued and that they want development. They
cannot continue to suffer and to see their resources
plundered at will. So I believe that even within the
fighting forces, this is the spirit that reigns today. I can
assure you Mr. President, and the members of
Governments here present, and those absent, that there
will be security and safety for personnel, both for those
in the peacekeeping role as well as for those attending to
humanitarian efforts.

As I said, the Joint Military Commission has met
once. It met first of all to approve the budget. It also met
to approve its Chairman, who is from Algeria. As the
Council knows, Algeria today occupies the Chair of the
OAU, and so they had to provide a Chairman. The
Chairman could have come from elsewhere, but we are
happy that he is from Algeria, which holds the Chair of
the OAU for the year. So we have General Rachid Lallali
as the Chairman of the Joint Military Commission.

Both the joint Political Committee and the Joint
Military Commission have met, and they have done their
initial work. In fact, we have just received a message that
the next Joint Military Commission meeting will be held
on 10 October. So a date has already been fixed, things
are moving, and I am sure that the procedures for
ensuring the peace process as laid out here, which are
well known, will be followed. We are not trying to short-
circuit or bypass anything. All we are now trying to say
is that after the team of the military liaison personnel has
been sent, a technical survey team must go and assess the
situation on the ground in order for other efforts to
follow.

We in the Great Lakes region and in the continent of
Africa as a whole have a desire to collaborate, a desire to
cooperate. The Council knows that Africa works
individually, each country pursuing its own domestic
agenda; it took us time to realize that, indeed, even with
the differences in our own economic strength between one
country and another, we have to move much, much faster.
Africa has certain landmarks one can refer to. They are
the Abuja Treaty in Nigeria, and of course many other
such landmarks that have tended to create structures
through which we can collaborate with the international
community, realizing that our individual efforts may not
be sufficient.

 
If I may talk about Africa, Mr. President, you referred
to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the ECOWAS Monitoring Group. We have
in the southern region the Southern African Development
Community; we have the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa; we have a few other building blocks that
have been formed on the continent of Africa to facilitate
our efforts to collaborate with the outside world, be it the
European Union or the United States of America or, of
course, other parts of the globe. We are keenly interested
in pursuing these goals of ours, and even with the
difficulties we encounter, we have kept our doors open.
And we will do so, because we need this collaboration,
close cooperation, in order to be able to carry on with the
work that we are undertaking.

It is true that it has been frequently said that Africa is
very quick at creating problems for itself, and then as soon
as the problems are there, then Africans run to Europe.
They go and seek facilitators in Europe and take a quarrel
between Kenya and Uganda to Rome, take a quarrel
between Zimbabwe and Zambia to the Netherlands. But this
time around we said, "Let us try to take our own initiative.
This is an African problem; why can't an African initiative
suffice and find a solution?" Europe, of course, is in an
advanced stage, economically and politically, and because
we are members of one family - the United Nations -
even when we make an effort, we do not hesitate to ask for
your hand of friendship so you will lend whatever support
you can. Yet it would be overtaxing for you if, after a
problem were created in Africa, we looked to Europe and
America for both the effort to solve the problem and the
material or financial effort as well. Slowly we are saying,
"No, let us take the responsibility. Let us shoulder it, and
if we have to ask for help, it will be to supplement the
efforts that we are making." You might say that I am
misusing the word "supplement", unless we first find the
initial financial capacity. We try. In fact, when this effort
started, even with a very shaky and weak economy, we
were able to travel around the region before we asked for
help. Again, I want to thank you, Mr. President: your
country helped tremendously. That was after we said "If it
is possible to work, let us work and get the problem
listened to". So we went, and tried to do the job. And we
are trying to shoulder this responsibility while seeking the
help of countries in Europe and America.

The commitment question has been repeated from time
to time: the United Kingdom mentioned it, too. Let me say
that the commitment is there, and the role of the Security
Council cannot be divorced from it. It is primarily the
responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that there is
international peace and security. Earlier I referred to the
Middle East, although I mentioned only Chairman Yasser
Arafat. The United States has been extremely steadfast, as
has the Security Council. If there were no commitment on
the part of the international community to the long-
standing Middle East problem and if it were left for the
Middle East alone to resolve, it could not have reached
the current stage. I can only thank the Council, reiterating
the need for the same commitment to ensure that there is
peace in one part of the world, which will guarantee
peace all over; we must look at the needs of peace in
Congo and in Africa in exactly the same way.

The Council has never been found wanting; it has
never been found to be tired. An agreement on the
Middle East is signed one day, and the following day it
is broken, but the Council picks up the pieces, threads
them together and moves on. Today, we are looking
towards the Middle East with a lot more optimism, after
many, many years. As I said, I was here 26 years ago at
the height of the cold war, and one would have thought
that by today the problem would have been resolved. But
it is still going on. I can assure the Council that we in
Africa want that same commitment. We will take the
Council's hand, because there is a need for peace and
there is a role for the Security Council to play. Let it play
the same role that it has played in the past - let it play
it even more fully now, and ensure that peace is secured
for us in Africa.

The United Nations and, of course, other countries
of the world have a role to play in helping us. We have
talked about holding a bigger conference with regard to
the peace process so as to remove tensions in the Great
Lakes region. The OAU has been seized of this problem
and is addressing it very seriously. Frankly, I am sure that
even when we come to arrange a specific meeting through
the existing machinery or structures at the OAU or at
other, subregional, levels, such as in SADC or the
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), we will get in touch and make sure that the
United Nations plays its role in providing technical
expertise. We are very much indebted to the United
Nations. From day one, when the problem started, the
United Nations arrived; it came to the second meeting and
it never departed. We worked well together throughout.
The United Nations has a role to play in the continued
search for peace in Africa.

I thank the representatives of China and of Gabon
for their supportive statements, and thank the
representative of Argentina, who reiterated three of the

 

six points that I made regarding what we want. Thanks to
today's modern, advanced news flow, I learned that the
countries going to East Timor are calling for a very
appropriate mandate to be given to the team in order to
enable them to deal with the situation as it obtains on the
ground. This is not becoming a slogan; it reflects the
realization that if we want to deal with the matter, and deal
with it effectively, there must be an appropriate way of
handling it. Hence, there is a need for an appropriate
mandate that does not oblige people or tie them down, but
gives them some kind of flexibility so that they will offer
what they can in terms of making possible the peace efforts
that are required. Otherwise, those who are sent may not be
considered to be carrying out an effective exercise.

The best way to end some of our problems, not only
in the Great Lakes region but in the whole continent of
Africa, is by broadening the political space and trying as
much as possible to democratize our systems of
government. We realize that there is no particular universal
model. Each country will adopt its own. But there are
general, universal characteristics of democracy which we
understand as States, and we believe that if we are allowed
to carry out or work out our own agendas without being
prompted into taking rash decisions, the exercise will be
implemented effectively on the continent of Africa.

In July I attended the regular meeting of the OAU
summit in Algeria, where we passed a resolution not to
welcome anybody who assumes power by the back door
using methods that are not legal or democratic. This is a
huge step on the continent of Africa. We realize that our
people need peace, and this peace will come only when we
have democratized sufficiently. But experts have said that
when people live in poverty, democracy is a chimera; it is
a recipe for further violence. That is why we have
continued to say "Please write off the external debt which
is holding us down". We will then be able to demonstrate
our efforts in going ahead to democratize the continent.

The United States of America reiterated the question
with regard to the appropriate mandate. Yes, we need that
in order to be able to achieve peace in the Congo. Indeed,
we need collaborative efforts with the United States of
America, with European countries and with all the
Governments of the States Members of the United Nations,
because we need peace there. Maybe the structures are not
quite clear, but we will try to ensure that when and where
the OAU takes the African flag forward, as it must, it will
do so in order for the rest of the world to know that this is
how we operate and how we can collaborate.

The work that we are asking for from the United
Nations peacekeeping mandate involves both
peacekeeping and peace enforcement. This is exactly why
we said that we needed an appropriate mandate: tracking
down and disarming armed groups is not a task that the
peacekeeping forces can carry out without properly laid
out efforts and measures. The Joint Military Commission
in particular, working under the Political Committee, will
be able to identify them. Therefore, as I said, through
cooperation, using the Joint Military Commission not as
a bargaining forum, but as a collective area for
determining and identifying obstacles, we believe that the
forces that will be there, working closely with the
Political Committee and the Joint Military Commission,
will be able to identity, track down and disarm those who
may be causing problems. We know that some of those
rebel groups may have the support of Governments.
Those Governments are today members of the Political
Committee and the Joint Military Commission, and there
is no way that they can collaborate with forces that they
are charged with the responsibility of disarming. We
believe that this will work out quite well.

As to the question on an internal debate, through we
may be days behind because of a late signing, efforts are
already under way. The OAU Secretary-General called
me only two days before I left. They are looking for a
facilitator - someone with some credibility who would
be accepted by the Government, Congolese political
parties and civil society, so that the internal debate and
dialogue can begin. There is a time-table for this, and we
believe that as soon as the peacekeeping efforts begin, so
that the security of those who are going to debate can be
ensured, things will begin to move, and move quite fast.

I am not suggesting in any way that there will be
insecurity, but some fear has been expressed, and
therefore the facilitator of this internal dialogue will make
sure that both the venue and other related logistics are
accepted by the parties, so that the debate can continue.

Yes, it is possible, even advisable, to disarm all of
those forces - the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the former Rwandan Armed Forces, the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA), the Uganda National Rescue Front (UNRF), the
Interahamwe, and so on. It is advisable and possible; it
will be done. I think that the machinery is in place to
ensure that peacekeeping and enforcement are
successfully implemented, so I believe it will be done.

 

Yes, I appreciate Slovenia's observations, and we will
do everything to ensure that we follow up and implement
those ideas that pertain to the short term as well as those
relating to the medium and long term, so that the peace
process itself is followed up until the successful conclusion
of the internal dialogue.

With the Joint Military Commission set up, we in
Africa are trying on our own to make some contribution to
it, but this may not be enough. That is why I have appealed
for generous contributions to ensure that the Commission
can work effectively in identifying areas and obstacles and
in ensuring that the peacekeeping forces are not subjected
to unnecessary risks and dangers in the process. Therefore
I still want to appeal for this help. It is absolutely
necessary.

With regard to what type of forces can go there, the
only qualification is that they be from countries that are
acceptable to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so
they can be forces from within the OAU countries or from
other countries that are helping. But because it has been
said that Africa needs to take greater responsibility, we
thought that, with the help of the United Nations, we could
perhaps increase the African contingent in the forces that
will be going there, but that is not to say that others may
not be part of the arrangement.

Even if our role is very clearly one in the Political
Committee, which is composed of African countries that at
one time were enemies, and also in the Joint Military
Commission, we can be part also of the peacekeeping
forces sent by the United Nations. We are appealing for
financing to help us get these forces, wherever they may
come from, into operation soon - and the sooner the
better. We are afraid that if we do not maintain this
momentum, something could crop up and perhaps set the
clock back and disturb the present order and the speed at
which things are now moving.

As I said, the next meeting of the Joint Military
Commission, set for 10 October, is just weeks away. We
are therefore looking forward to the cooperation of the
Security Council, whose role is primary.

Furthermore, when we mention African forces, we
are talking about a peacekeeping force under the auspices
of the United Nations. We are ready to take up the
challenge, because I think the situation warrants that we
move fast in order to begin the internal process itself,
which will lead to the achievement of lasting internal
peace for the Congo.

This is as far as I can go. If there are any areas I
have not made clear, I am ready to go back and do so,
because I do not think there has been any dialogue
between Africa and the Security Council. And,
Mr. President, since I am here, and I am a trade unionist,
why not make me work some overtime?

