Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Montenegro; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
the European Union firmly believes that now is the
time to take bold and concrete steps towards peace.
The parties must engage in direct and substantial
negotiations without preconditions in order to achieve
a lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
ending all claims. The European Union underlines the
urgency of renewed, structured and substantial peace
efforts in 2013, and towards that end it is ready to work
with the new United States Administration and other
international partners, including within the Quartet.

There will be no sustainable peace until the
Palestinians' aspirations to statehood and sovereignty
and those of Israelis to security are fulfilled through
a comprehensive negotiated peace, based on the two-
State solution. The viability of a two-State solution
must be maintained. The European Union expresses
deep concern about developments on the ground that
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.

The European Union is deeply dismayed by and
strongly opposes Israeli plans to expand settlements
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and in
particular Givat Hamatos, and plans to develop the E-l
area. Construction in Givat Hamatos cuts geographic
continuity between Jerusalem and Bethlehem. The E-l
plan, if implemented, would seriously undermine the
prospects of a negotiated resolution of the conflict by
jeopardizing the possibility of a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State and of Jerusalem as the future capital
of two States. It could also entail the forced transfer of
the civilian population. The European Union reiterates
that settlements are illegal under international law
and constitute an obstacle to peace. In the light of its
core objective of achieving a two-State solution, the
European Union will closely monitor the situation and
its broader implications, and act accordingly.

As we have stated before, the European Union will
not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders other
than those agreed by the parties. The European Union
also believes that the following further parameters
could serve as a basis for a resumption of negotiations:
first, security arrangements that, for Palestinians,
respect their sovereignty and show that the occupation
is over, and, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
new and emerging threats; secondly, a just, fair and
agreed solution to the refugee question; and, thirdly, the
fulfilment of the aspirations of both parties concerning
Jerusalem. A way must be found through negotiations
to resolve the status of Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.

The setting up of an internationally supported
framework for direct negotiations between the parties
would be instrumental in the resumption of such
negotiations. The European Union remains in close
contact with the parties and with the Union's partners
within the Quartet, as well as with other key actors,
with the clear aim of achieving significant progress as
soon as possible.

The European Union recalls that the Arab Peace
Initiative provides regional support for a comprehensive
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement. The European
Union will work with those who are willing to join in
such a quest for peace, stability and prosperity.

The European Union calls on Israel to resume
without delay the transfers of Palestinian tax and
clearance revenues it collects on behalf of the
Palestinian Authority, and without further interruption,
in line with the Paris Protocol. Cuts in those transfers
jeopardize the viability of the Palestinian Authority,
have a critical impact on the provision of basic
services for the Palestinian population, and present
a considerable threat to the security situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and beyond.

It is of the utmost importance that the Palestinian
Authority continue to receive strong political and
financial support from the international community
as a whole. The European Union recently decided on
a front-loading of its budget support to the Palestinian
Authority and calls on other donors, in particular Arab
countries, to fully honour their commitments.

The European Union calls on the new Israeli
Government that will be formed after yesterday's
election, as well as on the Palestinian leadership, to
reaffirm their commitment to the two-State solution
and to engage in direct and substantial negotiations
without preconditions.

On 29 November 2012, the General Assembly
voted in favour of resolution 67/19 on the granting
of non-member observer State status in the United
Nations to Palestine. The European Union calls on
the Palestinian leadership to use that new status
constructively and not to undertake steps that would
deepen the lack of trust and lead further away from a
negotiated solution.

Despite the ceasefire, the status quo in the Gaza
Strip remains unsustainable. Fully recognizing Israel's
legitimate security needs, the European Union reiterates
its call for the immediate, sustained and unconditional
opening of crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from the Gaza
Strip, the situation of which will be unsustainable
as long as it remains politically and economically
separated from the West Bank. Equally, the issue of
illegal weapons transfers into the Gaza Strip has to
be effectively addressed as a matter of urgency. It is
vital that all parts of the agreement on the cessation of
hostilities be implemented and that talks on a durable
ceasefire agreement continue.

The European Union commends the efforts of
Egypt and all those who engaged in mediation. The
European Union is committed to facilitating the social
and economic development of the Gaza Strip. The
European Union expresses its readiness to make use
of its instruments in support of the parties' efforts,
including the possible reactivation, in the appropriate
way, of the European Union Border Assistance Mission
to Rafah. The European Union underlines its readiness
to explore further ways to address the situation in the
Gaza Strip, including with concerned parties in the
region, in line with resolution 1860 (2009).

The European Union reiterates its call for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation behind the strong
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, in line with
the principles set out in his speech of4 May 2011, as an
important element for the unity of a future Palestinian
State and for reaching a two-State solution. It is in the
fundamental interest of the European Union to support
peace and democracy in the entire region, and a strategic
priority to see an end to a conflict that will continue to
undermine peace and security along the EU's southern
borders as long as it remains unresolved.

The European Union is appalled by the increasingly
deteriorating situation in Syria, primarily due to
the unprecedented use of force by the regime. It also
condemns all attacks, including terrorist acts, that
indiscriminately target civilians. The European Union
is seriously concerned about the potential use and
transfer of chemical weapons in Syria, and reminds
the Syrian regime and other parties that, in case of
their use, those responsible will be held accountable.
The European Union underlines the necessity of the
complete destruction of those chemical weapons at the
earliest date practicable, and urges Syria to accede to
the Chemical Weapons Convention as soon as possible.
The European Union remains deeply concerned by the
spillover effects of the Syrian crisis in neighbouring
countries. It remains committed to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.

The European Union reiterates its full support for the
efforts undertaken by the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to achieve a Syrian-led peaceful
political transition based on the principles included in
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012, and calls on
all parties to actively engage with Mr. Brahimi. The
European Union continues to call on all members of the
Security Council to uphold their responsibilities.

The European Union encourages the National
Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces to continue working on its structures, to
become more operational and inclusive, and to remain
committed to respecting the principles of human rights,
inclusiveness and democracy and to engaging with all
sections of Syrian civil society. The European Union
encourages the Coalition to engage further with the
Joint Special Representative, and stands ready to engage
with and support the Coalition in those endeavours and
its relations with the international community at large.

The European Union reiterates its support for
strengthening the capacity ofcivil society organizations
and stresses their importance for the building of the
future democratic Syria. It also acknowledges the
importance of supporting local civilian structures
throughout Syria.

The European Union reiterates its call on all parties
to the conflict to facilitate humanitarian access and aid
delivery to the people in need, to ensure the neutrality of
humanitarian aid, and to strictly abide by international
humanitarian law. The pledging conference in Kuwait
on 30 January will be an important opportunity. The EU
will reaffirm its engagement to the Syrian population
in Syria and in neighbouring countries affected by the
crisis and that are generously hosting Syrian refugees.
The European Union will also call on all donors to
step up their response, in coordination with the United
Nations and in full respect of humanitarian principles.
The overall humanitarian contribution so far from the
EU and its member States amounts to over €333 million.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about widespread and systematic violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law that,
according to the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Syria, may amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. The European Union
recalls that all those responsible for such crimes must be
held accountable and that there should be no impunity
for such violations and abuses. The European Union has
repeatedly stated that, if concerns about war crimes and
crimes against humanity are not adequately addressed
at the national level, the International Criminal Court
should deal with the situation. The Security Council can
refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court, as requested in the Swiss letter to the Security
Council of 14 January, at any time (S/2013/19, annex).
The European Union calls on the Security Council to
urgently address the situation in Syria in all its aspects,
including that issue.

