Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome again to the Security
Council Mr. Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President
of Colombia. I also thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his valuable briefing and his comprehensive
presentation on the most important achievements in
Columbia, as well as the challenges that are still facing
the peace operation there.

We reaffirm our full support for the peace process
in Colombia during the upcoming round of negotiations
between the Colombian Government and the National
Liberation Army. We hope that the negotiations will
be successful in ensuring that the aspirations of the
Colombian people - establishing a secure and safe
environment characterized by tolerance and integration,
while leading to progress and economic development in
Colombia - are met.

We commend the holding recently of successful
presidential elections and the high voter turnout by
Colombians in a safe environment that demonstrated
the sincere resolve of all Colombian parties to achieve
stability and lasting peace in their country. In that
regard, we congratulate the new President-elect,
Mr. Ivan Duque, and express our hope that the new
Colombian Government will continue to work pursuant
to the Peace Agreement and implement all its items to
ensure the desired stability and peace.

We commend the efforts of President Santos and
the leaders of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC). The opening session of the
Parliament included FARC representatives, and that is
the best demonstration of the progress achieved. We
also commend the efforts of the current Colombian
Government to improve the security situation and to
advance in the areas of legislation, transitional justice
and the reintegration of former FARC combatants.

In that regard, we underscore the importance
of continuing to provide security, legal, social and
economic guarantees in order to reintegrate former
FARC members. There is also a need to protect
the leaders of local communities and human rights
defenders, in addition to religious leaders. We call
for promoting attention to women and young people
so as to guarantee their participation in the various
initiatives linked to national reforms and policies.
They must be an integral part of the solution and
custodians of the future. Furthermore, we look forward
to the holding of a referendum on 26 August by the
Colombian Government on the management of public
resources in the context of combating corruption with
full transparency.

The State of Kuwait commends the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations Verification Mission, led by
Mr. Arnault, in coordination with national, regional
and local authorities, along with the civil society
and the private sector. Its role is to support national
initiatives and achieve stability and peace in Colombia.
We reaffirm our commitment to the Government
of Colombia and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in their efforts in achieving what
the Colombian people want - peace, security and
prosperity for their country.

