The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

At the outset, we would like to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) for their reports. We congratulate Mr. Theodor
Meron on his election to the post of President of the
ICTY, and we look forward to the ICTY at last
beginning to really effectively implement resolution
1966 (2010).

We note the efforts of the Tribunals to ensure the
timely and full implementation of their mandates,
while strictly complying with that resolution. The
recent successes of the Tribunals were made largely
possible by the excellent cooperation between them
and the States in their respective regions. In that
regard, we note in particular Serbia's excellent
cooperation with the ICTY. Our Serbian colleagues
have gone even further by launching a national
investigation into the reasons why some of the accused
remained in Serbia for so long. We understand and
welcome Serbia's desire to undertake such an
investigation. Given that only Serbia has the
jurisdiction to undertake such an investigation, we do
not understand why the ICTY is allowing itself to be
distracted from its numerous tasks by focusing on it.
The Tribunals certainly continue to face well-
known problems in their work. The attrition of
qualified staff continues and is more rapid than we
would wish. Here, it is necessary to bear in mind that,
in accordance with the completion strategy, the number
of Tribunal staff should gradually be reduced.
Nonetheless, we, together with other delegations, are
ready to consider ways of helping the Tribunals to
resolve that issue.

Despite all the difficulties of the Tribunals' work,
our top priority is the winding up of the Tribunals, in
full compliance with resolution 1966 (2010). In that
regard, unfortunately, we again see problems, in
particular with the ICTY. The documents and tables
show that, as was frequently the case in the past, the
intention is to exceed the deadlines established by
resolution 1966 (2010). The reasons for the delays are
not completely clear to us. For example, we do not
understand why the first instance trials of the Mladie
and HadZie cases are due to start only in November
2012 and January 2013, respectively. The necessary
pre-trial work on those cases has to a large extent been
completed. We see no obstacle to completing the first
instance trial of the Karadzie case on time.

Particular attention should be paid to the
notorious case of Seselj. He has been in detention for
nine years now. Moreover, there has still not been a
first instance judgement. Furthermore, we hear
worrying reports of Mr. Seselj's state of health and the
problems that he has encountered in enjoying his
procedural rights. We would be grateful if the ICTY
leadership could include the developments of that case
and the general condition of Mr. Seselj in its next
report to the Security Council.

We cannot fail to be concerned about the situation
of appeals to the ICTY on the Prlie, Seselj and Tolimir
cases. It is surprising that the ICTY report has not set
specific dates in the tables on the appeals. If we read
the tables correctly, the ICTY intends to consider those
appeals up to the middle of 2016. That is not in
compliance with resolution 1966 (2010).

We wish to recall that the parameters for the
Residual Mechanism and for closing the Tribunals
were formulated by members of the Security Council
on the basis of the timetables for the completion of
cases submitted by the Tribunals themselves last year.
Thus, we have every reason to insist that the heads of
both Tribunals make every effort to properly
implement resolution 1966 (2010). In that connection,
we welcome the intention of the President of the ICTY,
Mr. Meron, to take significant administrative measures
to increase the efficiency of the trials.

In addition to the steps mentioned by the
President of the ICTY, we believe that it would also be
appropriate to try to find a way to shorten trials by
reducing the length of judgements and, accordingly, the
time spent by judges in drawing them up and by
translators in translating them. We do not understand
why the length of judgements ranges from 2,000 to
some 4,000 pages. We recall that The Forsyte Saga, for
example, is only 1,500 pages long. The reports of the
Secretary-General on the most complex issues do not
exceed 100 pages.

An excellent practice in drawing up judgements
is demonstrated by the International Court of Justice. I
believe it significant that it is difficult not only for the
accused, but for other people who have not had
adequate training and for lawyers themselves, to
understand lengthy judgements. Furthermore, the ICTY
founding document does not establish any formal
requirements with regard to the length of the Tribunal's
judgements. We do not deny that different legal
systems have different approaches to drawing up
judgements. For example, in the Anglo-Saxon legal
system, whose representatives had a decisive influence
on establishing the practices of the ICTY, in particular
in the initial phase of its work, it is customary to draw
up lengthy rulings.

However, the Tribunals should represent all legal
systems. Most of them have the practice of drawing up
shorter judgements. In the current difficult
circumstances, we see no obstacle to the ICTY
adopting more concise forms of national practice in
that regard.

I have one further point. On 16 December, we are
due to elect judges for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We attach great
importance to those elections.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.

