Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset I wish to
congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to commend Germany
for its leadership in chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which has produced
significant decisions in moving the issue forward.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her recent
appointment as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Additionally, I thank the Special Representative, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Executive Director of UNICEF and Mr. Tolbert for
their valuable briefings this morning.

Malaysia is deeply concerned about the increasing
number of persistent perpetrators of severe violations
against children, particularly the parties listed in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/261).
I urge the parties involved to continue consultations
with the United Nations and implement the action plans
without delay. My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's recommendations that the Security Council
ensure that specific provisions for the protection of
children continue to be included in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as
political and peacebuilding missions, and that the issue
be given the highest visibility possible.

Malaysia is equally disturbed by the fact that
there was a significant increase in 2011 of fatal
incidents in the occupied Palestinian territories, where
20 Palestinian children were killed and 448 were injured.
We are deeply concerned about the unending cycle of
violence in which Palestinian children are detained and
subjected to cruel and degrading treatment by Israeli
security forces. I reiterate my call, particularly in the
Council, for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
The only way forward is to ensure that Palestinians,
especially Palestinian children, are granted their basic
rights as human beings.

Malaysia notes the mention in the Secretary-
General's report of attacks on schools and hospitals. We
are saddened that such places, which are regarded as
safe havens, are being ravaged by such deplorable acts.
We call on the Security Council to address this issue,
since the attacks not only claim innocent lives but also
deprive people of their right to education and health.

We believe there is an urgent need to strengthen
collaboration and the protection of children within the
United Nations system. In an effort to help accomplish
that crucial ongoing task, at the General Assembly's
sixty-sixth session Malaysia co-sponsored resolution
66/139, introduced by Thailand, on strengthening
collaboration on child protection within the United
Nations system, which was designed to bring about
important organizational improvements that will
further the cause of protecting children worldwide.

We are also parties to a wide range of international
instruments that provide a legal framework for the six
grave Violations committed against children in armed
conflict. I am pleased to announce that on 12 April
Malaysia, as a State party to those conventions, acceded
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. This is a milestone and underscores Malaysia's
commitment to the protection of children around the
world.

Malaysia acknowledges the two verdicts pronounced
by the International Criminal Court and the Special
Court for Sierra Leone in March and April this year on
the former Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga and the
former Liberian President Charles Taylor, respectively,
establishing important precedents for international
jurisprudence on the war crime of recruiting and using
children. They send a clear signal to commanders that
child recruitment is a war crime and that perpetrators
will be held accountable.

In that regard, Malaysia feels that Governments in
conflict should strengthen their capacity to investigate
and prosecute adult recruiters before national
courts. Measures that can help achieve this include
criminalizing underage recruitment and prosecuting
and investigating perpetrators; raising awareness of
child protection at the community level; addressing the
root causes of voluntary recruitment, such as poverty,
social grievances and basic survival; and providing
children with alternatives to military enrolment.

Malaysia reaffirms its strong commitment to
efforts aimed at protecting and promoting the rights
of children, including by paying sustained attention
to the issue of children in armed conflict. We feel
that, in the context of the issue of children and armed
conflict, accountability consists not only in careful
investigations and prosecutions of those responsible,
but also in a broader shouldering on the part of
individuals and institutions of the political, legal and
moral responsibility for violations that have occurred in
the past. Malaysia views accountability as a duty under
both domestic and international law. In that regard,
national systems should be guided towards meeting
international standards in order to establish effective
accountability measures in the hope ofbringing justice,
dignity and rehabilitation for children victimized by
armed conflict.

