Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this meeting on the
renewal of the sanctions regime for South Sudan. My
delegation decided to abstain in the voting on resolution
2471 (2019) for the following reasons. On 12 September
2018, after several years of conflict, the warring parties
in South Sudan signed the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. That important step was made possible by
the continued engagement of various actors in South
Sudan, particularly the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), through the mediation efforts of
the Presidents of the Sudan and Uganda.

Now that several months have passed since the
signing of the Agreement, Cote d'Ivoire has noted an
improvement in the overall security situation and the
fact that the signatories have largely respected the
cessation of hostilities agreement. We also welcome
the signatories' commitment to the comprehensive
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, to which
they have freely subscribed.

As the political process continues, Cote d'Ivoire
supports the African Union's recommendation in
which it encourages all the parties to refrain from
any measures that could weaken the political process
and thereby jeopardize the gains achieved, however
small they may be. The fact is that the Council's role
should not be limited to the constant imposition of
sanctions. We should also be able to assess advances
and direct our efforts to ensure dynamic progress. Our
friends and brothers in South Sudan need our united
and constructive action today more than ever, and our
encouragement in their difficult quest for peace.

We all know that the route to peace is not a long,
quiet river. The history of every people has taught us
that. We therefore consider it essential that the Security
Council, the African Union, IGAD and all the actors
involved in South Sudan give it helpful support in order
to preserve and strengthen the positive momentum we
have seen on the ground. We must therefore redouble
our efforts and show patience and common sense in
bringing the parties that are still reluctant to join the
peace and thereby help the South Sudanese parties to
fully implement the Revitalized Agreement, which is
the only way to bring lasting peace back to South Sudan.

