Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me first
express my delegation's delight in seeing you, Madam,
preside over the Council's deliberations. We commend
your delegation for organizing this timely debate on
the Great Lakes region of Africa during your
presidency.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
various ministers of foreign affairs who have graced
this meeting with their presence.

For more than a decade, the Great Lakes region
has been in profound turmoil. Through a game of
shifting alliances, and because of geographical
proximity in an area with porous borders, conflicts
have tended to merge, thus giving rise to a huge zone
of instability. That vast and resource-rich region has
been the theatre of widespread conflicts that have
brought death and destruction, displacement and great
suffering to its inhabitants.

The Security Council has rallied the support of
the international community in responding to the grave
challenges posed by those disastrous conflicts. Apart
from undertaking various field tours in the area, the
Council has mandated the stationing of thousands of
United Nations personnel, including peacekeepers, who
have not only saved lives but also alleviated the
suffering of many displaced persons, including the
most vulnerable segments of the population, especially
women and children.

My delegation remains convinced that the desired
breakthrough for peace can be attained in the Great
Lakes region, as it was in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
after 15 agonizing years of seemingly intractable
conflicts.

Now more than ever, sustainable peace seems
very much within reach. Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have taken their first brave
steps towards a new era of democratic governance and
enduring stability. We also consider as a decisive
turning point in the peace process the First Summit of
Heads of State and Government held in December
2004 in Tanzania, the most important outcome of
which was the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of Principles
on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region. The declaration is a bold attempt
to tackle head on the issues that clearly constitute the
foundation for lasting stability and sustainable
development in the region.

It is on the basis of an agreement between the
concerned parties, within this broad framework, that
we can hope to resolve the threats posed by the
continuing presence and activities of the foreign armed
groups and militias, such as the Forces Democratique
de Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the Palipehutu-
Forces Nationales de Liberation (FNL) and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), and bring an end to the
atrocities committed against the local population and
attacks against United Nation personnel and
humanitarian workers. The recent clashes between
suspected elements of the LRA and United Nations
peacekeepers in the eastern part of the Democratic
republic of the Congo, which resulted in the death of
eight Guatemalan soldiers and serious injuries to five
others, serve to underscore the imperative need for
forceful action to counteract the group's outrageous
and violent conduct, which continues to pose a threat
to peace, security and stability in the whole region.

The Governments of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda are to be commended for their
very constructive engagement with the militias, leading
to the peaceful repatriation of some FDLR members to
Rwanda. We also support the ongoing political and
military pressure being exerted on such forces through
joint operations by the Congolese Government and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). In the
same vein, we welcome the initiatives of the Tripartite
Plus Joint Commission, comprising Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, to increase dialogue among the countries in
the region.

It is evident from the outcome of the first Summit
that only a comprehensive and integrated strategy,
drawn up in a transparent way and with the
participation of all the relevant stakeholders, would
provide the best tonic for a durable solution to the
myriad problems and conflicts that have bedeviled the
region. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General's
plea to the Security Council to convey a strong
message of support for the International Conference on
the Great Lakes region and to urge the parties to renew
their commitment to respect both the spirit and letter of
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration and to make every
effort to hold the Nairobi Summit and sign the
Security, Stability and Development Pact.

It should also be possible for the parties to agree
on a specific date for the second Summit within the
coming weeks so that the meeting can take place soon
after the end of the transition process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in June this year.

Clearly, the process of achieving peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region requires a
collaborative effort of regional and international
proportions. Every conflict in the region has been
identified as having cross-border linkages and effects.
Consequently, a regional approach involving African
ownership and international partnership needs to be
enhanced. From this perspective the implementation of
resolution 1625 (2005) on conflict prevention can be
applied to the situation in the Great Lakes region.

In a wider context, there is the need to further
enhance the burgeoning cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, and as recently reaffirmed at the world summit
and in resolution 1631 (2005). We therefore call for
strengthened coordination and communications
between the United Nations and the AU, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union's
Peace and Security Council in mediation and
peacekeeping efforts in the Great Lakes region.
Aligned to this concept of practical cooperation is the
need to ensure that the time frame for the international
community's coordinated intervention in crises
identified in the region is shortened.

In the past, Council members have had the
occasion to urge African countries to adhere to the
African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence
Pact, adopted in Abuja on 31 January 2005, and to
sign, where appropriate, subregional pacts on peace,
security, democracy, good governance and
development. By the same token, the role of the United
Nations system in supporting the implementation of the
Pact needs to be further strengthened. Such action in
the region would be consistent with the objectives of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD).

My delegation earlier mentioned the success
chalked up in the Burundi peace process. It is our
considered view that Burundi is a classic case which
provides a maiden and golden opportunity for the
Peacebuilding Commission to exercise its mandate in
helping a smooth transition from war to peace.
Similarly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo could
be considered by the Commission, in the event of the
successful completion of its electoral timetable.

We share the view that wars are not acts of God.
They are caused by men, by man-made institutions, by
the way in which man has organized his society. What
man has made, man can change. This organ, which has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has been presented
with yet another opportunity to make positive and
decisive contribution towards the achievement of
lasting peace and security, and bring to closure a long
and protracted period of conflict and instability in the
Great Lakes Region. Let us seize the moment to act.
We support the draft resolution that has been prepared
by the delegations on the region.

