Mrs. Smith (Norway): I join others in thanking
Special Representative Mahiga for his thorough and
comprehensive briefing.

Norway joins the Secretary-General and other
Member States in strongly condemning the recent
terrorist attacks carried out by extremist groups against
the peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and innocent civilians in
Mogadishu and Kampala.

In spite of the commendable efforts made by
AMISOM. under extremely difficult circumstances, we
have to face the fact that the situation in Mogadishu is
still fragile. And the same may also be said about the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG). The threat
posed by militant and extremist groups to other
countries in the region underlines that what is
happening in Somalia is also a serious threat to peace
and security in the wider international community. It is
therefore important for the Security Council to take
appropriate action to boost the strength and the
operational capability of AMISOM.

The main victims of the ongoing war of attrition
in Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia are, of course,
the Somali people, who have been compelled to live
under the direst conditions for such a long time. As
long as the present situation continues, there is little
hope for any improvement, and those who are able to
do so are fleeing Mogadishu with their families.
Norway, together with other donors, is seeking to
provide humanitarian assistance, but access is often
difficult.

As regards piracy, Norway wishes to thank all the
countries that are currently contributing to the naval
capacities in the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. At
the same time, we note with concern that the
prosecution of captured pirates remains insufficient
and sporadic, despite our collective efforts.

Even if AMISOM. should be significantly
strengthened, a lasting solution to the conflict in
Somalia can be achieved only by political means.
Norway remains a strong supporter of the Djibouti
process and the efforts to reach out and integrate those
groups that are not yet party to the peace process. We
believe this should be vigorously pursued. At the same
time, it is vital that the TFG get its act together and
show a unity of purpose. The internal dispute over
political positions is seriously undermining not only
security, but also any efforts to achieve peace.

Norway will continue to support the transitional
federal institutions of Somalia, in particular the
ongoing constitutional process. With only one more
year left in the transitional period, time is now highly
limited if we are to find a lasting solution in Somalia.

