Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Ambassador Llorentty Soliz for his briefing
and commending him and Bolivia for their efforts in
steering the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). They deserve our praise.

Ethiopia welcomes the progress made in the
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent
resolutions aimed at preventing the proliferation to
non-State actors of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. We note in particular, as the
Chair of the Committee indicated, that the number of
States that have submitted their national reports has
reached 180, which in our view is a clear manifestation
of the political commitment of States Members of the
United Nations to addressing the threat posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials.

However, we note with concern that of the
13 Member States that have yet to submit at least a first
national report, 11 are in Africa. We have also noted
with great concern, after a recent informal briefing by
the Committee's Group of Experts, that Africa remains
far behind other regions both in terms of overall
implementation and of implementation in relation to
the establishment of domestic controls to prevent the
proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction,
particularly with regard to controlling related
materials and implementing measures in the areas of
accounting, securing, physical protection, border and
law enforcement, export and trade-related controls.

It is in that context that I would like to welcome
the upcoming training session for points of contact
for the African region, to be held in Addis Ababa in
cooperation with the African Union. I would also like
to reiterate our previous call for enhanced cooperation
with the African Union in the implementation of the
Common African Defence and Security Policy and
other regional frameworks, such as the African Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone. I would further like to encourage
the Committee to strengthen its assistance framework
to Member States, upon their request, with a View to
addressing the implementation gaps, particularly in
the area of domestic control measures, as well as in
adopting and enforcing appropriate and effective laws
that comprehensively address the proliferation risk
caused by non-State actors, including terrorists.

It is important for the Committee to work closely
with the Group of Experts to address the challenges
related to the assistance framework, particularly in the
areas of matchmaking, the availability and conditions
of assistance for all States and the limited number of
responses to requests for assistance. We have noted from
the Chair's briefing that there is a plan to undertake
country visits later this year with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and that the Group
of Experts had a meeting with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force to identify areas of
collaboration. In addition, further collaboration should
be envisaged between the 1540 Committee Group of
Experts and members of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
We are hopeful that this issue will be taken up by the
Committee in the implementation of its programme of
work for 2018.

I would like to conclude by affirming my
delegation's commitment to working closely with
the Chair and members of the Council to that end. I
would also like to reaffirm Ethiopia's commitment
to continuing taking all the measures necessary to
prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into
the hands of non-State actors. The possibility that they
may fall into terrorists' hands has always worried us.
We will never refrain from doing whatever is necessary
to contribute to the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions in this regard.

