Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Uganda appreciates the
initiative of Argentina to hold this high-level open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Navanethem Pillay
and International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Philip Spoerri for their instructive briefings.

We welcome the concerted efforts aimed at
ensuring the protection of civilians, but the fact that so
many civilians continue to lose their lives while others
are subjected to human rights violations in situations of
armed conflict, shows that a lot still remains to be done.
My delegation would like to stress that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians lies with
national authorities and actors, who should fulfil their
obligations and responsibilities under international
humanitarian and human rights law.

I wish to emphasize three points that we consider
vital in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

First, it is essential for the Security Council, as well
as regional and subregional organizations, to ensure
that greater efforts are directed towards preventing and
resolving conflicts, which necessitate the protection of
civilians.

Secondly, the role of national Governments, which
bear the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians, should be respected and supported in a
way that upholds the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, without undermining the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned. We
would not like to see situations where the noble goal of
protecting civilians is used as a pretext for interfering
in the internal affairs of Member States or for pursuing
other interests.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict should
be a collective effort to ensure strict observance of the
standards and principles of international humanitarian
law and human rights, especially with regard to
women and children. In that regard, we welcome the
incorporation of the protection of civilians in the
mandates ofUnited Nations peacekeeping missions, and
call for the effective implementation of that mandate,
particularly in situations where armed groups such as
the Lord's Resistance Army continue to commit grave
atrocities against civilians in the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Central African Republic.

Thirdly, in conclusion, the Security Council
and the international community should continue to
support efforts undertaken by national actors, as well
as regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, the Southern African Development
Community and the Economic Community of West
African States to settle conflicts on the continent
peacefully through negotiation, dialogue and mediation.
While we stress the need to end impunity and bring
perpetrators to justice, it is also important to promote
reconciliation for long-term stability.

