Mr. Feltman: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council following the comprehensive
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.

In two weeks, we will mark the beginning of the
eighth year of the Syrian conflict. There are no words
to express our frustration over the collective failure of
the international community to end this war, but that
frustration is nothing compared to the suffering and
destruction visited ceaselessly upon the Syrian people.
We are here again today because the brief respite
that the Council unanimously demanded only days
ago in resolution 2401 (2018) has not materialized, as
Mr. Lowcock just described. The air strikes, shelling
and ground offensives continue. There are even reports
of yet another chlorine gas attack. What we need is the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), and that is
not happening.

Nearly seven years since the peaceful protests in
Dar'a and the reaction that set in motion what would
eventually become all-out war, we are still grasping
for a political solution, which is the only way to end
the bloodletting. The Secretary-General has called
eastern Ghouta a hell on Earth. The United Nations will
continue to work with Syrians and the international
community to help bring about a durable political
solution. We will also continue to demand that all the
parties involved in the conflict respect international
humanitarian law - the rules of war - and protect
civilians. We will continue to demand the release of
those who have been arbitrarily detained and the end of
enforced disappearances. We will continue to forcefully
call for justice and accountability. Those responsible
for the catalogue of horrors that mark daily life in
Syria, including chemical and terrorist attacks, torture
and sexual violence, sieges and attacks on hospitals,
schools and other civilian infrastructure, must be held
accountable. Those outrages continue in large part
because the perpetrators have so far enjoyed impunity.

As the Secretary-General said earlier this week,
"Security Council resolutions are only meaningful
if they are effectively implemented". The United
Nations acknowledges Russia's announcement of a
daily five-hour pause for eastern Ghouta. In addition
to Mr. Lowcock's briefing and what the International
Committee of the Red Cross has stated, we respectfully
remind all parties that resolution 2401 (2018) demands
the sustained delivery of humanitarian aid for a
minimum of 30 consecutive days. The Secretariat
and relevant agencies are united and pulling in one
direction towards the immediate and continuous
cessation of hostilities that can be sustained beyond 30
days for unimpeded aid delivery. We also urgently need
to get humanitarian aid and services in and the sick and
critically wounded evacuated from besieged eastern
Ghouta and other locations. We are ready to deliver.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly reminded
parties of their absolute obligation under international
humanitarian law and human rights law to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Earlier this
month, Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock told
the Council (see S/PV.8186) in no uncertain terms that
that is an obligation, not a favour. He has just updated
us all on the humanitarian situation and provided an
update on the United Nations readiness to deliver aid
and services, and the tireless efforts of humanitarians
to reach all in need, wherever they are. But right now we
must address the particular needs of those in besieged
eastern Ghouta.

Resolution 2401 (2018) affirms that the cessation
of hostilities shall not apply to military operations
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Al Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front, and

"all other individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities associated with Al-Qaida or ISIL, and other
terrorist groups, as designated by the Security
Council". (resolution 240] (2018), para. 2).

In our view, that rightly maintains the parameters
set out in resolution 2254 (2015), but there must be
a frank assessment of what that means in relation to
the humanitarian tragedy that we are witnessing in
eastern Ghouta.

First, we condemn all violations of international law
by all parties, including shelling from eastern Ghouta,
which has injured or killed civilians in Damascus.
The scale of the Government's indiscriminate military
attacks against eastern Ghouta - an area with a
civilian population of 400,000 - cannot be justified
based on targeting Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters. Efforts to
combat terrorism do not supersede obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Secondly, the United Nations has not seen any
confirmation by the Government of Syria of its
commitment to implement resolution 2401 (2018),
although at the resolution's adoption Syria's Permanent
Representative to the United Nations said,

"As a State, we bear a responsibility towards our
citizens and we have a sovereign right to counter
terrorism" (S/PV8188, p. 12).

Thirdly, yesterday the Head of the Syrian
Negotiations Committee transmitted to the Secretary-
General a letter on behalf of the three major non-State
armed opposition groups - Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq
Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham - and civil groups in
eastern Ghouta regarding their full commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). Specifically,
they committed to ensuring the necessary environment
for United Nations humanitarian access as well as,

"to expel all elements of Hay'at Tahrir Al-Sham,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and Al-Qaida and all who belong
to these groups from eastern Ghouta".

Fourthly, the United Nations has no independent
verified reports that those three non-State armed
opposition groups in eastern Ghouta created a
coordination centre, as has been alleged regarding
Jabhat Al-Nusra, nor has the United Nations seen any
public announcement by those groups of such a centre.
Jaysh Al-Islam has denied that claim. What the United
Nations can verify is that non-State armed opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta, over the past 24 hours,
have expressed their readiness in writing to evacuate
Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters. Previous negotiations on
that issue among those groups and key members of
the International Syrian Support Group humanitarian
task force in Geneva and Damascus have not resulted
in success.

Alleviating the tragic situation in eastern Ghouta
has the Council's full attention. Yet we cannot forget
that resolution 2401 (2018) demands a cessation of
hostilities throughout Syria. Violence continues in
Afrin, Idlib and the eastern part of the country. Council
members have heard about the humanitarian challenges
and suffering of the people in those areas as well. I
would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that
developments in those areas will undoubtedly render
the situation in Syria even more complex. There will
be no sustainable solution if the Council's resolutions
are not implemented. That will require that the parties
step back from the brink and fulfil their obligations to
end the fighting in Syria. All our efforts will be in vain
if there is no serious investment in a political solution.

As Council members are aware, resolution 2401
(2018) calls on all Member States to use their influence
with the parties to ensure the implementation of the
cessation of hostilities. The United Nations calls for
a renewed commitment by all concerned Member
States to work seriously to implement the cessation of
hostilities. The United Nations also cautions against
drawing the Organization into monitoring exercises.
That has been tried in the past without success - not
for lack of trying - but in the absence of political will
among Member States to underpin United Nations
efforts. Member States, especially those working
within the Astana and Amman arrangements, should
use their resources and clear influence over the parties
to ensure the implementation of a sustained cessation of
hostilities throughout Syria.

The conflict in Syria continues to threaten regional
and international stability because the warring parties
believe there is a military solution. There is not. The
United Nations remains convinced that a political
solution is the only way forward. Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura is pressing forward on facilitating
the establishment of a constitutional committee in
Geneva, as part of the overall intra-Syrian political
process towards the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), for which the United Nations requires
the positive and constructive engagement of both
negotiating delegations. Special Envoy De Mistura will
need the full support of the Council and the international
community as a whole if the United Nations efforts
are to have a chance of reinvigorating a serious and
meaningful political process. I trust that he will have
that support.

