Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing.

This meeting provides another forum for us to
assess the progress made by the United Nations and its
organs in instilling within the international community
a culture of protecting civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation notes with great concern that
today's armed conflicts are characterized by the active
and deliberate targeting of civilians. Widespread
human rights abuses and the use of rape and other
crimes of sexual violence as brutal weapons of war,
particularly against women and children, are causing
the displacement of hundreds of thousands of civilians.
06-40877
We condemn in the strongest terms all acts of
violence and abuses committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict, in particular torture and
other prohibited treatment, gender-based and sexual
violence, violence against children, the recruitment and
use of child soldiers, trafficking in humans, forced
displacement and the intentional denial of
humanitarian assistance. We demand that all those
responsible put an end to such practices.

It is gratifying to see that the United Nations has
consistently spared no effort to end conflicts and build
sustainable peace. My delegation supports the United
Nations in its endeavours to dedicate greater attention
to protecting civilians in ongoing armed conflicts in
Africa and in other parts of the world.

Resolution 1674 (2006), adopted by the Security
Council in April 2006, was an important achievement
and was in line with the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. The resolution stresses the protection and
assistance needs of all affected civilian populations and
reaffirms the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the Outcome Document regarding the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

It is worth stressing here the fact that appropriate
measures to protect civilians threatened by armed
conflict should go beyond statements of intent or
expressions of concern. Meaningful and practical
protection should be based on appropriate and effective
action. In that context, we urge Member States and
international organizations, armed groups, the private
sector and other non-State actors to live up to their
responsibilities and continue to display the necessary
commitment to ensure decisive and rapid action to
move war-torn societies from vulnerability to security
and from war to peace.

We recognize that appropriate protection
measures depend on the circumstances and stages of a
particular conflict. At the same time, however, we must
insist that regardless of circumstances, Governments,
armed groups and the humanitarian community should
protect each and every civilian within their
jurisdiction, regardless of gender, ethnicity, religion or
political conviction.

In conclusion, we welcome the recommendations
of the Secretary-General contained in his report on
combating the illicit trade in small arms and those in
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping

Operations on combating acts of sexual abuse and
exploitation committed by peacekeepers, in tandem
with a zero-tolerance policy.

We call on all Member States and troop-
contributing countries to cooperate with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in effectively
implementing a zero-tolerance policy in all
peacekeeping missions.

