Mr. Levald (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and Norway.

Children bear the least responsibility for armed
conflicts, yet when conflicts arise, they suffer the most.
We therefore commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for her valuable work. Through her tireless efforts, she
lends a voice to children who otherwise would not be
heard.
The Nordic countries reiterate their unequivocal
endorsement of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2007/757) concerning
child rights and the role of child protection in future
peacekeeping missions. Each of the six categories of
grave violations set out in resolution 1612 (2005) must
be addressed with equal resolve. We must act to put an
end to all assaults on the human dignity of children.

Women and girls constitute the largest and most
vulnerable group of victims in armed conflicts.
Therefore, both those groups deserve our constant
attention. In line with the recommendations of the
report (S/2007/757) of the Secretary-General and of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we
ask that sexual and gender-based violence be included
on the list of Violations that trigger listing in the
annexes to the Secretary-General's reports.

We recognize the absolute importance of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the mechanisms set up in
its wake. We welcome the reports of the Special
Representative announcing the release of hundreds of
children from armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Chad. We also welcome the
reports of progress made in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
However, we remain deeply concerned at the high
number of Violations against children in the Sudan,
including their recruitment by armed forces and
groups, and rape and sexual Violence, especially in
Darfur.

Although promising progress has been made in
some areas, there often remains a gap between words
and deeds, between United Nations resolutions and
actions by affected Member States. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism provides the Security Council
with reliable information on grave violations of child
rights. With that knowledge comes responsibility. The
Security Council should therefore seriously consider
effective targeted measures against those who commit
grave violations against children. We call on the
Working Group to explore the full range of measures to
hold persistent perpetrators responsible, whether they
fall short of their own action plan objectives or choose
to ignore the mechanism altogether.

Increased efforts are needed in order to end
impunity for perpetrators of crimes against children.
We welcome the progress made by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in persecuting individuals
suspected of grave violations of the rights of the child.

Nevertheless, effective national courts are also needed.
Governments should benefit from the competence and
capacity of the United Nations monitoring and
reporting mechanism. We encourage the Security
Council to refer Violations against children in armed
conflict to the ICC for investigation and prosecution
when national Governments continuously fail to
address such crimes.

The body of international humanitarian and
human rights instruments leaves us with strong moral,
political and legal obligations that must lead to action
to provide a protective environment for the
development of children, enriching their childhoods,
expanding their opportunities and inspiring hope in our
common future. The recently concluded Convention on
Cluster Munitions, which will open for signature in
December of this year, and the ongoing negotiations
within the framework of the Convention on
Conventional Weapons will, hopefully, serve as
effective tools to that end.

The Nordic countries encourage the Security
Council to ensure that it pays equal attention to all
children affected by armed conflict. Procedural
arguments concerning whether or not a specific
situation is on its agenda should not undermine the
Security Council's ability to discuss the plight of all
children affected by armed conflict and, if necessary, to
act accordingly.

