Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): With your kind permission,
Mr. President, the Malaysian delegation would like to join
the Council and others in expressing our deep sorrow and
heartfelt condolences over the untimely death of Maitre
Alioune Blondin Beye and his colleagues, all of whom
had dedicated themselves to the cause of international
peace and security. Maitre Beye's death is a great loss not
only to his family and country, but also to the
international community.

 

Malaysia remains concerned over Israeli policies and
practices in the occupied Arab territories. Despite
international condemnation in the recent past, the Israeli
Government remains unrepentant. Its policy on the
expansion of settlements and the application of
administrative measures, including the classification of Arab
residents of Jerusalem as resident aliens or, in certain cases,
foreign immigrants, would complete the encirclement of
Arab-populated East Jerusalem, cutting it off from the rest
of the West Bank.

The latest decision by the Israeli Government on 21
June 1998 to expand the municipal borders of Jerusalem to
include the surrounding settlements and extensive areas in
the West Bank is another blatant act of provocation and a
gross violation of international law. The real goal here is
clear to all. The Israeli Government is taking another step
in its long-term strategy to strengthen irrevocably its hold
on Jerusalem, which it has illegally proclaimed as its united
and eternal capital.

My delegation cannot accept this unilateral Israeli
decision. We see this decision as illegal, invalid and in
contravention of international law. It is but another attempt
to reinforce previous Israeli efforts to effectively alter the
demographic character of the city of Jerusalem in favour of
the Jewish population, thereby predetermining the outcome
of the final status negotiations on Jerusalem between the
parties concerned.
According to General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which partitioned Palestine into a Jewish State and an Arab
State, the city of Jerusalem should remain as corpus
separatam until its final status is determined through
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis. The
occupation of East Jerusalem in June 1967 and the
subsequent annexation of the Old City and surrounding
areas by Israel have not been recognized internationally.
And let us not forget that, in addition to numerous General
Assembly resolutions, the Security Council itself has
adopted 16 resolutions regarding the city of Jerusalem and
has repeatedly declared that all measures and actions taken
by Israel which aim at changing the legal status,
demographic composition and character of the city are null
and void and without any legal validity whatsoever.
Malaysia wishes to reiterate that Jerusalem is of great
spiritual importance not only to the Jews, but also to the
entire Islamic community throughout the world, as it is to
Christians everywhere.

My delegation believes that this latest Israeli decision
deserves condemnation. This decision amounts to blatant

 

non- compliance with the terms of reference of the
Madrid Peace Conference and all relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 252 (1968). This decision is
also a clear violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 and the Hague Convention of 1907. We call on the
Israeli Government to immediately rescind the decision.
Israel should desist from taking any such unilateral
actions which clearly undermine the fragile and stalled
peace process. My delegation cannot accept illegal and
unilateral measures taken by the Israeli Government
which create tension and threaten to further erode the
prospects for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
between Palestine and Israel and throughout the Middle
East.

By continuously embarking on a provocative course,
the Israeli Government, through its unilateral actions, has
placed into serious question its own commitment to the
peace process. It appears to be intent on reverting to the
old ways of taking and keeping what belongs to others,
thus further eroding mutual confidence and trust among
the parties concerned while delaying the implementation
of the peace agreements. My delegation calls upon Israel
to join the Palestinians and others concerned to make
every effort to revive the peace process. Israel must
steadfastly stay the course. While it has the right to be
concerned about its security, Israel must also recognize
that others similarly have the right to be concerned over
their own security. Therefore, we call upon Israel to
eschew aggressive behaviour and instead adopt policies
designed to bring about long-term prosperity and security
both for itself and for its neighbours.

It is now time for Israel to realize that the threats it
perceives are a direct consequence of its own policies and
actions. Israel cannot flourish at the expense of its
neighbours by denying the rightful owners their legitimate
rights and lands and by depriving them of these. Security
certainly cannot be founded on gross injustice. Israel must
have the courage to look beyond the confines of the self-
centred and cloistered notion of security and so-called
military logic. It must be prepared to build effective
partnerships with the Palestinians as well as with all its
neighbours and at all levels.

My delegation believes that the Security Council, in
carrying out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should take immediate
steps to ensure the exercise of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to self-
determination, as well as to promote efforts to encourage

 

the immediate resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process. We also urge the co-sponsors of the peace process,
which have invested so much effort, to earnestly encourage
the Israeli Government to honour its obligations and
commitments to the peace agreements, and to continue with
those efforts. Malaysia is firmly convinced that security for
all countries in the Middle East can only be assured by the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
the region.

