Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil is deeply concerned
at the magnitude and gravity of developments in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in recent days. Through
press releases issued since the start of the Israeli
operation in Gaza, Brazil has made its views widely
known. We condemn the violence on all sides and
deplore Israel's disproportionate military response to
unlawful rocket attacks against its territory, which also
must cease. The new cycle of violence is inflicting
extraordinary pain and anguish on civilians. We call for
an immediate ceasefire and for the opening of border
crossings to the Gaza Strip to allow for the access of
humanitarian aid and to alleviate the unsustainable
humanitarian situation there.

The ceasefire is ever more needed in the light of
the spiralling death toll and the desperate plight of the
residents of Gaza, where impartial and respected
observers, including the United Nations, agree that a
humanitarian catastrophe is in the horizon. The loss of
innocent lives in Israel is also saddening and must be
stopped.

Furthermore, we add our voice to those of
Security Council members in their call for a negotiated
solution. Lasting peace can be achieved only through
the creation of an independent Palestinian State living
peacefully side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders and in full
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

Today, international public opinion expects
effective action from the United Nations and its
Member States. In such an endeavour, the Security
Council has a key - although not an exclusive - role
to play. We all share a collective interest in a respected
and active Council. Its legitimacy and effectiveness
would be diminished if it were to be perceived as
hesitant to fulfil its legal and political obligation to
maintain and restore international peace and security.

Recently, President Lula has reaffirmed our
willingness to cooperate more intensely with the
international community in order to defuse the current
crisis and truly advance the cause of peace. That would
be the main purpose of the expanded conference
recently proposed by President Lula himself. Such an
initiative could facilitate the work of the Council.

Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs Celso
Amorim will soon visit the region. He will discuss
possible ways to effectively address the current crisis
and to help Israelis and Palestinians achieve peace. We
are encouraged by the initiative of Presidents Mubarak
and Sarkozy, announced yesterday. We also welcome
the visit by the Secretary-General to the region. A
special session of the Human Rights Council, presently
under consideration, might also strengthen our
collective endeavours. In addition, improving
humanitarian assistance is imperative. At the request of
the Palestinian Authority, Brazil is sending 14 tons of
food and medicine to Gaza.

Such efforts, however do not exempt this organ
from carrying out its most urgently needed action,
which is to demand that all parties halt the violence
immediately. A ceasefire called for by the Security
Council must be fully implemented by all parties. After
so many decades, no one can have the slightest illusion
that there is a military solution to the conflict or that
lasting political gains can be achieved through the use
of force. Nor can violence be allowed to serve as a
political tool. An international mechanism to monitor a
sustained cessation of hostilities could be put in place.
Brazil would be willing to contribute to such a
mechanism if the parties found it useful.

Just as important, the Council must ensure that all
parties fully satisfy the humanitarian and economic
needs of the Gaza Strip. All sides - including, given
its relative strength, the State of Israel in particular -
must, in each and every case and at all times, fully
abide by international humanitarian law and respect
human rights.

We welcome yesterday's announcement that
Israel will soon open humanitarian corridors in Gaza.
That is a first step that must be immediately
complemented by other measures. Meanwhile, we
reiterate that targeting civilian populations - through
rocket firings; military action likely to cause harm to
innocent civilians, especially women and children; or
any other means - is unacceptable. The deaths of
civilians caused by Israeli military action in the
vicinity of United Nations schools in Gaza in recent
days are a tragic illustration of the intolerable perils of
the current situation.

Halting violence is also key to allowing the peace
process to be resumed in earnest and as promptly as
possible. Negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian National Authority and the needed internal
reconciliation among Palestinians cannot make
progress while Gaza burns and its residents, as well as
those of southern Israel, fear for their lives. Likewise,
the negotiating process does not stand a true chance if
all parties are not clearly and forcefully reminded that
the international community considers a just and
comprehensive settlement to be the only realistic and
acceptable way forward. Only the Security Council can
credibly convey that message.

Once calm is restored, the Council must assist the
peace process more decisively, without prejudice to the
valuable role of individual Member States, groups of
Member States or other organizations. At each
juncture, the Council must determine the most
appropriate way to best contribute to a peaceful
solution to the conflict. Now is the time to act,
including through the implementation of resolution
1850 (2008), by which this organ commits the
international community to a number of goals. Among
them are the irreversibility of negotiations; the
fulfilment of obligations under the Quartet Road Map,

as stated in the Annapolis Joint Understanding;
refraining from any steps that could undermine
confidence or prejudice the outcome of negotiations;
and the intensification of efforts aimed at the mutual
recognition and peaceful coexistence of all States in
the region. All those objectives have been thwarted by
recent events and their tragic repercussions. As several
delegations stated in the meeting held on 16 December
(see S/PV.6045), resolution 1850 (2008) put the
Council to a difficult test. It must succeed.

