Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to thank the presidency for convening this open
debate on the protection of journalists in armed
conflict and for submitting a concept note on the topic
(S/2013/393, annex). We are also grateful to Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing and to
the media representatives for their contribution to the
discussion.

Journalists play an indispensable role in informing
the public and the international community about events
in conflict areas. As the Secretary-General noted in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,

"Journalists play a crucial role by reporting on
the treatment and suffering endured by civilians
in situations of conflict and on violations of
humanitarian law and human rights" (5/2012/3 76, para. 14).

Indeed, the circumstances of armed conflict often
expose journalists exercising their profession to risks
that sometimes even exceed the level of danger normally
encountered by civilians. The need to guarantee the
safety of journalists has been repeatedly stated at the
international level, and a number of important steps
have been taken to ensure the protection of media
professionals and associated personnel in armed
conflict.

International law sets out clear provisions for
the protection ofjournalists. First of all, it should be
recalled that the right to the freedom of opinion and
of expression is a human right guaranteed to all,
including journalists, in accordance with the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the relevant
regional human rights instruments.

In addition, special rules of international
humanitarian law apply to journalists who are
imperiled by their professional duties in the context
of armed conflict. According to Additional Protocol I
to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, journalists engaged
in dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflicts shall be considered as civilians and as such
shall be respected and protected under international
humanitarian law. That norm was recalled in Security
Council resolution 1738 (2006) and the presidential
statement of 12 February (S/PRST/2013/2). It is also
widely recognized that the rule according to which
civilianjournalists engaged in professional missions in
areas of armed conflict must be respected and protected
as long as they are not taking a direct part in hostilities
constitutes a norm of customary international law
applicable in both international and non-international
armed conflicts.

Furthermore, a number of other important efforts
have been undertaken recently at the international level
to address the protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict. Among them is resolution 21/12 on the
safety ofjournalists, adopted in September 2012 by the
Human Rights Council, and the 2012 UNESCO report
containing the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.

At the same time, despite the development of
unequivocal international norms and standards and the
increased attention of the international community to
the protection of journalists, acts of violence against
journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts - in particular deliberate
attacks in violation of international humanitarian law,
as well as impunity for such violations - remain
widespread. We condemn all such attacks against
journalists and Violations of their rights.

The role of journalists as monitors of atrocious
crimes committed during armed conflicts has frequently
led to their being targets of intentional attacks by
parties to a conflict. Indeed, as is often said, the first
casualty of war is truth. We pay tribute to journalists
who, under dangerous circumstances, bravely perform
their duties to inform the broader public about threats
to international peace and security.

The increased brutality of armed conflicts and the
changing nature of warfare nowadays give rise to the
need for greater measures of protection for journalists
at the national and international levels. It is important
that the Security Council consistently maintain its
focus on the topic and systematically recall its demand
that all parties to armed conflict comply fully with
their obligations under international law related to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
journalists, and take all necessary measures to
prevent attacks against journalists and prosecute those
responsible for such attacks.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
the initiative of the United States in convening this open
debate. We are confident that our discussions today will
achieve their objective of demonstrating the Council's
support for providing journalists with the necessary
protection and of recalling that all perpetrators of
violence against journalists must be held accountable.

