The President: As this is the first public meeting of
the Security Council for the month of September 2014,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Sir Mark
Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for
his service as President of the Council for the month
of August. I know that I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Lyall Grant and his great team for the terrific diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the Council's business
last month.

I should also like to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Francois Delattre. We look forward to
collaborating closely with him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

Report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2014/339)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, New Zealand,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Yemen to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Yoka Brandt, Deputy Executive
Director of UNICEF; Mr. Forest Whitaker, Special
Envoy for Peace and Reconciliation of UNESCO; and
Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer ofthe League
of Arab States, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2014/339, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.


