The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam. I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We highly appreciate the tireless efforts of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to deliver assistance to Syrian people in need. We remain deeply concerned over the escalation of hostilities in north-west Syria during the past month. Continued reports of the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in that area, especially the impact on the civilian population, are of particular concern. We share the concern over the high number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and civilian casualties, especially among woman and children. We are troubled by the plight of some 2.7 million people in north-western Syria in urgent need of assistance, including food, shelter, water, health care and winterization assistance. For that very reason, 20 days ago we joined other Council members in voting in favour of resolution 2504 (2020) to renew the cross- border mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria. In order to address the situation, we would like to emphasize the following points. First, all parties to the conflict must fully respect international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law, and meet their obligations to protect the civilian population and objects. We call on all the parties to abide by the latestceasefire brokered by Russia and Turkey and to return to dialogue. Secondly, humanitarian assistance on the ground needs to be maintained where it is needed. Humanitarian aid must go to the right people. The Syrian Government has the primary responsibility in that regard, with the continuous joint support of Member States and international organizations. Thirdly, humanitarian work should also help create a favourable environment for the political process, reconciliation and reconstruction in Syria. At the same time, it must be carried out in full respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria. Fourthly, Viet Nam has consistently held the position that all disputes and conflicts must be settled by peaceful means, in accordance with international law, including the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. We therefore urge all concerned parties to constructively engage in dialogue and negotiations. In that regard, we deeply appreciate the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen. Viet Nam stands together with the United Nations and the international community in continuously supporting Syria's Constitutional Committee as it moves forward towards a comprehensive and lasting political solution for Syria. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
