Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on the promotion and strengthening of the
rule of law in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We are meeting at a time when significant
developments are unfolding in different parts of the
world, including the Middle East, and many issues
need to be addressed in a responsible manner within
the context of the rule of law.

The root causes behind many conflicts are
poverty, exclusion and marginalization, foreign
intervention and military excursion and occupation.
Unfortunately, in addressing the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has in many instances failed to take into account those
causes. The sobering reality is that the influence
exercised by some members of the Council that have
made the decisions of the Council has, if not
exacerbated conflicts, contributed to their
prolongation, with severe impacts on peace and
stability. That has also hindered the way for the
promotion of sustainable development and economic
prosperity. Taking into account the time restraint, I
would like to bring to the attention of the Council just
one example to which the rule of law should have
caused it to react promptly.

The example relates to the sad series of terrorist
incidents targeting Iranian nuclear scientists, the most
recent of which happened last Wednesday in Tehran. In
that incident, another prominent Iranian scientist,
Mostafa Ahmadi Roshan, Deputy Director of Iran's
Natanz nuclear facility, fell victim to a blind terrorist
attack. Previously, assassination attempts had also
targeted the prominent physicists Majid Shahriari and
Fereydoun Abbasi Davani, who currently heads Iran's
Atomic Energy Organization. Unfortunately, Majid
Shahriari was martyred in that attack. In the same
series of attacks, another prominent scientist, Professor
Massoud Ali Mohammadi, was martyred in front of his
house.

After such terrorist attacks, on behalf of my
Government, our mission immediately sent letters to
the Presidents of the Council and, through them, we
informed the members of the Security Council of those
attacks. The Secretariat distributed the letters as
documents of the Council (see S/2010/634 and S/2012/27). Through those letters, we brought to the
attention of the Council the fact that, on the basis of
some evidence, those operations were masterminded by
some foreign intelligence services, which we have
already explained in those letters.

Officials and politicians of the Israeli regime do
not deny the fact that such terrorist attacks have been
carried out as part of efforts to disrupt Iran's peaceful
nuclear programme. Those circles have spared no effort
in depriving the Islamic Republic of Iran of its
inalienable right to peaceful nuclear energy. They
called for covert operations, ranging from assassinating
Iranian nuclear scientists to launching a military strike
on Iran, as well as sabotaging Iran's nuclear
programme, to be conducted.

Here, I want to refer to Israeli officials, who have
recently stepped up their war rhetoric against Iran.
Rhetoric along the same lines is used by some
politicians in the United States. They should also note
the fact that United Nations bodies, including the
Council, suffer from several deficiencies, such as the
failure to keep the inspection of nuclear facilities
secret, which is required by established laws,
regulations and practices.

In this case, however, there is high suspicion that
those terrorist circles used intelligence obtained from
United Nations bodies, including the sanctions list of
the Security Council and interviews carried out with
our nuclear scientists by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), to identify and carry out their
malicious acts. The late Ahmadi Roshan had recently
met with IAEA inspectors - a fact that indicates that
that United Nations Agency may have played a role in
leaking information on Iran's nuclear facilities and
scientists.

While the Council promptly reacts to terrorist
incidents that happen around the world, it is odd to
note that the Council kept silent about the terrorist
attacks targeting Iranian scientists. Is that the way to
advance the rule of law at the international level?

Now, the question remains whether resorting to
all unlawful and coercive measures, even terrorist acts,
to prevent developing nations from exercising their
right to development, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy, is permissible within the internationally
recognized rule of law. It goes without saying that the
imposition of unilateral economic sanctions and
organizing terrorist attacks against scientists and
experts, particularly in the field of peaceful nuclear
technologies, pose a serious threat to peace and
security, as well as to sustainable development in
developing countries. The least expectation of this
body is that it should denounce such actions and take
the necessary steps to prevent their recurrence.

We hope that the international community will
take all measures necessary to uphold the rule of law,
fairness and justice on the basis of respect for the lives
of innocent scientists. Justice demands that the
perpetrators of those crimes be prosecuted and brought
to justice. That is extremely important for the credibility
of the Security Council. If we want our debate on the rule
of law to be meaningful and effective, we should have a
fair, balanced, non-selective and comprehensive
approach based on full respect for international law.

