Mr. McLay (New Zealand): The threat posed
by maritime piracy is as old as maritime commerce.
Indeed, it is as old as civilization. The earliest
histories from ancient Egypt, around 1300 BCE, talk
of the difficulties caused by stateless pirates. For
millennia, piracy has been a profitable - if illegal
and dangerous - occupation in settings beyond the
effective rule of law, jeopardizing trade and the lives of
legitimate seafarers. It also fuels crime on land, such as
slavery and the drug trade. Sadly, one of New Zealand's
most distinguished sons, the yachtsman Sir Peter Blake,
died at the hands of pirates.

In today's world, maritime piracy is a significant
challenge in places as far apart as the Gulfs of Aden and
Guinea, the Straits of Malacca and the South American
coast. The estimated cost to the shipping industry and
Governments is around $7 billion each year. Today's
debate is therefore a very timely opportunity to reflect
on what we have learned about effective ways to prevent
and combat the modern version of this ancient scourge,
and about the further action that is still required of the
international community.

In some parts of the world, efforts to tackle
international piracy are starting to bear fruit. We
welcome in particular the significant drop in reported
piracy off the coast of Somalia and elsewhere over the
past year. The International Maritime Bureau reported
219 cases of pirates trying to board vessels in 2010 and
236 in 2011, but this year just 71. Successful seizures
are down from 49 in 2010 to 28 in 2011 and only 13
this year. That results from robust international efforts
and shows what can be achieved with a comprehensive,
adequately resourced regional strategy involving all
affected parties within the region and beyond.

Let us be blunt. Those results also show that pirates
do not want to die in a firefight. They seek easy pickings
and will be deterred only by force, by the rule oflaw and
by building societies that give better opportunities than
those offered by crime. In that regard, we particularly
commend the efforts of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia.

New Zealand is a small, maritime trading nation.
For us, free and secure navigation is of fundamental
importance, and so we have been willing to play a
role in counter-piracy activities. Last year, off the
coast of Somalia, New Zealand contributed the Force
Commander and other staff officers to Combined Task
Force 151, and, more recently, provided key personnel
to assist Combined Task Force 150's counter-terrorism
and security efforts.

But even though we are definitely going in the right
direction, and recent gains notwithstanding, it is clear
that the task of ending piracy off Somalia is far from
complete and that sustained international effort is still
required to counter this international menace and assist
its victims. For example, despite the reduced incidence
of attacks, many captured crews are still being held for
ransom, including many, I believe, from your country,
Mr. President.

Moreover, we have yet to tackle seriously the
challenges outlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/783) on accountability for piracy, particularly
by establishing specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and neighbouring countries. The detention,
prosecution and imprisonment of pirates in the absence
of an effective nationaljudicial system all raise complex
legal and jurisdictional issues, although we should not
forget what we have already agreed under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
provides a very solid foundation on which to build.

We commend countries such as Kenya, Yemen,
India, Tanzania, Seychelles and others that have already
assumed heavy burdens on this, and those others that
have offered assistance. We echo Tanzania's call for
a sustainable solution to this legal dilemma, both for
Somalia and for future, similar situations.

Somalia's example contrasts starkly with that
of the Gulf of Guinea, where piracy incidents have
increased exponentially over the past year. So far,
piracy in that region has attracted less attention and
has been less disruptive to shipping than it has been
in the Gulf of Aden. Even so, we hope that the same
level of international solidarity and support shown to
Somalia and its neighbours can be extended to the Gulf
of Guinea before that situation worsens any further. We
must all stand ready to respond vigorously to piracy
wherever it occurs and whenever assistance is sought
by affected countries. There is no alternative. Piracy
thrives whenever the will and the means to prevent it
wavers.

The experience of Somalia also makes clear that
security solutions alone are not sufficient to solve this
multidimensional problem. Indeed, even 2,000 years
ago, when Pompey swept the Mediterranean clean of
pirates, it was recognized that the ultimate solution
lay in providing better alternative sources of income
and other forms of employment. Piracy cannot be
tackled effectively, much less prevented, without due
consideration of the factors that give birth to it and feed
it.

There is no doubt that, in Somalia, two decades
without a functioning State; two decades without any
effective rule of law; and more than two decades of
ruthless, often illegal exploitation of its resources by
external actors all helped lead former Somali fishermen
to lives of piracy. The international community has
much to learn from its long neglect of the Somali crisis,
and that same international community must know
that conditions conducive to piracy will remain until
peace, security and the rule of law have been restored
and Somalis are given the opportunity for genuine,
domestically based social and economic development.

New Zealand welcomes recent international
initiatives, such as the ongoing efforts of the African
Union, through the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), to support Somali partners in
re-establishing effective sovereignty in Somalia. We
call on the Council and on international partners to
effectively support those efforts, including by assisting
AMISOM. to more effectively control Somalia's coastal
waters and building the longer-term capacity of Somali
authorities to police those waters themselves.

The past decade has revealed both the grave threat
piracy continues to pose in today's globalized world
and how it can be countered through concerted regional
and international action. But there is still much more
that can and must be done to counter piracy wherever
it occurs and to address the conditions on which it
thrives. New Zealand stands ready to continue to play
its part in all of that.

