Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi for
his comprehensive briefing on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I commend him on his commitment and
leadership.

The renewed increase of the phenomenon of
terrorism throughout the world, the alleged or proven
use of chemical weapons in some regions and the
attempts to traffic in nuclear material in several
countries are among the many factors that attest to
the risk of non-State actors acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials. Nonetheless, fortunately, resolution 1540
(2004), which is the cornerstone of the non-proliferation
regime, allows us to mitigate those risks and prevent the
acquisition ofweapons ofmass destruction by non-State
actors, their delivery systems and related materials.
To that end, Chad welcomes the notable progress
made in implementing the resolution, as we see from
the report of the Chair of the 1540 Committee. Over
90 per cent of States have reported to the Committee,
which has finalized the revision of implementation
measures applicable to all 193 Member States.
Moreover, the Committee has approved the modalities
for the comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and and has developed and is
implementing a work plan focused on four issues.

Despite that significant progress, work remains
to be done in achieving the universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Chad therefore encourages
the Committee to reinforce its cooperation with
the relevant international organizations. Chad also
encourages the Committee to reach out to and to
include the parliamentarians, who are responsible
for drafting and adopting the legislation necessary
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We
welcome the convening of a conference of African
parliamentarians, which will be held in C6te d'Ivoire
next year. Similarly, Chad commends the outreach
efforts of the Committee to civil society, as well as the
holding ofa seminar bringing together representatives of
industry in Germany as part of the Wiesbaden process.
We also commend and encourage the initiative of the
Republic of Korea and India, who have announced that
they would organize similar activities in 2016.

The Committee must further highlight the role
of African regional and subregional organizations,
because a number of States that have not yet submitted
their first implementation report are located in Africa.
In that regard, more vigorous cooperation with the
African Union and with the continent's regional
economic communities could help to significantly
reinforce the momentum towards the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

As we are at the end of our term in the Council,
and since this is most likely our last meeting this year,
I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of my
entire delegation, to thank all Member States of the
Council and the Secretariat staff for their invaluable
support and their vast understanding, from which we
have benefited during the past two years of our term
on the Council. During that time, we were not able to
achieve everything that we would have liked. However,
in so far as were able, we exerted every effort to make
our modest contribution to the collective work of the
Council. So far as possible and alongside the other
African members of the Council, we endeavoured to
make Africa's as yet barely audible voice heard in this
organ.

We are happy to have had this experience for the
first time, and we will keep very fond memories of it.
We hope that, with the caring support of all the members
of the Council, the incoming African members will be
able to maintain and further strengthen the new dynamic
established by the representatives of our continent
within the Council. Africa, which hosts over 70 per cent
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, can and
must be involved in the search for solutions to the crises
that it is undergoing. In that regard, it is imperative that
the views of our continental organization, the African
Union, pertaining to peace and security be taken into
account if we really want to help Africa.

In conclusion, we commend the spirit of openness
and of mutual understanding that has often enabled
members of the Council to work on the basis of
consensus, and we hope that that momentum continues
to grow. I could not conclude without congratulating
the incoming members of the Council - Egypt, Japan,
Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay i on their election, or
without wishing them every success during their terms
of office. I would also like to commend the outgoing
members - Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria - for
their significant contributions to the work ofthe Council.
I wish them well in their future activities within other
United Nations bodies.

Lastly, Madam President, I would like to
congratulate you and all of your team for the leadership
and aplomb with which you have conducted the work
of the Council during the United States presidency
for December. On that note, I would like to wish to
everyone Merry Christmas and a happy New Year.

