Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I would like to thank the
President for convening this open meeting of the Council
to enable Ambassador Fowler, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),
to present the report of the Panel of Experts on violations
of Security Council sanctions against UNITA.

I acknowledge the presence of the two Ministers at
this important meeting.

I wish to express my delegation's appreciation for
Ambassador Fowler's forceful presentation of the report.
Chairman Fowler and the entire team of the Panel of
Experts deserve our commendation for their outstanding
work in trying to give meaning to the efforts of the
Council for a more effective implementation of the
sanctions regime. We are profoundly grateful to
Ambassador Fowler and commend him for the
seriousness, energy and resources he has brought to bear
on the work of the Committee. The result is an active and
robust Committee which is at the forefront of the
international campaign to cripple the war-making
capability of UNITA. The success of those efforts is
evidenced by the current military situation on the ground
in Angola - in which UNITA has suffered serious
setbacks, thus decisively turning the tide of this long,
debilitating war.

The report before the Council is as in-depth and
comprehensive as it is bold and candid. It has the courage
to name people, commercial companies and Governments
on the basis of investigations carried out by the Panel of
Experts. Naturally, all those named should have the right
to respond to the allegations and to clarify their own roles
in the alleged sanctions-busting activities. If those
clarifications are not plausible and cannot be borne out by
facts, the international community and the Council will
doubtless draw their own conclusions and take appropriate
actions.

We note that the Panel of Experts has investigated
UNITA's supply routes, which must now be effectively

 

blocked if we are serious in our objective to frustrate
UNITA's war efforts. UNITA spends hundreds of millions
of dollars for its fuel, munitions and weapons supplies,
which come in through various means - often on transport
planes with international and regional connections and
sometimes with pilots well known to agencies monitoring
African conflicts. They invariably go through neighbouring
African countries, frequently with the assistance of corrupt
officials who take their cut but whose Governments claim
ignorance of these illegal activities. Clearly, what is needed
is a new will and determination on the part of the
international community and this Council to enforce more
vigorously the sanctions regime, and the full and more
effective cooperation of the countries and the companies
concerned in stopping breaches of the sanctions. This would
include making those responsible accountable for their
transgressions under international law.

On the diamond industry front, we welcome the
decision of the Government of Angola to embark upon a
wholesale effort to revamp and restructure virtually all
aspects of the diamond- mining and diamond-trading
industry of the country. We also recognize the steps being
taken by Luanda to enhance enforcement of the sanctions,
including the introduction of new, standardized certificates
of origin which will be harder to forge and make it easier
to verify and keep track of diamonds. In these efforts, we
believe that the responsible Governments and industry
authorities should be invited to work with the sanctions
Committee to devise practical measures to limit and
ultimately halt UNITA's access to legitimate diamond
markets. Major diamond-trading centres named in the report
need to be consulted and fully engaged. At the same time,
we are also mindful of the concerns that international
solutions to the Angolan problem must not be allowed to
adversely affect the entire global diamond industry. We
must do nothing to harm the legitimate diamond industry.
Its cooperation is vital in finding ways to help us regulate
the trade so that it does maximum good and minimum
harm.

Although it is possible that UNITA has enough wealth
and resources to keep going for years, we are convinced
that the options for action contained in the report with
respect to this aspect of the sanctions regime are
implementable. Diamonds are UNITA's lifeline, which
must now be cut in order to dry up its main source of
income for waging the war. UNITA's assets must be
tracked down and confiscated and its bank accounts frozen.
The international banking community must fully cooperate
with the Council in this regard. Appropriate Council action
should be taken in respect of those individuals, companies
and Governments that have been named in the report and
cannot plausibly or convincingly explain their alleged
roles.

The report also makes clear that the weapons made
available to UNITA were of foreign origin. The illegal
supply of weapons to Angola and other parts of Africa is
simply too numerous to ignore. The idea of bringing
together these foreign suppliers of arms with a view to
formulating concrete proposals on how best to stem the
illicit flow of arms would be a constructive and,
hopefully, an effective process in addressing this aspect
of the problem.

On another aspect of the report, we share its
assertion that there is a clear link between all crises in
Africa. Angola was led to intervene in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo because UNITA sought to operate
from that country. Paragraph 50 of the report indicates the
substantial presence of UNITA troops and advisers
fighting in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the deployment of UNITA troops in the north-
eastern sector of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
These undeniable linkages clearly underline the need for
the Council to deal with all the crises in the region in a
comprehensive manner.

We must now put to good use the vital store of
information in our possession pertaining to the breaches
of sanctions against UNITA. The Council should now
look carefully at how it can target individuals who profit
in the prolongation of the war. We should also examine
closely the legal options open to us. All of this would
require the continuing strong support and cooperation of
Governments both within and outside the region. The
Council obviously cannot act alone, even with such an
effective and indefatigable Chairman of the sanctions
Committee as Ambassador Fowler. Member States and
international agencies must collaborate effectively with
the Council to achieve this.

All who yearn for peace in Africa must work
together to usher in this peace. The report calls for
countries of the Southern African Development
Community to play a major role to enforce sanctions
against UNITA. This is their major contribution to help
find an African solution to this African problem. With
UNITA weakened by the Angolan Armed Forces military
successes and increasing surveillance of its supply
channels, we should not miss this opportunity to act
decisively now, lest we be accused of timidity and lack of
resolve, or worse still, hypocrisy. Let us work together to

 

end the plague of destruction, pain and death forced on
Angola and its long-suffering people.

My delegation is naturally concerned at the continuing
acts of sanctions breaking vis-a-vis UNITA, which
constitute a very serious challenge to the Council's
collective authority. My delegation therefore urges Member
States to respect fully the existing Council resolutions on
sanctions against UNITA. The report has put forward a set
of 39 bold and far-reaching recommendations for the
consideration of the Council. We believe many of these
proposals are concrete measures which should be seriously
considered in order to ensure that the sanctions regime will
be more effectively observed. We agree with Chairman
Fowler that the Council should be more actively engaged in
the effort to improve the implementation and enforcement
of the sanctions against UNITA and to curb existing
violations. My delegation is aware that there is a very real
risk that when the spotlight is turned off, UNITA and its
partners will go back to doing business as usual. This
should not be allowed to happen. The Council should
vigorously work to put more teeth in the implementation of
the sanctions regime, for with UNITA there can be no
business as usual. My delegation looks forward to
participating actively and constructively in a further, in-
depth consideration of the report by the Council.

Finally, my delegation once again condemns most
strongly the downing of the two United Nations aircraft in
UNITA-held territory in Huambo in December 1998 and
January 1999. The involvement of UNITA in the shooting
down of the two aircraft and the "specific orders" given to
UNITA soldiers by Savimbi to shoot down any and all
United Nations aircraft reflect the criminal character of this
rebel group and its rogue leader. Such actions cannot be
tolerated or the perpetrators allowed to go with impunity.

