Mr. Prendergast: Since the Secretariat's last
briefing to the Security Council, the situation in the
Middle East has remained tense. On the ground, the
conflict continues to claim lives, economic conditions
worsen, hope for a better future is low, suffering
continues - all of which contribute to a climate of
despair and extremism.

Bad as it is, the situation could get still worse. At
the same time, peace and reconciliation are not beyond
reach. The basis, parameters and contours of peace are
known to all. The international community stands
ready to assist the parties if they themselves show the
necessary will. What remains elusive is the readiness
of the parties themselves to take the difficult but
necessary decisions.

Since the last monthly briefing, 39 Palestinians
and 2 Israelis have been killed and 309 Palestinians
and 32 Israelis wounded. That brings the total number
of casualties since the start of the current crisis in
September 2000 to 3,437 Palestinians and 942 Israelis
killed, with 33,776 Palestinians and 6,008 Israelis
wounded.

The last briefing by the Secretariat took place on
21 May, amid grave concerns over the Israeli incursion
into Rafah in the Gaza Strip, which lasted until 24
May. It was only after the briefing that a full picture
emerged of the impact that Operation Rainbow had had
on the ground.

According to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), 167 buildings, housing 379 families or
2,066 people, were destroyed or damaged beyond
repair by Israeli forces in what was one of the most
destructive operations in the Gaza Strip since
September 2000. Since that date, a total of 1,476
structures have been destroyed in Rafah town and
refugee camp, affecting almost 15,000 people. In the
course of Operation Rainbow, 53 Palestinians were
killed. The operation uncovered three tunnels used to
smuggle weapons. On 2 and 3 June, Israeli forces, with
tanks and bulldozers, again entered Rafah town and
camp, demolishing 11 more buildings, 4 of them
partially.

During the reporting period, closures continued
throughout the West Bank. The Israel Defence Forces
(IDF) conducted a number of search-and-arrest
operations following security warnings. Curfews were
imposed repeatedly in most West Bank Palestinian
towns and villages. Bethlehem was declared a closed
military zone for almost a week.

Extrajudicial killings also continued through the
reporting period. On 23 May, three Palestinians were
killed and four were injured when an Israeli helicopter
fired a missile at a Palestinian car in Nablus. On 30
May, an Israeli helicopter fired two missiles at a
motorcycle in the Zeitoun suburb of Gaza City, killing
a senior Hamas leader, his assistant and a third
Palestinian, as well as wounding 10 bystanders.

I wish to repeat the Secretary-General's call on
the Government of Israel to cease the illegal practice of
extrajudicial killings. In light of the toll of Palestinian
deaths and injuries and large-scale property destruction
resulting from Israeli military operations, it is also
necessary to remind the Israeli authorities of their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law,
as the occupying Power, to protect Palestinian civilians
and their property.

Palestinian Violence has continued as well. On 22
May, a Palestinian suicide bomber killed himself and
injured one IDF soldier, as well as four Palestinians, at
the Hamra checkpoint in the West Bank. On 28 May, an
IDF officer was killed in the Balata refugee camp
during an Israeli operation there. On 29 May, a
Palestinian stabbed and injured an Israeli civilian in the
Old City of Jerusalem. During the period, 10 mortars
were fired on Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip.

Also during the reporting period, there has been a
disturbing increase in attacks against and harassment of
United Nations staff and property. In the Jenin refugee
camp, during an IDF incursion early on the morning of
20 May, the head of UNRWA's Jenin Camp
Reconstruction Project was bound, blindfolded and
interrogated by Israeli soldiers for three hours. There
have also been troubling incidents of violence near
United Nations-run schools. In one incident on 23 May,
IDF troops fired at stone-throwers and entered an
UNRWA school in the Fawwar camp in the West Bank;
four pupils were injured. On 2 June, two 10-year-old
Palestinian pupils were injured in their classroom in an
UNRWA school in Rafah when they were hit by a
bullet. The same day, IDF troops opened fire near a
second UNRWA school in the area, causing panic
among the students. UNRWA has lodged official
protests with the Israeli authorities concerning those
incidents.

On 9 June, also in Jenin, armed Palestinians
entered UNRWA's offices and opened fire. Luckily
there were no injuries. The armed men were camp
residents dissatisfied with the donor-funded project to
reconstruct demolished homes. UNRWA has protested
to the Palestinian Authority over the threats to its staff.
This disturbing incident highlights the obligation of the
Authority to implement security reform.

Construction of the Israeli barrier continued at a
rapid pace in and around Jerusalem. On 8 June, IDF
troops bulldozed a car park belonging to Al-Quds
University in Abu Dis. On 13 June, the IDF began
preparations for the construction of the barrier to the
east of the settlement of Ariel. Repeated protests
against the far-reaching consequences of such an
intrusion deep inside the West Bank have gone
unheeded. Confiscation of Palestinian land for the
construction of the Israeli barrier and for other
purposes has also continued.

During the reporting period, increasing numbers
of Palestinians and international peace activists
demonstrated against the construction of the barrier,
and in some instances, Israeli troops fired tear gas and
plastic-coated bullets at the demonstrators, injuring
dozens. In Zawiya, in the northern West Bank, clashes
have been going on intermittently since 9 June, in the
context of Israeli land-levelling operations there.

I am pleased to report the success of the
intergovernmental conference in Geneva on the subject
of "Meeting the Humanitarian Needs of the Palestine
Refugees in the Near East: Building Partnerships in
Support of UNRW ", hosted by the Government of
Switzerland. The Geneva conference reaffirmed the
central role of UNRWA in meeting the humanitarian
needs of Palestine refugees until a final political
settlement is reached. It recognized the need for donor
support to be enhanced, and it endorsed an ambitious
five-year plan that would enable UNRWA to transfer
assets, not liabilities, when the Agency is eventually
called upon to hand over its responsibilities to other
actors. With effective follow-up, the conference should
help place UNRWA on a stronger political and
financial footing.

Let me take this opportunity to state very plainly
that reliance on the use of force and violence
strengthens extremism on both sides and makes it more
difficult to return to the negotiating table so as to
achieve the compromises necessary for peace.

Allow me also to repeat that the Quartet's road
map, despite failure to move ahead with its
implementation, remains the only solution that can
truly achieve the national aspirations of both
Palestinians and Israelis. The road map sets out
specific practical measures leading to an end of the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory and to the
emergence of a viable independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, while ensuring that Israelis will live
in peace and security.

True, implementation of the road map has stalled.
Indeed, it never truly started. But the plan remains a
solid map that includes both the road and the
destination. It has been stalled so far, but with the
international backing it enjoys it can easily be revived
if both sides take the political decision to do so. We
have repeatedly called on both parties to take the steps
needed to make its implementation possible. As you
know, our calls for bold and courageous action have
gone unheeded. The stalemate continues.

The proposed Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip and parts of the West Bank could help to break
the stalemate. On 7 June, the Israeli Government
adopted a plan related to this initiative. Under their
plan, disengagement would proceed in four stages and
would involve the evacuation of all settlements and
military installations in the Gaza Strip as well as the
dismantling of four settlements in the northern West
Bank, by the end of 2005. First, the isolated Gaza
settlements of Morag, Netzarim, and Kfar Darom
would be evacuated and next the West Bank
settlements of Kadim, Ganim, Sanur and Homesh.
Then the remaining Gush Katif settlements would be
evacuated, and finally, the northern Gaza settlements of
Nissanit, Elei Sinai and Dugit would be dismantled.
Another vote by the Israeli cabinet will be necessary
before the actual implementation of the plan begins.

Palestinian Prime Minister Abu Allah has stated
that the Palestinian Authority welcomes the
disengagement plan so long as it is implemented as a
part of the road map.

However, if the withdrawal from Gaza and parts
of the West Bank is to become a new beginning in the
peace process, both sides, Israeli and Palestinian, will
have to play a part. Although the initiative is unilateral,
its successful application requires cooperation between
all parties.

The position of the Quartet and the international
community is known to the Council. To state it briefly,
there must be a full and complete Israeli withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip and a transfer of authority and
control to the Palestinians if withdrawal is to be
recognized as an end of the Israeli occupation of the
Gaza Strip. To be a part of the implementation of the
road map, the withdrawal also has to be accompanied
by similar steps in the West Bank. These actions would
not be a substitute for Israel's compliance with other
obligations under the road map, such as the
dismantlement of all settlement outposts erected since
March 2001 and a move towards a full freeze of
settlement activities, nor would they exempt Israel
from compliance with its obligations as an occupying
Power in accordance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

The Palestinian Authority, too, has a major role to
play in the success of the withdrawal, and this role is
contingent on the Palestinian leadership also fulfilling
its obligations under the road map. The Palestinian
Authority must establish security control in the vacated
areas. It must work to make the withdrawal from Gaza
an opportunity and a source of optimism for the
Palestinian people.

Revitalizing, reorganizing and reforming the
Palestinian Authority is not only a Quartet request; it is
demanded by the Palestinian people, as expressed by
their elected representatives and civil society activists.
Those in the international community actively involved
in the search for peace should call on President Arafat
to act decisively to restore the Authority's credibility.

Among the most urgent tasks, both for the Gaza
withdrawal and more generally, is the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions and promotion of the rule of
law. This includes the genuine empowerment of Prime
Minister Qurei and his cabinet, and the unification of
the Palestinian security forces into three components
under the authority of an empowered interior minister.
We continue to await the implementation of these
measures.

The involvement of the international community
will be crucial to an effective handover in the Gaza
Strip. Significant donor support could make the
difference between hope and despair among
Palestinians in Gaza. Close international involvement
in both the political and the security aspects could also
make the difference between success and failure.
Quartet envoys have been meeting in the region to
discuss ways of making withdrawal a success. Security
Council guidance and supervision could help the
parties to carry out clearly defined tasks. International
involvement, however, cannot substitute for the parties
effectively working to fulfil their obligations.

Egypt and Jordan can assist this process. Both
countries have so far displayed a welcome and
commendable leadership. The Egyptian initiative in
providing training to Palestinian Authority security
forces could greatly improve the chances of the
withdrawal being a success. Jordan's Interior Minister
has stated that Jordan is ready to offer support to the
Palestinian security services in the West Bank in a way
similar to that proposed by the Egyptian Government
for Gaza. We look forward to continued discussions
between the Palestinian Authority and the
Governments of Egypt and Jordan on security plans.

The Quartet envoys are meeting in Taba
tomorrow to discuss the action plan related to the
proposed withdrawals. Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, is in close
contact with the Government of Egypt regarding its
initiative.

I turn now to the situation in southern Lebanon. A
number of serious breaches occurred in the past month,
which could further destabilize the situation in the area.
As mentioned in our last briefing, and indeed several
times before, the parties have explicitly stated that they
do not wish to see deterioration along the Blue Line.
Recent events, however, indicate that further efforts are
required from the parties to halt violations that are
leading towards that outcome.

The violations of 7 June are revealing in that
respect. In the early morning of that day, three rockets
were fired by an unidentified group from the Lebanese
side towards Israel, close to United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) headquarters in Naqoura.
One landed near an Israeli patrol boat, and two others
landed in Lebanese territory, in Naqoura. Shortly
thereafter, Israeli jets violated Lebanese airspace. Later
that evening, a serious violation of Lebanese
sovereignty took place when Israeli jets bombed a site
in Naameh, just south of Beirut. Israel stated that the
bombing of that site, a reported position of the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General
Command, was in response to the launching of rockets
from Lebanese territory earlier that day.

Despite calls by the Secretary-General's Personal
Representative for Southern Lebanon on both sides to
exercise restraint, the deterioration continued. The
following day, Hizbullah launched an attack on IDF
positions in the Sheba'a Farms area, wounding one
Israeli soldier. Hizbullah claimed that that attack was a
direct response to the Israeli air attack the day before.
Israel in turn responded with heavy artillery fire, and
an exchange of fire between Hizbullah and the IDF
ensued for some two hours.

While, fortunately, no fatalities were reported as a
result of any of those actions, their escalatory nature is
obvious, and they show how isolated events risk
creating a chain reaction leading the parties straight
into conflict. It is very much in the interest of stability
in the region that all parties abstain from action that
could lead them down that dangerous and uncertain
road.

Israeli air violations of the Blue Line have also
continued. On 11 June, 11 such Violations were
recorded, involving a total of 33 aircraft. On that
occasion, there was no retaliatory anti-aircraft fire.
However, on 20 June, Hizbullah fired anti-aircraft
rounds into Israel, damaging property. The Israeli air
force then dropped two bombs on a suspected
Hizbullah position. Once again, we call on the Israeli
Government to cease such air violations, and we
caution the Lebanese Government against permitting
firing across the Blue Line.

The situation between Israel and Syria has not
changed since the last monthly briefing. It is
unfortunate that no progress has been made on this
track. The resumption of negotiations between Israel
and Syria could greatly improve the political and
security environment in the region and contribute to
bringing hope back to its peoples. That goal - modest,
attainable and in the interest of both parties - remains
elusive. We reiterate our calls on Israel and Syria to
resume talks aimed at achieving comprehensive peace
in the region, based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In conclusion, the events of the past month have
demonstrated yet again how desperately the people of
the Middle East need a political solution to their long
conflict. Israeli military operations in the occupied
Palestinian territory cannot provide the real security
that would come only from a negotiated settlement. At
the same time, the Palestinian Authority must act on its
obligations under the road map provisions. Force will
achieve neither a viable and independent Palestinian
State nor a secure and recognized Israel.

There will be no peace unless all of us - the
parties, the region and the wider international
community - are ready to play our parts. The rocky
road to peace will continue to be fraught with
difficulties and a constant danger of breakdowns and
setbacks. Those who are waiting for guarantees in
order to start moving forward will have to wait for a
long time. To choose peace is to choose the difficult
road, the road less travelled. But the alternative is a
continued long, slow, inevitable descent into a
landscape full of violence, hatred and bloodshed.

