Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): In the five
years since the beginning of the conflict in Syria and
its consequences, caused in part by the involvement of
outside parties, the country has suffered immeasurably
and the international community has been unable
to end the carnage, which cannot be achieved until
reconciliation takes place. The parties are not interested
in Syria itself, which has become fertile soil for terrorist
groups and foreign terrorist fighters coming from
various countries around the world, thereby making it
fertile soil for chaos and sectarianism.

We have seen the Secretary-General's recent report
on the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2016/63l).
Despite the relative progress that has been achieved
towards ensuring the access of humanitarian aid since
the beginning of the work of the International Syria
Support Group, so far we have only seen the military
zones and targets increase and the number of external
players involved, including those taking part in military
activities, expand. Unfortunately, innocent victims
are still dying in Syria. Furthermore, some people are
using the unprecedented humanitarian crisis to achieve
their own political goals.

For its part, Egypt has made efforts and concentrated
on the process of ensuring humanitarian access, and we
have achieved some progress in that regard.

We have sent a complete convoy to a number of
towns, including Damascus, Dara', Qunaytirah and
Suwayda', and we will persist in our efforts. We call
upon the members of the Security Council and the
international community to focus on providing whatever
support it can to the Syrian people on the ground
without politicizing or trading on the humanitarian
crisis in Syria.

Only a political solution will effectively put an end
to the suffering of the Syrian people. We are all aware
that the only formula for such a solution is the one
agreed by the international community, as set out in
various resolutions, including resolutions 2254 (2015)
and 2268 (2016) on the cessation of hostilities in Syria.
In that regard, I recall that this solution represents our
final opportunity to put an end to the Syrian conflict. In
a constantly evolving international political situation,
there is little time left, and what is possible today might
turn into a missed opportunity tomorrow.

Allow me to reiterate that the current international
consensus is based on a number of pillars. First, a
cessation of hostilities in Syria is a prerequisite for
establishing a complete ceasefire in the country.
Secondly, a political transition must be attained
through negotiations between the Syrian Government
and the broadest possible spectrum of opposition
groups, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (8/2012/523, annex). Thirdly, we
must work to improve the humanitarian situation and
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need of
it in Syria, including in the besieged areas. Fourthly,
we must combat the terrorism and extremism that run
rampant in Syria. In the coming period, implementing
those pillars will depend primarily on the international
community's determination to put an end to the crisis
and to comply with those agreements. It will also
depend on the International Syrian Support Group's
efforts to ensure that those measures are implemented.

In that context, I reiterate Egypt's support for the
cooperation and coordination between the Russian
Federation and the United States as co-chairs of the
International Syria Support Group. We welcome their
tireless efforts at the political level and in terms of
ensuring humanitarian access in Syria. I once again
call on them to promptly agree on how to address the
situation on the ground, including by strengthening
the implementation of the cessation of hostilities and
preventing terrorist organizations and those groups
affiliated with them from sabotaging it. Furthermore,
they should push for the launch of direct negotiations
between the Syrian parties as soon as possible, under
the auspices of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.

Despite the fact that the terrorist groups are
clearly not parties to the ceasefire in Syria, we note
that there has been an incomprehensible hesitation and
politicization in dealing with those groups. That has led
some armed groups to collaborate openly with terrorist
organizations, particularly the Al-Nusra Front - the
Syrian branch of Al-Qaida. We believe that such a
brazen challenge to the international community can no
longer be tolerated. In that connection, we call on the
international community to set a timetable for including
those groups on the list of terrorist organizations should
they continue to cooperate with the Al-Nusra Front.
Continuing to show complacency and turn a blind
eye will only serve to encourage terrorism. Terrorist
fighters who belong to so-called moderate groups have
begun to emulate the beastly and sick acts perpetrated
by Da'esh. They recently filmed the beheading of a
child and posted the footage on social media.

In closing, allow me to call on and plead with all
domestic, regional and international parties in Syria, on
behalf of the Egyptian and Arab peoples, to have mercy
and spare the Syrian people from the consequences of
their score-settling and narrow political interests, and
to be willing to compromise, if only partly, on those
interests in order to show mercy and compassion to
the innocent mothers and children of Syria who have
committed no political sins.

