Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, Mr. President, we would like to
associate ourselves with the words of gratitude to you for
having organized our discussion of the report of the
Independent Inquiry into the actions of the United Nations
during the time of the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.

The Russian delegation has carefully studied the
report, which reminds us of that terrible period when
800,000 entirely innocent people in Rwanda fell victim to
an ethnic conflict that was rightly described by the
international community as genocide. We are grateful to the
authors of the report for their painstaking analysis of what
could have been done by the international community to
prevent that horrendous crime and of what, for a variety of
reasons, was not done. Unfortunately, history does not
know the conditional tense, and the clock cannot be turned
back. Those who fell victim to genocide in Rwanda in 1994
cannot be resurrected from the dead, but we agree with the
view that lessons must be drawn from the past to see to it
that what happened in 1994 in Rwanda never happens
again.

The Russian delegation believes that in preparing new
peacekeeping operations, very careful account should be
taken by the Security Council of the results of the analysis
of actions by the United Nations in Rwanda during the time
of the 1994 genocide. Unfortunately, the world is not
perfect, and even the capacity of an authoritative body such
as the Security Council of the United Nations is not
unlimited, to say nothing of the capacity of individual
countries represented on the Council. Nevertheless, Russia
attaches great importance to a careful analysis of provisions
for protecting civilians in areas where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are being conducted. We must
attempt, on the one hand, to ensure that peacekeepers
provide maximum protection for innocent civilians and, on
the other hand, to avoid creating illusions that are not
backed up by the real capacities of United Nations
personnel.

In the broader context, we again take note of the
desirability of developing norms of international law,
adapting them to new realities in order to produce a proper
international legal interpretation of humanitarian crises and
making it possible to respond to them properly. That was
precisely the thrust of the President of Russia's proposal
that consideration be given to the legal aspects of the use
of force in international relations in our globalizing world.

Concerning the current situation in Rwanda and in
the Great Lakes region as a whole, of course we share the
conclusions of the report regarding the need for the
international community to assist the Rwandans in dealing
with the effects of the genocide and in punishing the
perpetrators. At the same time, we believe that the
spinning wheel of violence, one rotation of which was the
genocide in Rwanda, must be finally stopped. In other
words, we call upon all forces involved in the conflicts in
the Great Lakes region to lay down their arms and
intensify the search for a political settlement to these
conflicts, which could ultimately lead to a comprehensive
settlement of the situation in the region within the context
of an international conference on the Great Lakes region.

