Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
delegation of China welcomes the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, and thanks him for his
briefing. We thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita,
Ambassador Mohammed and Managing Director
Vervaeke for their briefings. We also listened attentively
to Ms. Diallo's statement.

At present, the Sahel region is grappling with
multiple challenges, including a fragile security
environment, the spread of terrorism and rising
transnational organized crime, which need to be
addressed in a holistic manner. The international
community should continue to provide support to the
countries of the region, and especially to the efforts
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to
independently tackle regional security challenges.
We need to increase support for the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel, which is facing a deteriorating regional
security environment and gaps in operational capacity,
equipment, training and funding. As an important
mechanism for countries of the region to take the
initiative in responding to security challenges, the
Joint Force is making a critical contribution to peace
and security in Africa and beyond. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali should continue to provide support to the
Joint Force in keeping with relevant agreements. The
international community should continue to provide
support and assistance.

We need to push forward the political settlement
of regional hotspot issues. The security and stability of
the Sahel require an earnest effort to advance the peace
process in the countries concerned. The international
community should, on the basis of respect for their
sovereignty, actively support countries of the region
in advancing peace processes and promoting national
reconciliation so as to achieve the gradual de-escalation
and definitive settlement of relevant hotspot issues.
The Malian parties should be given continuous support
to carry out an inclusive dialogue and consultation
and accelerate the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Paying greater
attention to the settlement of external issues, such as
the crisis in Libya, can help reduce their impact on
the Sahel.

We need to give full play to the role of regional
mechanisms. China has consistently championed the
efforts of African countries to resolve African problems
in African ways and has supported African regional
and subregional organizations, such as the G-5 Sahel,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, in playing a lead role in dealing
with Sahel issues. The international community
should help the permanent secretariat of the G-5
Sahel to build capacity and strengthen communication
and coordination with countries of the region and
relevant regional and subregional organizations so that
national and regional strategies and the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel can work together as
an organic whole to create synergy, with each part fully
leveraging its respective advantages.

We need to address both the symptoms and the
root causes of the conflicts. The Sahel region is
plagued by poverty, unemployment, environmental
degradation and other problems. The international
community should help countries of the region meet
development challenges, assist the Secretary-General
in implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its Support Plan, and support the
Priority Investment Programme developed by Sahel
countries in line with the actual needs of the countries
of the region and their peoples. It should help the region
achieve sustainable development and deliver a peace
dividend in order to attain sustainable peace.

China has always supported the efforts of African
countries, including those of the Sahel, in the pursuit
of peace and development. We support the actions
of the G-5 Sahel to assume ownership of security
responsibilities and meet regional security challenges.
China supports the United Nations in providing the
Joint Force with necessary financial support. Together
with the rest of the international community, China
stands ready to continue to contribute to the stability
and prosperity of the Sahel and the African continent
as a whole.

