Mr. Zenenga: When Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keating addressed the Council two
months ago (see (S/PV.79()5), Somalia's new Cabinet
had just been announced and the Secretary-General had
just visited the country at a time that he aptly described
as a moment of both tragedy and hope.

The tragedy, emanating from the severe drought,
continues to unfold. The humanitarian crisis has
deteriorated more rapidly than was originally projected.
Assessments conducted in April indicate critical levels
of acute malnutrition among pastoral and agricultural
populations, and also among internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Baidoa and Mogadishu. The expected
relief from the Gu rains has not materialized. The
rains arrived late and a substantial loss of livestock
has already occurred. Food security is also expected
to further decline. The crisis is unlikely to abate any
time soon. Mortality and protection risks, especially
for women and children, continue to rise as drought
conditions force nomads to migrate from rural areas to
towns. Sexual violence in the IDP camps is on the rise.

The scaled-up response of the humanitarian
agencies has averted a famine thus far, but the crisis
is unlikely to abate any time soon. The needs for
humanitarian assistance are increasing faster than
the pace of the response. So far, only half of the
3 million people in need of food have been reached.
A total of $669 million has been received or pledged
for the ongoing humanitarian effort, leaving a gap of
$831 million in the revised 2017 humanitarian response
plan. Donor contributions and commitments therefore
need to be further scaled up.

In parallel, steps must be taken to build Somalia's
capacity to withstand recurrent humanitarian crises
triggered by extreme climatic conditions. Somalia will
continue to lurch from one avoidable humanitarian crisis
to another unless resilience is fostered by addressing the
country's structural problems. Investment in capacity-
building for relevant State institutions and development-
oriented approaches should be prioritized to enable the
country to better cope with future humanitarian crises.
Improving security, generating revenues and fighting
corruption will also increase resilience.

Somalia now has a unique opportunity to overcome
its current fragility and build a functional State in the
coming four years. To realize this vision, the country
needs to make progress on the following priorities.

The first is building security and police forces that
are capable of protecting its population and that can start
taking over responsibility for security from the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The second is
promoting economic recovery so that it can generate
revenues, create jobs, start delivering basic social
services and reduce the country's overdependence on
donors. The third is instituting appropriate measures
for effective management of public funds, coupled with
rooting out corruption - which is as great a threat to
stability as the prevailing insecurity - and accelerating
progress in clearing arrears in order to secure financing

from international financial institutions through the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative process.
The fourth is completing the review of the Constitution
and strengthening federalism. The fifth and last is
fostering reconciliation and resolving the many long-
standing local conflicts in the country. The universal
elections to be held in 2020 will be a defining litmus
test of the progress that has been made towards building
a properly functioning State.

In the past two months, the Federal Government
and federal member state leaders have taken important
first steps that have reinforced the prevailing hope that
these key peace- and State-building priorities can be
accomplished during the new Government's current
term. They have demonstrated the will to secure the
political agreements that are essential to such progress.
The leaders recognize that the current credibility gap
dividing Government institutions from the general
population needs to be addressed. They have also
shown the necessary commitment to working with
the private sector and engaging constructively with
Somalia's international partners.

On 16 April, just two months into President
Farmajo's term of office, the leaders concluded a
political agreement on the long-awaited national
security architecture. It defines the size, structure,
composition, command and control, and financing
arrangements for Somalia's security forces, based
on a federal model. Its significance is enormous. It
provides a framework for the accelerated development
of acceptable, accountable, affordable and able
security forces. It will also have a catalytic effect on
efforts to reinforce governance and increase revenue
generation. In addition, it provides a model for other
essential political agreements on such key issues as
the management of natural resources, revenue sharing
and the broader definition of the respective powers
and responsibilities of the Federal Government and the
federal member states. The agreement makes it possible
for international partners to support Somalia's security
sector in a more coherent manner. The national security
architecture agreement and the new policing model,
adopted last year, should now be complemented by a
political agreement defining a federal model for the
justice and corrections sectors.

As we welcome the advent of a new chapter in
Somalia and the unique opportunities it has unlocked,
we are not oblivious to the scale and complexity of the

hurdles facing the Somali Government during the long
four-year journey that lies ahead. Continued insecurity,
owing primarily but not exclusively to Al-Shabaab
attacks, remains the biggest challenge. We applaud
AMISOM. for providing the backbone for security in
Somalia over the past 10 years. Its joint efforts with the
Somali security forces, with support from international
partners, have made possible the progress the country
has achieved so far.

However, Al-Shabaab still has the capacity to
disrupt and impede the peace- and State-building
process. Fighting it requires a multi-pronged approach
that combines staging AMISOM. and Somali national
army offensive operations; conducting special counter-
terrorism operations by those of Somalia's partners
in a position to do so; fostering the extension of State
authority; addressing governance deficits; and resolving
local conflicts, while at the same time providing
incentives to elements wishing to take advantage of
President Farmajo's offer of amnesty.

Support enabling AMISOM. to carry out effective
operations must accompany and complement the
implementation of the national security architecture
agreement. There is no question of choosing one
over the other. In the short term, therefore, AMISOM
needs predictable funding, ideally through assessed
contributions. Offensive operations by AMISOM. and
the Somali forces will yield sustainable outcomes only if
they are planned in a coordinated manner and conducted
in compliance with human rights and international
humanitarian law. The current humanitarian crisis
should be taken into account, vulnerable populations
properly protected and arrangements put in place for
holding and building recovered areas, including local
administrations acceptable to the local communities.

The vigorous implementation of the United
Nations human rights due diligence policy is important
as we continue to enable AMISOM. operations and
help to accelerate the building of Somali security
forces. Al-Shabaab feeds on shortfalls in governance,
particularly in the areas of human rights, justice and
the rule of law, and the delivery of basic services.
An inclusive approach to governance and access to
basic services is therefore critical to preventing and
countering violent extremism. We welcome the Federal
Government's efforts to mediate between Galmudug
state and Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama'a. The dialogue
must continue. Reconciliation with Ahl Al-Sunna is
critical to the viability and security of Galmudug state,
including its efforts to address the threat from piracy.
While it is premature to talk ofa return to the peak era of
piracy off the coast of Somalia, the recent hijackings of
ships remind us that the progress achieved so far could
be reversed. Robust counter-piracy efforts, including
increased patrolling of Somali waters, should continue,
accompanied by greater support to building the capacity
of Somalia's maritime law-enforcement services.

The Somali institutions responsible for implementing
the Government's agenda over the next four years
are suffering from severe capacity shortfalls. The
target dates set out in the political agreement on the
national security architecture and other plans will
not be met without substantial and coherent support
from international partners. The work related to the
national security architecture must be harmonized
with arrangements for the conditions-based transition
of primary responsibility for the country's security
from AMISOM. to Somalia's security forces, which is
expected to start in 2018. That will require a high degree
of coordination that exceeds the current capacity of the
country's institutions. Similarly, timely progress in
reviewing the Constitution, synchronized with both the
painstaking process of securing political agreements on
key issues and the preparations for the 2020 elections
in a challenging political and security context, requires
complex coordination between the Somali institutions
concerned and reinforcement of their capacity.

Such cohesion is imperative not just among the
relevant Somali institutions but also among the many
international partners that deliver support to Somalia's
security sector and its key political processes. We must
acknowledge that the absence of an agreed-on national
security architecture and the disorganized delivery by
international partners of security-sector support over
the past eight years have contributed equally to the lack
of progress in building capable and legitimate security
forces in Somalia.

That is why the outcome of the London Conference
on Somalia, which took place six days ago, and the
joint African Union (AU) and United Nations review
of AMISOM. and Somali security forces, which is
currently under way, are so important. The London
Conference provided a unique opportunity for Somalia
to present its agenda to international partners and reach
agreement on the framework for cooperation to realize
key priorities, anchored in the principle of mutual
accountability. That is reflected in two key agreements
that came out of the Conference.

One is the security pact between Somalia and 42
international partners. The pact endorses the national
security architecture agreement, sets out milestones
for the rapid development of Somalia's security forces
and recognizes that AMISOM. remains critical to
securing Somalia, while also expressing support for a
conditions-based transition from AMISOM. to Somali
security forces, with clear target dates linked to the
agreed milestones. It also outlines a coordination and
implementation mechanism to ensure the coherent
delivery of support by international partners.

The second document defines a new partnership for
Somalia. It sets out a mutual accountability framework,
as well as specific partnership principles and enabling
actions, based on which Somalia and its international
partners will work together to meet the priority political,
security and economic recovery goals identified in
Somalia's national development plan. Somalia and its
partners agreed to meet again in October, to follow up
on the commitments made in London. At that meeting,
they will consider a financing strategy for the national
security architecture, in line with the comprehensive
approach to security. The London Conference has
therefore added momentum to the efforts to advance
Somalia's key priorities.

The joint AU-United Nations review focuses on
six key tasks: first, establishing a baseline assessment
of AMISOM. and the Somali security forces; secondly,
identifying the necessary tasks for AMISOM, taking
into account the national security architecture and
the comprehensive approach to security; thirdly,
identifying the range of security actors that play a
role in Somalia and making recommendations on the
preferred relationships and division of responsibilities
among them; fourthly, making recommendations
on AMISOM's future configuration to facilitate a
smooth conditions-based transition to Somali security
forces; fifthly, developing recommendations on what
a conditions-based transition should look like and,
finally, identifying the required support to AMISOM
and the Somali security forces, tied to the transition
plan. The findings and recommendations of the
review will be presented to the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council for
their consideration.

The joint review builds on the strategic assessment
of the United Nations presence in Somalia, which was
conducted from 5-15 March, at the Council's request. In
his letter of 5 May, addressed to you, Sir, the Secretary-
General transmitted the results of the assessment. I
wish to emphasize the Secretary-General's observation
in the letter that, as the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia is adjusted according
to new priorities, some elements of the United Nations
support to Somalia over the next four years will create
demands for increased resources. We therefore trust
that the Security Council and other relevant legislative
bodies will support the recommendations of the strategic
assessment and continue to provide the necessary
resources required to enable the United Nations system
to support Somalia's ambitious undertakings.

I wish to thank all members of the Council for their
strong and unified position on supporting Somalia's
peacebuilding and State-building agenda and for
supporting the United Nations team in Somalia.

