Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Azubalis to
the Security Council and to thank him very much for
his comprehensive briefing today.

As a member of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the United States is
committed to working with other participating States
and the OSCE secretariat to advance the organization's
work in its three areas of competence, namely, the
political-military, economic-environmental and human
dimensions. The OSCE's comprehensive approach to
security and practical focus across all three dimensions
make it a valuable partner to the United Nations in
addressing global security challenges, both within and
outside the OSCE region. I would like to highlight four
areas of beneficial OSCE cooperation with the United
Nations.

First, in January's debate (see S/PV.6472) on
post-conflict institution-building and in last week's
debate (see S/PV.6479) on security and development,
the Council noted that the sustainability of a peace
process often hinges on strengthening key national
institutions in the immediate aftermath of conflict. This
is particularly vital in the areas of the rule of law and
security sectors. The OSCE has been an indispensable
partner of the United Nations in this regard.

In the Balkans, as one of the pillars of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the
OSCE has played an important role in helping to build
and advise Kosovo's institutions from the ground up.
We commend the OSCE's work with the Government
of Kosovo to increase governmental transparency and
good governance, in particularly at the local level.

I would also like to note the contributions of the
OSCE to the international community's efforts to help
stabilize Afghanistan, in particular in helping the
Afghan people to strengthen border security, flght drug
trafficking and promote development.

Women must have an equitable stake in post-
conflict peacebuilding and decision-making in their
communities. The United States supports further OSCE
efforts to increase gender mainstreaming and the issue
of gender-based violence in the security sector, as well
as to encourage more participating States to implement
national action plans.

As the United Nations looks for ways to make its
civilian response more effective in post-conflict
situations, we should consider whether there are ways
to better leverage the existing capacity-building
expertise of organizations such as the OSCE.

Secondly, the United States commends the
conflict prevention and conflict resolution role played
by the Chairperson-in-Office and the organization as a
whole. We appreciate the OSCE's co-chairmanship
with the United Nations and the European Union of the
Geneva discussions that bring together Georgia, Russia
and participants from the de facto authorities in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The OSCE's facilitation
of the Joint Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism for South Ossetia is important for
addressing ongoing security and humanitarian concerns
on the ground. We urge participants to meet regularly
to address practical issues and enhance confidence-
building measures. The United States supports the re-
establishment of an OSCE presence throughout
Georgia and the continued travel to Georgia by its
Special Representative on Protracted Conflicts. We
also note the OSCE's quick response in the wake of
last year's violence in Kyrgyzstan and the recent
efforts by the OSCE's community security initiative to
support the Kyrgyzstan police in reducing tensions and
providing security for all communities in Kyrgyzstan.
Such efforts have helped prevent further violence and
contribute to long-term stability.

Thirdly, we cannot separate the human dimension
from peace and security. True security in the OSCE
area can only be achieved with participating States' full
implementation of OSCE commitments to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Towards that
goal, we particularly welcome the emphasis placed by
the Chairperson-in-Office on advancing freedom of the
media and of expression, especially where new media
and digital technologies are concerned.

Finally, we welcome the emphasis by the
Chairperson-in-Offlce on strengthening efforts to
counter transnational threats, including by promoting
the implementation of Security Council resolutions to
counter terrorism and proliferation. Strengthening our
common security involves not only countering new
unconventional transnational threats such as terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
but also organized crime and illicit trafficking.

The United States welcomes and encourages
OSCE efforts to strengthen its regional, subregional
and international cooperation. In that regard, we look
forward to further cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations.

