The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Canada, Cuba, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Liechtenstein,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, Singapore, South Africa, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and Tajikistan,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. More than one quarter of the
membership of the United Nations has asked to speak
in this meeting. I think it would be only fair to give all
a chance to express their concerns and make their
comments and suggestions. If everyone sticks to four
minutes, I think everyone will have a chance to
participate in a useful way in the Council's
deliberations. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
As another measure to optimize the use of our
time and in order to allow as many delegations as
possible to take the floor, I will not individually invite
speakers to take a seat at the table or invite them to
resume their seat at the side. When a speaker is taking
the floor, the conference officer will seat the next
speaker on the list at the table. I thank all for their
understanding and cooperation.

I now give the floor to the members of the
Council.


