Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important meeting and for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2016/969, annex). Our
discussions today are an important follow-up to the
Arria Formula meeting held in April, presided over
by His Excellency President Macky Sall, in which
Malaysia was pleased to participate.

We have followed Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
comprehensive views on today's topic with much
interest. Similarly, I wish to convey my appreciation to
the briefers, namely, Mr. Turk of the Global High-level
Panel on Water and Peace, Ms. Beerli ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Mr. Waslekar of the
Strategic Foresight Group for their respective expert
views and briefings.

The competencies of the General Assembly and
the processes that it has established with regard to
multilateral approaches to sustainable development
and the environment, including the management of
transboundary waters and water resources, require no
further elaboration. However, it cannot be denied that
there exists a legitimate linkage between the issues of
water, peace and security that falls arguably Within the
purview of the Council. Therefore, for the purposes
of today's discussions, I will focus my remarks only
on the issue of water as a resource and the potential
conflicts that could arise from competition over water
as a scarce resource.

Against that backdrop, my delegation is of the
View that these discussions demonstrate the Council's
ability to assume a preventive posture by considering
issues that could be drivers of conflict. It is hoped,
therefore, that the discussion today will be frank
with a forward-looking exchange on how the United
Nations, and the international community as a whole,
could address potential threats to international peace
and security related to competition and conflict over
natural resources, specifically in this case over water
and water resources.

The question of water insecurity cannot be limited

merely to issues of access. Water insecurity should be
seen as a potential threat multiplier that can aggravate
or be aggravated by existing tensions and conflicts
rooted in political, social and economic factors. In
that connection, various possible causes of conflicts
related to water, including rapid population growth,
industrialization, agriculture and urbanization, were
highlighted earlier. The list should not preclude the
impact of military occupation.

A particular situation that stands out in that regard
is the dire situation of Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, specifically their right to water and
their access to water resources. Since 1967, Palestinians
have lost access to the water of the Jordan River; 90 per
cent of Palestinian water resources have been under
Israeli control since 1967. Furthermore, the apartheid
wall not only cuts off Palestinian access to their own
land, but also cuts off access to many important aquifers
and wellsprings. The exploitation resulting from the
annexations of Palestinian water resources is illegal
under international law. It is therefore doubly illegal for
the expropriated water to be used and channelled to the
illegal settlers.

In addition, the decision to prevent Gaza from
rebuilding its water and sanitation infrastructure,
following the 2009 and 2014 attacks, is abhorrent and
unacceptable. We call for an immediate end to the
systematic and cynical exploitation of Palestinian water
resources, which has caused much anger, frustration
and despair among the Palestinians. Such unsustainable
situations could trigger not only a political insecurity
crisis, but potentially even a health crisis in an already
volatile region that can ill afford further threats to
peace and security.

Across the globe, my delegation is encouraged by
the pursuit of collective efforts on transboundary water
cooperation in the context of regional cooperation.
Initiatives such as the Senegal River Basin Development
Organization in Africa, the establishment of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in
Central Asia and the Blue Peace initiative in the Middle
East, which seek to harness water as an instrument of
peace as opposed to a cause of conflict, are inspiring.

I am pleased to share the fact that in my own
region, South-East Asia, the 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
pursue such a collaborative approach under the
framework of the ASEAN Working Group on Water
Resources Management. Since 2005, the Working
Group has spearheaded the implementation of the
ASEAN strategic plan of action on water resources
management. In essence, that format provides a platform
for enhancing cooperation, promoting networking
and engaging in collaborative actions aimed at the
practical implementation of integrated water resources
management in the region.

At the global level, we commend and support
the ongoing effort and work of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace, led by Mr. Turk, to
strengthen the global architecture aimed at preventing
and resolving water-related conflicts and tensions. We
look forward to the release of the Panel's final report
and recommendations as future contributions to the
ongoing debate on water, peace and security.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight three additional
points. We acknowledge the potentially destabilizing
effects that could arise from poorly managed conflicts
and tensions related to water and water resources. It
is therefore vital that the capacity and capability of
preventive diplomacy mechanisms and institutions,
including those deployed by the United Nations and
by regional organizations, continue to be supported.
It is vitally important to understand and address the
negative impact of armed conflicts on water resources
and the related infrastructure, especially in those areas
currently ongoing conflicts, where we have seen the
callous contamination of water and the destruction of
water-related infrastructure resources employed as a
military strategy or tactic, which is in flagrant violation
of applicable international humanitarian law norms
and standards.

In the post-conflict recovery phase, the provision
of safe water should rank among the highest priorities.
Water, sanitation and the associated delivery
infrastructures are critical to economic development
and the recovery of livelihoods in the aftermath of
conflict. In that regard, the formation of partnerships,
capacity-building and the transfer of technologies
are key to ensuring sustainable water management
in peacebuilding efforts. At the same time, collective
efforts aimed at achieving water-related targets
under Sustainable Development Goal 6 would help in
addressing potential conflicts driven by competition
over increasingly scarce water resources. It is also
vital that our collective efforts be further intensified in
addressing the issues.

