Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like my Dutch colleague and friend, I too
have three points to make.

I would first like to respectfully request of my
colleague Mrs. Nikki Haley, Permanent Representative
of the United States, that from now on she refrain from
labelling any legitimate Governments as "regimes".
Right now I am referring specifically to Russia. I have
made that request once before, but Ambassador Haley
was not present, and I asked for it to be conveyed to her
by her colleagues. Now I am requesting it personally. If
it happens again, I will interrupt the meeting on a point
of order.

Secondly, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom said that Syria is different from
Salisbury in that there no investigation is being
conducted in Syria, while one is under way in Salisbury.
We would very much like to know more about the details
of that investigation and would be grateful if she could
communicate them to us. However, for the time being
we know nothing other than that all of a sudden the
alleged victims of a chemical warfare agent, thankfully,
turn out to be alive and, apparently, almost completely
well. However, nobody has seen them yet, and we fear
for the condition of those important witnesses. At the
moment, we have learned from newspaper reports, the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has offered to shelter
the Skripals in the United States under new identities.
The CIA's participation in this is itself revealing. But it
also means that we may never see these people, who are
key witnesses to what happened, again.

What else do we know? We know about the speedy
euthanization of the Skripals' pets and the cremation
of the cat and dead guinea pigs. We are also aware of
the intention to demolish their house and the restaurant
and pub they visited. We also know that Yulia Skripal's
sister, Viktoria, who wanted to see her, was denied a
British visa. Why? That is all we know. I repeat that we
would very much like to learn more details about what
is going on, and we would be grateful to our British
colleagues if they could keep us regularly informed
during the investigation.

Thirdly, and lastly, we did not meet here today to
address the situation in Douma. The agenda item is
entitled "Threats to international peace and security",
although, needless to say, it was the situation regarding
Douma and the so-called chemical attack that prompted
the meeting. In today's meeting, as Mr. De Mistura
mentioned and the Secretary-General has previously
discussed, we are moving towards a dangerous area.
Unfortunately, the people who are playing these
dangerous games and spewing irresponsible threats
do not understand that. Today we heard once again
what we have already heard many times. None of
our Western colleagues want to hear or listen to
objective information. None of them has expressed
any doubts about the one and only version that has
been given of what transpired. So what is the point
of an investigation? Why bother? They have accused
Damascus of a chemical-weapon attack not just before
any investigation has been carried out but before the
incident was even known about.

They are not convinced by the information that we
have provided today. They simply do not want to listen.
We have already said that there are no witnesses to the
use of chemical weapons at all. There are no traces of
chemicals, no bodies, no injuries, no poisoning victims.
Nobody went to the hospital. The footage was all clearly
staged by the White Helmets. We demand that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) mission immediately visit Douma and the area
of the alleged chemical weapons attack, interview the
residents and medical staff and and collect soil samples.
My British colleague said that only an investigation can
establish who is to blame. We agree, except that did
not stop her from blaming the so-called Syrian regime.
Those two things do not really jibe. We insist that the
OPCW mission visit Douma immediately. The Syrian
authorities and Russian troops are ready to provide the
necessary conditions for this to take place.

Lastly, we too wish there were an independent
investigative mechanism. I would like to remind the
Council that our draft resolution, which includes a
proposal for establishing such a mechanism, is in blue,
and we are ready to adopt it today, if necessary.

