Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see Guatemala assume the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank your country,
Sir, for having organized this meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), a matter
of great importance in our region of Latin America and
the Caribbean.

My delegation welcomes the presence of
Ambassador Mariano Fernandez Amunategui and
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Secretary-General for his wise choice in appointing
him his Special Representative for Haiti and for the
efforts he has made to build a better future for this
sister nation.

Ecuador's commitment to the stabilization process
in Haiti is well known. Therefore, since the beginning
ofthe Haitian crisis in 2004, we have been participating
actively in MINUSTAH, in keeping with the central
principle of our foreign relations to provide unwavering
support in humanitarian crisis situations and seek to
resolve conflicts.

It is worth underscoring that my country does not
merely contribute troops to peacekeeping operations;
we have implemented a series of measures and actions
which together form a comprehensive policy, including,
for example, Ecuador's peacekeeping school, where
soldiers are trained to tackle problems faced by
internally displaced persons and refugees, and to
respond to humanitarian disasters, as well as prepared
to resolve conflicts with civilians.

I take this opportunity to recall that following
the earthquake of January 2010, my country, under
the auspices of the Union of South American Nations,
cooperated directly with the Government of Haiti
in rebuilding roads, bridges and access routes in the
Artibonite area, which allowed farmers to bring their
produce to cities, thus contributing to the development
of food security in the most important producing
area of Haiti and thereby to the country's sustainable
development.

Ecuador welcomes the progress made, which
has improved conditions in Haiti. These include the
ratification by the Senate of the new Prime Minister
and the publication of the corrected constitutional
amendments which had been awaited since June 2011.
Likewise, the establishment of the Superior Council
of the Judiciary is another step forward in the work of
the Haitian Government in strengthening institutions
essential to the rule of law and thereby human rights.

However, Ecuador is concerned to see that the
process of the establishment of Haiti's first Permanent
Electoral Commission is plagued by controversy
between political parties in Parliament and civil society,
who have questioned the integrity of the Council and its
ability to organize credible elections, which has led a
number of lawmakers to favour the establishment of a
provisional electoral council.

In this regard, my country hopes that all stakeholders
will participate in a constructive dialogue with a view
to holding credible elections without further delay and
thereby contribute to revitalizing Haitian institutions
and minimizing the institutional vacuum created by the
expiration on 8 May of the mandate of 10 senators.

Ecuador commends the progress made in extending
State authority, including over border control and
in strengthened security. However, we note that
violence continues to be concentrated in major urban
areas, signalling that the National Police continues to
face challenges when it comes to fully assuming its
responsibility for safety in the country. In this context,
MINUSTAH's social and military components play an
essential role in maintaining security and stability in
general.

In conclusion, Ecuador supports the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2012/678) to extend the MINUSTAH
mandate for a further year. Haiti undeniably continues
to be threatened by food insecurity, growing poverty
and a fragile humanitarian situation. My Government
hopes that measures can be devised to optimize
coordination and joint efforts by the Group of Friends
of Haiti, donor countries, and the authorities and the
Government of Haiti in order to achieve the badly
needed social, political and economic stability that the
people of Haiti demand and deserve.

