Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like once again to congratulate Portugal on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also thank President Cavaco Silva for
his presence at today's open debate. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement. And I listened attentively to the statements
by Ms. Pillay, High Commissioner for Human Rights,
by Ms. Bragg, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and by Mr. Spoerri, of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

Over the past few years, the Security Council has
held many open debates on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Broad consensus has been achieved,
but there are still differing views on some issues. In
particular, the recent practice of the Security Council
has triggered a new round of debate and reflection in
the international community. This meeting, which is
being held at the initiative of Portugal, is no doubt very
timely and important. For that, I wish to express my
great appreciation. It is imperative for the Security
Council to engage in a thorough consideration and
comprehensive debate on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It is also necessary to take
seriously the views of non-members of the Council and
to act in a manner that better reflects the will of all
States Members of the United Nations.

The protection of civilians is, first and foremost,
the responsibility of the relevant Government and
parties to a conflict. Civilians make up the majority of
the victims of war, and they are the most directly
affected. Violence against civilians in armed conflict is
unacceptable. Human life is the most precious thing.
Innocent civilians in armed conflicts, especially
women and children, must be protected effectively.
Governments bear the primary responsibility in that
regard. Other parties involved in a conflict, including
those who intervene, whether domestic or foreign
forces, are also duty-bound to protect civilians and
must abide by international humanitarian law and other
relevant international law. They must fulfil their
obligations with regard to protecting civilians.

Secondly, action to protect civilians must comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, especially the principles of
non-interference in countries' internal affairs and of
respect for the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of States. Such action must be authorized by
the Security Council and be undertaken in an orderly
manner under the framework of the United Nations. It
should also focus on pressing for the early conclusion
of a ceasefire, resolving conflicts through dialogue,
negotiation and other political means, and supporting
the good offices and mediation efforts of relevant
parties, including those of regional organizations and
the Secretary-General, rather than the other way
around.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians through the
use of force should be authorized with extreme caution.
China has always advocated the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. However advanced weapons may be and
however precise strikes may be, civilian casualties are
inevitable.

Experience has shown that Security Council
action to protect civilians requires serious and careful
discussion. There should be strict provisions on the
mandate, implementing parties and implementing
conditions. If many questions remain to be clarified,
the Security Council should not rush to take action
until those questions are answered.

Fourthly, Security Council resolutions should be
fully and strictly implemented. Resolutions must be
implemented in full and to the letter. No party should
wilfully misinterpret resolutions, let alone take action
that goes beyond the mandate given by the Security
Council. In such cases, the principle of protection of
civilians is distorted to mean that force can be used on
a large scale, that infrastructure and residential areas
may be bombarded and that casualties among women
and children are acceptable. Those are all legitimate
concerns of the international community, and the
questions they raise demand answers.

The protection of civilians falls within the realm
of humanitarianism. There should be no political
motives or purposes involved, including regime
change. For that reason, how to strictly and effectively
monitor the implementation of Security Council
resolutions has become an important and urgent issue.
China welcomes and will carefully study the concept
paper proposed by Brazil and actively supports
discussions considering that concept paper.

Fifthly, it is imperative to abandon the practice of
selectivity and double-standards. Many Member States
have consistently called on the Security Council to
adhere to the principle of fairness and equity and to
attach equal importance to all issues on its agenda
involving the protection of civilians - including the
situations in the Gaza Strip, Somalia, Afghanistan and
Iraq. China endorses that view. Selectivity and double-
standards only undermine the role and authority of the
Security Council.

