Mr. Lee Kyung Chul (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, we thank the Azerbaijani presidency
for organizing today's debate. We also commend
Ambassador Perceval for her leadership as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

Today's debate provides an opportunity to assess the
status of our collective efforts to improve the working
methods of the Council and to allow non-members of the
Council to share their observations and proposals. We
believe that any effort to improve the working methods
of the Council must focus on three goals - enhancing
transparency, strengthening interaction with the wider
United Nations members, and increasing efficiency.
Such efforts are essential for the Council to effectively
meet its task of maintaining international peace and
security.

In recent years, we have seen some improvement
in the realization of those aims. More open debates
are being organized, and meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries now take place on a more
regular basis. Further measures to improve interactivity
have been duly reflected in note by the President of the
Security Council adopted in August 2013 (S/2013/515).

Presidencies have also promoted useful practices
aimed at increasing efficiency, such as the strict
application of the five-minute rule when making
statements and holding video-teleconferences in
briefings in order to have updates from the field.
However, we believe more can be done. Allow me to
point out some areas that require further concerted
efforts.

First, with regard to enhancing transparency, the
Republic of Korea supports the Council's holding
of more meetings and briefings that are open to the
entire membership of the United Nations. The increase
trend of holding wrap-up sessions and briefings by
the presidencies is a step in the right direction. Such
efforts should be coupled with meaningful measures to
enhance the effectiveness of such meetings, including
through having specific scope and focus and pursuing
necessary follow-up measures. That openness should
apply to the work of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council as well. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on arms control,
disarmament and non-proliferation, I would mention
that we plan to convene an open interactive briefing
for all Member States on the current status and future
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We Will
continue our efforts to keep the membership informed
of the work of the Committee and seek valuable input
from it.

Secondly, the Council should make additional
efforts to enhance interaction with the United Nations
membership and other relevant stakeholders. We
support enhanced interaction between the Council
and other organs of the United Nations. It is important
to ensure that regular meetings are held between the
Presidents of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The Council's interaction with the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
on cross-cutting issues such as conflict prevention and
peacebuilding are also of great value. That will help us
to have a more integrated approach to methods related
to peace and security.

Given the increasing importance of the role of
regional and subregional organizations in dealing with
challenges to peace and security, we also support the
enhanced consultations with regional organizations,
as was the case in yesterday's high-level meeting
(S/PV.7050). Cooperation with regional institutions
can complement the work of the Council and, through
those efforts, create synergy. In addition, informal
interactive discussions and meetings with troop-
and police-contributing countries for peacekeeping
operations should also continue to be an important
part of the Council's activities. The President's note
contained in document S/2013/630, adopted last week,
can serve as an important basis to further the Council's
efforts to that end.

Thirdly, to deal with the ever increasing volume
and diversity of its workload, it is imperative that the
Council undertake more efforts to increase its overall
efficiency. In that regard, the Council should continue
its efforts to implement the measures laid out in
documents S/2010/507 and S/2012/402. Better planning
of its work, by adjusting mandate renewal periods and
the timing of reports, and more focused and concise
statements are among the areas that could be improved.

Improving the working methods of the Security
Council is indeed an important component in enhancing
the effectiveness and overall legitimacy of its work.
The Council should therefore continue to pursue that
objective collectively and vigorously.

