The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Poland.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Taye-Brook Zerihoun and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their very informative briefings on the recent
developments in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to
thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for his
comprehensive analysis.

Poland welcomes the recent positive developments
in Guinea-Bissau following the Summit ofthe Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
held in Lome on 14 April. The appointment of an
inclusive Government, headed by consensus Prime
Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes, the reopening of the
National Assembly, the election of the President of the
National Electoral Commission and the announcement
of parliamentary elections to be held in November
constitute major steps to ending the political impasse
and successfully implementing the Conakry Agreement.

Against that backdrop, drug trafficking and
organized crime continue to represent grave threats
to peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. In that
regard, we call on the political leaders and State
institutions to combat those crimes in cooperation with
UNODC, ECOWAS and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, we commend the role played by the
President of the ECOWAS Authority, President Faure
Gnassingbe' of Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator for
Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Conde of the Republic
of Guinea, as well as other regional and international
facilitators in resolving the political crisis. Last but
not least, let me express our full support to the newly
appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jose' Viegas Filho. Let me also express our
sincere gratitude to his predecessor, Mr. Modibo Toure,
for his efforts aimed at resolving the political crisis in
Guinea-Bissau.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Guinea-
Bissau.

