Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human

Rights for their statements.

Ending a conflict is much more costly than
preventing one. It is therefore crucial to ensure, early
on, that we understand the warning signs, take decisions
and take action. In oder to ensure that the Security
Council can fully assume its key role in preventive
action and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, it must
fully utilize the various tools at its disposal.

Through the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) initiative, a cross-regional group
of States coordinated by Switzerland that seeks to
reinforce the working methods of the Security Council,
Switzerland has repeatedly raised the question of
improving the preventive capacities of the Council.
First and foremost, the Council needs to be alerted as
early as possible to potential crises in order to take
appropriate action at an early stage.

I would like to take this opportunity to briefly
highlight a few issues that Switzerland believes are
crucial in conflict prevention.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), as
an intergovernmental advisory body of the Council,
has a major role to play in preventing the recurrence
of conflicts. Roughly half of all countries emerging
from conflict suffer a relapse into violence at some
point. The recent crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders of that fact. A
coordinated and committed approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding is key to preventing such relapses.
As Chair of the Burundi configuration, Switzerland
believes that the Peacebuilding Commission can fill the
role of a forum where critical situations are discussed
very early, in an inclusive manner and with all the
relevant stakeholders. The upcoming 2015 review
of the peacebuilding architecture will be a valuable
opportunity to implement the adaptations necessary to
further improve that role of the PBC.

The participation of a wide variety of actors through
formal and informal meetings has helped to develop a
comprehensive understanding of complex situations
and to prevent relapses into conflict. Initiatives such
as the recently established Global Action Against Mass
Atrocity Crimes provide indispensable support to
efforts to better grasp local and regional complexities.
Today, the fact that serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights must be seen as
early warning signs of violent conflict is uncontested.
It is therefore vital that the entire United Nations
system have the necessary means to collect and provide
information on populations that are victims of such
violations or are at risk of becoming so. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes and fully supports the Rights Up
Front initiative.

Secondly, special political missions are crucial
instruments for the Security Council's preventive
diplomacy work. In order to succeed, they need to
assume, among other things, a holistic approach
encompassing all stakeholders, enjoy broad political
support and have the necessary means and resources.
Switzerland welcomes the debate in the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly on special
political missions. Discussing the strengths, challenges
and needs of such missions is crucial to improving their
effectiveness and efficiency. Switzerland will continue
to actively participate in those efforts and in the
discussions in the Fifth Committee on how to improve
support and funding for such missions. We believe that
concrete improvements, such as those recommended
by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, would be an important step
forward.

Finally, we believe that, in future, developing local
capacities and constructive coordination between all
the relevant national, regional and global actors will
be the key to the success of conflict prevention efforts.
Current and past examples of successful cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) support
such an approach. In that regard, we would like to share
with the Council some of the experience we gleaned
from the Swiss chairmanship of the OSCE.

Last May, the OSCE convened a high-level event
in Warsaw to foster cooperation between regional
and international organizations in the area of human
rights. The participation of key representatives of
the United Nations and the Council of Europe made
a major contribution to a fruitful, serious dialogue
with participating OSCE States and institutions. The
recent signing of a cooperation agreement between the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the OSCE's Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights marks an important
stage in our joint efforts to improve respect for human
rights and their protection.

