Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having swiftly responded and convened this important
meeting. We would also like to thank Mr. Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing today.

Four days ago in the Security Council (see S/PV.8214), we heard a briefing by Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov on the status of the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), at which he talked about the
demonstration that took place today in Gaza. As is usual
during the occasions when the defenceless Palestinian
people take to the streets to peacefully reaffirm their
right to an independent State, we have seen the policy
of Israeli arrogance and oppression in action. Today,
tens of thousands of brotherly Palestinian people have
taken to the streets in Gaza. They have participated
in a peaceful demonstration as they do every year on
30 March to commemorate Land Day, express their
attachment to their land and their national identity, and
underscore their legitimate and inalienable political
rights, guaranteed by international treaties, laws
and norms.

The Israeli occupation has continued for more
than 50 years now. Israel's illegal and illegitimate
expansionist activities continue in Palestinian occupied
territory, including east Jerusalem. They are flagrant
violations of relevant Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

The State of Kuwait condemns in the strongest
terms the Israeli actions today, which have left at
least 15 Palestinians dead and more than 1,400
injured. Let us be clear. What happened today was
a peaceful demonstration pertaining to the right of
defenceless people. This right was responded to with
the direct targeting of civilians, in flagrant violation
of international human rights law. The perpetrators of
today's crime must be brought to justice.
The Palestinian people cannot be an exception
to international commitments and international law,
including the commitment to protecting civilians from
atrocities and grave violations. Israel, the occupying
Power, must honour its commitments, in line with the
1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons. We strongly support international
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
territory, and addressing the practices and policies of
the repressive Israeli occupation authority.

It is very important not to separate what happened
today from the overall context. The Gaza Strip is
still under blockade and has been so for more than
10 years now. Some of those who participated in the
demonstration today are refugees who have been
negatively impacted by the decrease in contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. What happened
today is the result of more than 50 years of occupation.
Numerous international reports have reiterated the
degree to which living conditions have deteriorated
in Gaza. When no response is made to such practices,
policies and continued attacks against the defenceless
Palestinian people and their legitimate rights, this will
be the usual result, and we are definitely going to see
more of such distressing incidents. Consequently, and as
a first step, we are going to distribute a press statement
to the Member States for review and adoption by the
Security Council. In fact, as Mr. Zerihoun said, these
incidents are a painful reminder of the need to achieve
a lasting peace in the Middle East as soon as possible.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait emphasizes the
importance of forcing Israel, the occupying Power, to
respect and implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We reiterate that any just and comprehensive
peace must be a strategic one, and that in order to
achieve it, the entire Israeli occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories must end and the Palestinian people
be permitted to exercise their inalienable rights. Those
rights include the right to establish an independent and
full sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along the borders of 4 June 1967, based on resolutions
of international legitimacy and those of the United
Nations, the principle of land for peace, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

