I thank our briefers, Peter Maurer, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and, of course, Secretary-General Guterres. The stark reality of today's debate is that despite all our efforts - our collective efforts - civilians still bear the brunt of conflict. States have the primary responsibility to protect civilians, but too often they and other parties to conflict flout their obligations. The indirect consequences are death, injury, violence against children, torture and much more. In this year's report (S/2020/366), the Secretary-General has again noted the appalling use of sexual and gender-based violence and attacks on places of worship. As the British Prime Minister's Special Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict, and also as Minister for Human Rights for the United Kingdom, I can assure the Security Council that our commitment to leading global action to tackle these horrific crimes and support all survivors remains solid. It remains steadfast. When the United Nations emerged from the ashes of global conflict 75 years ago, we all collectively resolved to end such horrors. The United Nations has since become the heart of our international system based on our shared values and rules. Together, we have developed responses to conflict and measures to protect civilians, and we now recognize that our interventions must go beyond physical pain and that we must protect access to basic services and address psychological harm and, indeed, family separation. One of the most pivotal steps we have taken together was the establishment of the Blue Helmets and the Blue Berets, deploying peacekeeping missions and special political missions to conflicts all over the world. To strengthen them further, the United Kingdom continues to support the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. It is important we deliver on the commitments we made in the shared declaration and fully implement resolution 2436 (2018). Accountability is also essential for the United Nations, for our peacekeepers and, indeed, for ourselves. It is a fundamental part of providing protection for civilians. The United Kingdom Government values the contribution of the International Criminal Court to the fight for justice and unity by holding perpetrators to account for the most serious crimes of international concern. We shall together shine the spotlight on individual responsibility and deter future atrocities. Our work together at the United Nations over many decades has furnished us with the necessary tools to stem conflicts. Yet too often we still hesitate to use them, even when the need is great. Nowhere is that need greater than when we look at the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Myanmar. Protecting civilians in Syria should be an urgent priority for all of us. The United Kingdom Government continues to urge all parties to the conflict to do just that and the forces to uphold international humanitarian law. More than half the pre-war population is now displaced, and it is unacceptable that the Al-Assad regime continues to prevent aid from reaching millions of people who need it. It is imperative that all parties engage constructively and provide unfettered access to humanitarian organizations. The humanitarian situation in the north-west remains particularly dire. It is therefore important that we, the Security Council, come together behind resolution 2504 (2020), on cross-border aid, when it is renewed in July. It is also crucial that we act on the findings of the United Nations Headquarters Board of Inquiry investigation into the appalling attacks in Idlib in 2019 and hold those responsible to account. The protection of civilians is also of paramount importance in Yemen. The ongoing conflict has claimed more than 100,000 lives, and we must all continue to push the parties to the conflict to uphold international humanitarian law and protect human rights. With 80 per cent of the population reliant on humanitarian aid, it is crucial that parties comply with resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian response. In the long term, the best way to protect Yemen's civilians is a comprehensive political solution to the conflict, and we therefore urge the parties to engage constructively with the peace process led by Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths. In Myanmar, the recent escalation of the conflict between the military and the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army has led to a spike in civilian casualties, further internal displacement and restrictions on humanitarian access. We urge an immediate cessation of hostilities in Rakhine and Chin states. Those who commit human rights violations, including against the Rohingya, must be held to account, and there must be unhindered humanitarian access to protect all communities from the effects of COVID-19. With regard to COVID-19, its potentially catastrophic impacts mount on top of the challenges facing civilians living amid armed conflict. We must now redouble our efforts to protect them, including from those who would seek to use the pandemic to their advantage. When opportunity to end conflict lies before us, let us reach for our tools, not our excuses. Let us get behind the Secretary-General's call for a global humanitarian ceasefire. Let all parties to armed conflict lay down their weapons at this time and use the space to shield their people from COVID-19. Let us work collectively to build towards peace. Diplomacy can make that a reality. Working together, we could make it a reality.
