Mr. Malloch Brown: I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency this month. It is a
great pleasure and a great opportunity to come before
you today and contribute to this critical debate, and I
am grateful for the invitation. Speaking both as
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and as Chair of the United
Nations Development Group, I think there are few
more important current tests of the United Nations than
helping East Timor to full nationhood.

It is a test, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has just outlined, in which the
United Nations has already enjoyed significant success
and learned some tough lessons. Let me take this
opportunity to pay special tribute to Sergio Vieira de
Mello for his strong leadership and deep personal
commitment in helping guide the country through this
very difficult transition. We, his colleagues, are very
proud of him, but not surprised by his success. His
leadership has been key to providing a strong,
coordinated response from the United Nations system.
As the Council is aware, United Nations humanitarian
and development agencies have been active in East
Timor since September 1999. Currently nine -UNDP
(including the United Nations Volunteers), the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health
Organization, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Office for Project Services and the
United Nations Population Fund-maintain a
presence in Dili. As Sergio kindly pointed out, the
United Nations country team, led by a United Nations
Development Coordinator, has, I hope, been able to
provide a dynamic resource and support in helping
cope with this, the first phase of the transition to
independence.

Now, we face a tougher question, as was just
outlined. How can we best support the process of
helping move East Timor to a path of strong,
sustainable development? The answer, I believe, lies in
building on the strong work which the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and others have begun with their
contributions, from overseeing the repatriation and
reintegration of some 175,000 refugees to the
distribution of food aid to 180,000 vulnerable people.

We have already begun the work of building that
critical bridge between emergency work and longer-
term rehabilitation and development. United Nations
agencies and programmes have, in collaboration with
development partners, including non-governmental
organizations, spent some $136 million to address
short-term needs while starting to build real capacity
for the future. Our collective achievements to date
include over 1,000 classrooms reroofed; a functioning
health care system re-established; six power stations
and 120 kilometres of road repaired; the training of 200
public servants, including judges, public prosecutors
and public defenders, and the rehabilitation of the
courts; the basic training of youth auto mechanics,
electricians and carpenters, and the establishment of
new employment centres; support for 60 national non-
governmental organizations; and the provision of
technical, administrative and management skills
through 500 United Nations Volunteers.

To help guide future policy decisions, the United
Nations family has also undertaken a detailed
assessment of future development needs. UNDP, the
Asian Development Bank and the World Bank are
carrying out a comprehensive poverty assessment and
UNDP will have completed a benchmarking national
human development report in time for independence.
We are also, I think, all trying to play a key role in the
coordination of the new development process,
supporting the nascent East Timorese National
Planning and Development Agency and helping to
ensure a coherent response from the donor community.

But even as we reflect on what we have done, we
must be honest about acknowledging what has not yet
taken place. The United Nations as a system has had a
difficult time making real progress in the area East
Timorese people most need help in: building the
institutional capacity to manage their own country and
meet the needs oftheir people themselves. For a nation
of 850,000 people that started with just 60 qualified
secondary school teachers, 20 doctors and little in the
way of effective systems of governance, that remains
an enormous task. But it is where the United Nations
development focus must now be turned, using our
skills and experience to help develop sound democratic
institutions and a strong, accountable public service
while committing to remain on afterwards as a full
development partner.

That kind of capacity-building is one of UNDP's
special strengths and we have already been designated
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
as the lead agency for capacity-building in support of
the Transitional Administration. To that end, we have
already, in consultation with sister agencies and other
partners, developed a broad plan of action to help do
this in East Timor in key areas, from direct support to
leadership for transition, to human resources, to
electoral assistance and to the establishment of a fully-
functioning justice system.

It is clearly a very ambitious agenda, but, I think,
an achievable one. It provides a clear framework for
the United Nations system to prove how we can
respond to such challenges - in the spirit of the
Brahimi report - in a more coherent manner built
around shared objectives. We are committed to
working closely with the donor community, the Bretton
Woods institutions, civil society and other partners to
achieve it.

But we and this Security Council must also face
the fact not only that future funding remains uncertain,
but that currently adequate resources are not being
made available for this critical, forward-looking task of
capacity-building. So, in closing, I would like to urge
the Council to help seek out new ways of either
adapting current funding arrangements or establishing
new ones that ensure that the kind of issues I have
outlined are not neglected, but are put, as they need to
be, at the heart of preparations for independence.

To fund the current Administration's costs
without investing in building on East Timorese
administration for the future is evidently short-sighted
but, nevertheless, in many ways, frankly, the sum of
our current approach. We now need a funding and
programming strategy that builds towards
independence, so looking beyond the present recurrent
needs.

Jose Ramos-Horta, our friend and colleague and
the future Foreign Minister of East Timor, who is here
with us today- and to whom I think Sergio and I
would both defer as the one with the decisive voice in
this Chamber on the future needs and goals of the East
Timorese-and his colleagues need our support for
tomorrow even more than they need it for today. There
is no more important task than to help them build the
people and institutions of an independent East Timor.
