Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report (see S/2017/922, annex) on the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
unanimous adoption ofresolution 2384 (2017), renewing
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Althea operation, and we are grateful
to Italy for its role as penholder in facilitating the
negotiation of the draft resolution.

We would like to once again affirm our support
for Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity. We take note of the positive
developments, such as the signing of a transport
community treaty with the European Union and five
other Western Balkan countries, as indicated in the
report of the High Representative. We believe that
such progress will help to promote the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We
also take note of the continuing exchanges of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders of the countries
in the region, which we believe will strengthen good-
neighbourly relations and enhance cooperation in the
Western Balkans.

We are nevertheless concerned about some of
the reported developments undermining Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political stability, particularly the
divisive rhetoric and actions that continue to challenge
the constitutional order and integrity of the country's
judiciary at the State level. In that regard, we call on
all authorities and political leaders to fully respect the
decision ofthe Constitutional Court. Respect for the rule
of law and the authority of State institutions established
under the Dayton Agreement is fundamental to the
State-building process, and it is therefore vital that all
parties refrain from any provocative statements and
actions that could undermine Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty, territorial integrity, cohesion and
constitutional order.

We also take note of the disagreement over changes
to the electoral law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the issue must be handled very carefully,
since it has the potential to affect the formation of a
Government after the next election cycle and undermine
the country's institutional continuity and stability. It
is our hope that the ruling of the Constitutional Court
after its review of the country's election law will be
implemented in a manner consistent with the provisions
ofthe Dayton Agreement. We also encourage the parties
to engage in serious political dialogue to address their
differences over the electoral reform issue, which would
be particularly appropriate in the light of the upcoming
general elections in 2018.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his office in carrying
out their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We call on
all the parties to extend the cooperation essential to the
work of the High Representative. We also recognize
the vital role played by the European Union's military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in
maintaining the safety and stability of the country.

