Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to thank the Russian presidency for having
convened this important debate. It is a pleasure to
welcome the new representative of Japan. Let me also
take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his report
(S/2010/394) and briefing on this important issue, as
well as Under-Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for
her valuable contribution. We also welcome the presence
of Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale, Permanent
Representative of Somalia to the United Nations.
Let me express our strong support for the
presidential statement just adopted (S/PRST/2010/l6).
We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

We express our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack that took
place in Mogadishu and to the people and Government
of Somalia. This tragic event provides additional proof
of how delicate and complex the struggle for stability
in Somalia is. The toll of victims on the front line
obliges us to redouble our efforts and to work together
for a better future for the Somali people.

Bosnia and Herzegovina also wishes to join the
Secretary-General and other delegations in expressing
its deep sorrow and shock in regard to the tragic
information from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We strongly condemn the reported crimes and
join the call to fight and end impunity in this regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains deeply
concerned by piracy off the coast of Somalia, which
poses a threat to international peace and security in the
region and to international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. These acts are illegal and
cannot be tolerated.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on possible options to further the aim of prosecuting
and imprisoning persons responsible for acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia
(S/2010/394). We look forward to the outcome of this
debate and to its long-term impact.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its full support
to the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
ongoing Djibouti peace process. We share the view of
other delegations that the measures to build the
capacity of the State institutions in Somalia, in addition
to the reinforcement of sovereignty, will significantly
contribute to the eradication of the piracy off the coast
of Somalia that negatively affects the entire region and
beyond.

We must bear in mind that a long-term solution
can be achieved only through fighting the root causes
of the piracy off the coast of Somalia. Thus, Somali
institutions and jurisdiction should benefit from the
option considered the most adequate and effective.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to appoint a special adviser on legal issues
related to piracy off the coast of Somalia. We also
recognize and emphasize articles 100, 101 and 105 of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
as the legal framework applicable to combating piracy.

The engagement of States, in particular Kenya
and Seychelles, and their role in piracy prosecutions
are commendable. We encourage States to continue
those ongoing efforts, which contribute to peace and
stability in the region.

We commend the efforts of the European Union
Naval Force Operation Atalanta, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, the Coalition Maritime Forces
and of States acting in their national capacities, in
cooperation with the TFG, other States in the region
and each other, to suppress piracy and to protect
vessels transiting through the waters off the coast of
Somalia. Furthermore, we commend the African Union
and the troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
for their important role and hard work in stabilizing the
situation in Somalia.

An important aspect of fighting piracy is the
imprisonment of convicted pirates. Recent trials have
shown that the sentences may be lengthy. We commend
the work of the United Nations offices in the region,
especially assistance and capacity-building programmes
run by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
cooperation with the European Union in Kenya,
Seychelles and Somalia. Prison reform and
construction of infrastructure are essential.

Establishment of the International Trust Fund
with the purpose of supporting adequate measures
against piracy is important, and we encourage all States
to continue logistic and financial support. We believe
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
with its four supporting Working Groups, is an
effective international cooperation mechanism on all
aspects of the fight against piracy. We encourage the
Group to continue its engagement.

In conclusion, we remain hopeful that fighting
the root causes of piracy will give results in the near
future through local, regional and international efforts
by establishing the rule of law and effective
governance, as well as by creating new employment
and economic opportunities for the Somali people.

