Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief this meeting on behalf of the European Union (EU) at such a critical time for the future of democracy and peace in the Central African Republic. The upcoming elections provide a unique opportunity to firmly entrench the country on its democratic path. The past months have seen increased political tensions over the process. That was to be expected. However, it reminds us that only a transparent, credible, peaceful and inclusive electoral process that favours dialogue and consensus, respects the constitutional order and ensures acceptable quality standards can guarantee its credibility and set the basis for a brighter future for the people. The next steps will be even more crucial following the recent modification of the electoral law. As has been said by the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, we continue to encourage the participation of refugees in that process. As the Council knows, the European Union is providing more than half the budget for the preparations of the elections, as well as expertise to strengthen the capacity of Central African institutions. All political stakeholders - the majority, the opposition and civil society - should act responsibly, and the authorities should double their efforts to ensure a credible electoral process in a constructive and open spirit and in close coordination with its partners and donors. In such a febrile context, we witness disinformation campaigns in the media with concern. Government and political actors should do everything to ensure the transparency of the media. We are ready to work with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to document such campaigns. I now turn to the peace and reconciliation process. Since the signature of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, important progress has been made. But we have also seen continued violations perpetrated by some armed groups. We welcome MINUSCA's actions in that respect. Dialogue among parties, the re-engagement of both sides - the Government and the armed groups - and the revitalization of the agreement, in particular relaunching the follow-up mechanisms, seem more necessary than ever. The agreement needs new impetus, but without compromising on its message - no impunity, meaning that those that violate it should pay the price. In that regard, we call on the guarantors, as well as the facilitators and the region, to redouble their efforts in support of the effective implementation and respect for the agreement. The EU will continue to be one of the strongest supporters of the Central African authorities and population in their efforts towards peace, reconciliation, democracy and recovery. To that end, we are mobilizing all our efforts - political, humanitarian, cooperation development, security and crisis management, including, as was mentioned, through a new civilian Common Security and Defence Policy mission to contribute to security sector reform. All such efforts are to accompany the Central African Republic on the path of State-building, the rule of law and the realization of its economic opportunities - a path where civil society, women and young people need to be given a greater role. In all those efforts, we are more than ever committed to closely cooperating with the United Nations, the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States, as well as all partners involved, including in particular neighbours of the Central African Republic. On this occasion, I would like to pay tribute to the work of MINUSCA and of its leadership. The EU supports the recommendations of the Secretary-General to extend the MINUSCA mandate for another year.
