Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I thank the
Argentine delegation for having organized this open
debate and welcome your presence, Madam President,
among us as a demonstration of the importance that
your country attaches to the subject.

I also thank the Secretary-General and all other
speakers for their statements. I welcome Ms. Samantha
Powers, the new Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, and wish her every success
in assuming her new function.

The numerous discussions held on the issue of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations have all indicated that the
United Nations is and must remain at the centre of the
international collective security mechanism and that,
in that context, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

However, the proliferation of increasingly complex
and multidimensional conflicts has required the
regional and subregional organizations to commit
firmly and with greater determination to the prevention
and resolution of crises in their respective geographical
spheres. Their important role has led to further
reflection on the nature and form of cooperation between
the world Organization and the regional actors. We
believe that such cooperation should not be limited to
its traditional context in the maintenance of peace, but
that it should go further and focus on finding the causes
of conflict and ways to prevent and resolve it, as well
as peacebuilding, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, and the fight against impunity for perpetrators
of serious violations of human rights. My delegation
welcomes the fact that the presidential statement just
adopted by the Council (S/PRST/20l3/l2) stresses the
importance of all those issues in the framework of
cooperation.

Insofar as these issues are common to all regional
and subregional organizations, I will concentrate my
remarks on cooperation between the United Nations
and African organizations. In that regard, I welcome
and fully endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia. However, I would first
like to acknowledge the important role played by all
regional and subregional organizations throughout the
world in the struggle to maintain international peace
and security.

In Africa, the main factor in the transformation
of the Organization of African Unity into the African
Union (AU) was the creation of the African peace and
security architecture, under which the continental
organization, in cooperation with the regional economic
communities, gradually assumed responsibility for
the maintenance of security on the continent, thereby
affirming its role as a major partner of the United
Nations. In that context, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has played a key role in
the maintenance of peace. It has long been responsible
for its own fate by intervening in Liberia, Guinea-
Bissau, Sierra Leone and recently in Mali in order to
restore peace before receiving international support.

Togo welcomes the development in recent years
of the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union based on the spirit of
subsidiarityy and the accountability of regional actors,
as recently manifested in the joint efforts to combat the
threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army in Central
Africa and the Great Lakes region, and especially the
support provided by the United Nations to the African
Union Mission in Somalia.

The positive momentum of that cooperation must
continue to strengthen. The creation 10 years ago of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the active cooperation
with subregional organizations such as ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to
settle ongoing crises in West and Central Africa, the
Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes region form part of
such positive action.

However, we believe it essential to further clarify
the relationship between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council in order to better
define their respective responsibilities and to allow
both organizations to benefit from their respective
advantages in the spirit of resolution 1631 (2005).
That will assist in, inter alia, avoiding the frustrations
and misunderstandings that sometimes arise due to
differences in strategies or solutions between the two
organizations.

One advantage of their regional and subregional
experience and expertise is that the organizations are
often more quickly informed about evolving situations
that could lead to conflict. The United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, should therefore
strengthen ties with those organizations with a view
to responding faster and protecting people in danger.
An acceptable relationship must be found between
the willingness of those organizations to assume the
task of conflict management, or at the least to provide
leadership, and the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, as those organizations are in the best
position to assess the most appropriate approach to
conflicts in their region. In any event, there should be
no conflict of responsibility or procrastination in the
actions to be taken when people's lives are at stake and
when the State's capacity to protect them is lacking.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should prioritize
the critical issue of the financing of peacekeeping
operations, which has always been a major challenge to
regional organizations in assuming the responsibility
of security in their regions. The United Nations and
its institutional partners must continue to promote the
greater diversification and sustainability of funding for
peacekeeping operations.

We hope that this discussion will generate new
ideas and strategies in order to expand, deepen and
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations with a view
to strengthening the capacity of the international
community to respond effectively to new and old
threats to international peace and security.

