Mr. Danforth (United States of America): The
Council has before it yet another draft resolution
regarding the Middle East situation, and once again the
draft resolution is lopsided and unbalanced. It is
dangerously disingenuous because of its many material
omissions. Because of that lack of balance and because
of those omissions, the draft resolution lacks
credibility and deserves a "no" vote.

As members consider the current draft resolution,
I ask them to perform a simple analysis. Consider first
what the draft resolution says and then what it fails to
say. The draft resolution condemns Israel's military
actions in Gaza. It criticizes incursions into the
Jabaliya refugee camp. It condemns Israeli acts of
"destruction". And it laments extensive human
casualties among Palestinians. It demands that Israel,
as the "occupying Power" withdraw its forces
immediately. Tough words. The United States has no
problem with tough words, but only when they are
accurate and when there is balance.

Now consider what the draft resolution does not
say. It does not mention even one of the 450 Qassam
rocket attacks launched against Israel over the past two
years. It does not mention the 200 rockets launched
this year alone. It does not mention the two Israeli
children who were outside playing last week when a
rocket suddenly crashed into their young bodies. It
does not mention the undisputed fact that Qassam
rockets have no military purpose and that they are
crude, imprecise devices of terror designed to kill
civilians. It does not mention that Hamas took credit
for killing those Israeli children and maiming many
other Israeli civilians, calling those deaths and
woundings a "victory". It does not mention that the
terrorists hide among Palestinian civilians, provoking
their deaths, and then use those deaths as fodder for
their hatred, lawlessness and efforts to derail the peace
process. It does not mention the complete failure of the
Palestinian Authority to meet its commitments to
establish security among its people. It does not mention
any of those facts. Nor does it acknowledge the
legitimate need for Israel to defend itself. The draft
resolution is totally lacking in balance.

There is an old saying that silence indicates
consent. The silence here today is deafening. I said
yesterday, and I reiterate today, that when the rest of
the world gangs up on Israel, with insidious silence
about terrorism, it does not advance the cause of peace;
it encourages both sides to dig in, makes Israel feel
isolated and backed into a corner and discourages
dialogue.

The approach of the United States is to recognize
that both sides need to renounce violence, that both
sides need to recommit to the road map and that both
sides need to move quickly to establish a Palestinian
State. But until the Palestinians and those claiming to
act in their name stop their use of indiscriminate acts
of terror, Israel will likely continue to track down
terrorists wherever they may hide, often with a tragic
but unintended result of civilian casualties.

My friend Ambassador Baali reminded me that it
is very important to take an even-handed approach
when describing civilian casualties. Civilian casualties
are always tragic. The death of children is especially
tragic. It is tragic when they are Israeli children, when
they are Israeli civilians. It is tragic when they are
Palestinian children and Palestinian civilians. But
where the death of civilians is intentional, where the
death of civilians is the sole purpose of the attack, it is
not only tragic; it is reprehensible.

The draft resolution before the Council today not
only encourages the terrorists, it will not do anything
to prevent the predictable Israeli response. Ultimately,
a draft resolution such as this one emboldens terrorists,
encourages counter-attacks and contributes to the
ultimate terrorist goal of derailing the peace process.

The Security Council should reverse the incessant
stream of one anti-Israel draft resolution after the other
and apply pressure even-handedly on both sides to
return to the road of peace. The United States will vote
"no" on this draft resolution.

