Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, and the Gabonese
presidency of the Council for organizing this very
important debate on a key topic that has particular
relevance for the region of Central Africa. We are
grateful for the interest shown in this matter by the
Deputy Secretary-General. We appreciate the presence
of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
We listened with great interest to what the Secretary
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States had to say.

However, let me also say a special word of thanks
to Executive Director Costa. Since we joined the
Council a year ago, we have had many occasions to
listen to his presentations. For obvious reasons, we
know his work well and I must say that what he told us
today was once again a model of precision, clarity and
frankness.

We align ourselves fully with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union, but
let me also add the following points.

Small arms and light weapons are commonly
termed the real weapons of mass destruction, as they
are responsible for an exceedingly high toll of human
lives on a regular basis. According to the statistics that
we have seen, they cause the deaths of more than
500,000 people annually - approximately 1,400
people per day. The vast majority of the Victims are
civilians.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated on an
earlier occasion, small arms facilitate a vast spectrum
of human rights Violations, such as rape and other
forms of sexual violence, torture and the forced
recruitment of children by armed groups or forces. In
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the Council noted that the excessive
accumulation and destabilizing effect of small arms
and light weapons pose a considerable impediment to
the provision of humanitarian assistance and have the
potential to exacerbate and prolong conflicts, endanger
civilians, and undermine security and the confidence
required for a return to peace and stability.

Today's draft presidential statement also
underlines the fact that the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons fuels armed conflict and thereby has
various harmful effects on the civilian population,
including gender-based Violence and the recruitment of
child soldiers. As others have already said today, it is
very clear that such challenges require a firm response
at the national, regional and global levels.

For that very reason, we see the importance of the
initiative of the Economic Community of Central
African States to draw up a legally binding instrument
on the control of small arms and light weapons, their
ammunitions and all equipments that might be used in
their manufacture. Mr. Sylvain-Goma gave us a
detailed presentation on the various activities of the
Community, but we very much believe that this core
initiative deserves support. For that reason, we have
also decided to support it financially, from an Austrian
point of view. We look forward to the adoption of the
legally binding instrument.

Furthermore, we support other important regional
initiatives by African States aimed at fighting illicit
arms brokering, such as the establishment of a register
of arms dealers. We welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted today and the fact that it
acknowledges those two important Central African
initiatives.

In that context, let me comment on the invaluable
support provided by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, in particular the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa,
in promoting and implementing those and other
initiatives. The efforts of the Regional Centre aimed at
preventing the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons deserve our full support.

The illicit flow of such weapons is a problem that
goes beyond Central Africa and affects the whole
continent. In 2007, my country co-organized an
international conference in Ouagadougou, Burkina
Faso, on peace and security in West Africa. The
outcome document of the conference also envisioned
the possibility of a pan-African convention on the
control of small arms and light weapons - a vision
that we continue to support wholeheartedly.

We are pleased that the European Union Africa
Strategy comprises a segment on small arms and light
weapons and that the first pan-African project in the
fight against those weapons has recently been
launched, with the support of the African Union. It is
clear that such challenges as the fight against the illicit
trafficking of those weapons require a firm
internationally coordinated response. We need the
cooperation of States and international and
non-governmental organizations, which is also
acknowledged in the draft presidential statement.

At the global level, Austria strongly supports the
ongoing process towards an arms trade treaty, a legally
binding international agreement establishing a set of
basic rules to regulate the international transfer of
conventional arms, including small arms and light
weapons. Pending the adoption of such a global legal
instrument, the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
remains the only global forum and global instrument to
prevent the illicit trade in such weapons.

Convinced of the need for African States to be
actively involved and to participate in the upcoming
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action, which, as others have already mentioned, will
take place in New York in June under the chairmanship
of Mexico, we have teamed up with the United Nations
Development Programme to provide support for
African delegations to participate in that Meeting.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is closely interrelated with transnational organized
crimes, such as the illicit trafficking of drugs or the
illicit exploration of natural resources. This debate,
therefore, is in line with the Council's efforts to tackle
transnational threats to peace and security in a
comprehensive manner. In that regard, we welcome the
Council's call on Member States to accede to the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its protocols, and we commend
the assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in implementing those legal instruments.

In conclusion, Austria remains committed to
assisting African States, in particular those of Central
Africa, in building the capacities to counter and,
eventually, to prevent the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons and the respective ammunition. We call
on all Member States to support their efforts in that
regard.

