Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2334 (2016) on the Israeli settlements and
appreciates the important role played by the sponsors
in promoting its adoption.

The question of Palestine has been the crux of the
Middle East issue. It is also the underlying cause of
the situation in the region. Safeguarding the legitimate
national interests of the Palestinian people is the shared
responsibility of the international community. Recent
years have seen the stalled peace talks between the two
sides, the ever-expanding Israeli settlements, ongoing
violence and conflict, the constantly deteriorating
humanitarian situation and the growing tension between
Palestine and Israel, all of which has threatened the
vision of two States as well as regional peace and
stability.

China has all along supported the Council in
playing its due role on the question of Palestine.
Resolution 2334 (2016) adopted by the Council today
is significant in that it reflects the common aspiration
and wish of the international community and heeds
the just demand of Palestine and the Arab countries.
We urge Israel to implement 2334 (2016) in a practical
manner, immediately end its settlement activities and
stop demolishing Palestinian homes in order to create
conditions for the relaunch of the peace talks. China
encourages both sides to honour their respective
obligations, keep calm, exercise restrain and gradually
establish mutual trust so as to come back to the path of
peace negotiations as soon as possible.

China has been a firm supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people. China supports the Palestinian
people in establishing a fully sovereign and independent
State, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. China welcomes and supports all efforts that
help ease tension between Israel and Palestine, achieve
the two-State solution at an early date and support the
peaceful coexistence between the two sides. China is
ready to work with the international community in
scaling up the diplomatic efforts to promote an early,
comprehensive and just solution to the conflict between
Palestine and Israel.

