Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Lithuania on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February and
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
thematic open debate.

We would like to reaffirm our commitment to the
rule of law and we stress its fundamental importance
for political dialogue and cooperation among all
States. We are of the opinion that the rule of law has
a fundamental role in the further development of the
three main pillars upon which the United Nations is
built, namely, international peace and security, human
rights and development.

It is evident that a comprehensive approach to
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach based
on coherence among the various political, security,
development, human-rights and rule-of-law and justice
activities. While keeping in mind that the need for
universal adherence to the implementation of the rule
of law remains crucial, we need to promote justice and
the rule of law as indispensable elements for peaceful
coexistence and the prevention of armed conflicts.

The rule oflaw applies to all States equally, as well
as to international organizations, including the United
Nations and its principal organs. In that respect, the
promotion of the rule of law and justice should guide
all of their activities and provide predictability and
legitimacy to their actions.

Today, we all concur that the rule of law is one of
the key elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. In that vein,
justice, including transitional justice, is a fundamental
building block of sustainable peace in countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations. It is evident that
there is an urgent need for the international community
to assist and support such countries.

Member States, bound by the Charter of the United
Nations, reaffirm their duty to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means, and utilizing and promoting
tools for the pacific settlement of disputes is of the
utmost importance. We need to strengthen our response
at all stages of the conflict cycle - from prevention to
resolution and the implementation of peace agreements.
In that context, mediation is a cross-cutting tool to be
utilized at all stages of the conflict cycle.

Turkey therefore endeavours to strengthen the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
in conflict prevention and resolution, along with the
other members of the Group of Friends of Mediation,
which it co-chairs with Finland.

The success of efforts to promote the rule of
law at the international level depends on ensuring
States' strict compliance with the accepted rules and
principles, particularly those embodied in the Charter
ofthe United Nations and those arising from obligations
under multilateral treaties and international law in
general. Adherence to international law and respect
for the rule of law are intertwined, and securing them
both constitutes one of the core missions of the United
Nations.

The rule of law is not an abstract concept. We
need to find better ways and means to apply it in
concrete terms. In that respect, national ownership of
the rule of law is crucial. We need to promote rule-of-
law assistance activities and strengthen justice and
security institutions that are accessible and responsive
to citizens' needs and that promote social cohesion and
economic prosperity.

It is equally important to recognize the need for
enhanced efforts aimed at capacity-building in justice
and security institutions, especially in the police,
prosecutorial, judicial and corrections sectors.

There is an obvious demand for strengthened
international cooperation among Member States for the
promotion of the rule of law in all its aspects. With that
expectation, donors, regional, subregional and other
international organizations and civil society actors can
play an important role in promoting capacity-building,
including through education and training on issues
related to the rule of law.

Terrorism continues to pose one ofthe most serious
threats to international peace and security. However,
all measures used in the fight against terrorism must
be in compliance with the obligations of States under
international law. In a similar manner, based on the
principles of shared responsibility and in accordance
with international law, we need to cooperate to
dismantle illicit networks and counter the drug problem
and transnational organized crime in order to strengthen
the rule of law.

The United Nations has an important role to play in
broadening the areas of international cooperation aimed
at enabling Member States to implement international
treaties more effectively. Concurrently, United Nations
assistance with the capacity-building needed to
implement international treaties is vital, particularly
for developing countries. The rule of law would not be
possible without effective jurisdictional mechanisms
at the national and international levels. Effective
implementation of multilateral treaties remains at the
heart of establishing the rule of law between States.

We attach the utmost importance to the Declaration
of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1), adopted
on 24 September 2012, and the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2012/1) of 19 January 2012. We also note
the important role played by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme as the joint global focal point
for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule
of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations.

Lastly, promoting accountability is an important
tool at the disposal ofthe Security Council in discharging
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Granting impunity
or immunity to the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes could cause serious harm to the delicate fabric
of societies and undermine international peace and
security.

The Security Council has the authority and
the moral responsibility to respond to the historic
challenges that we are facing today. The rule of law can
prevail in establishing international peace and security
only if the people believe in it.

Thank you.

