Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Over the past two days, 10 of the thousands of
missiles that have fallen on the Syrian capital landed
on the headquarters of the Red Crescent in Damascus,
the main headquarters of the Syrian Red Crescent, in
the Abu Ramani neighbourhood of Damascus. Those
missiles were launched by the moderate armed groups
in Al-Ghouta. Thousands of people died, including
Dr. Hassan, a professor at the Technological Health
Institute in Damascus. A French colleague and friend,
Thierry Mariani, said:

(spoke in French)

"Like hundreds of others over the past five years,
Dr. Hassan Haj Hassan was killed by shells fired
from Ghouta on Damascus by these moderate
rebels. Those dead and are not entitled to media
compassion; they are on the wrong side of history.
When will there be balanced coverage?"

(spoke in Arabic)

This French citizen accurately described the
suffering of the Syrian people as a result of the launching
by terrorists of missiles against Damascus. He had
visited Aleppo in 2017, and as he was leaving Free
Syrian Army gangs fired rockets at the airport. Luckily
he was not hurt, but since then the Aleppo airport has
been closed because it is unsafe. Also. the head of the
Syrian Red Crescent in Idlib, Dr. Muhammad Al-Waty,
was kidnapped by moderate armed groups.

My colleague the Permanent Representative of
France said that we must observe a truce, andI agree with
him. However, I think that we also need to implement
the 29 other Security Council resolutions on the
situation in Syria, ofwhich 13 relate to the fight against
terrorism. We need not only a month-long cessation of
hostilities; we also need to see the implementation of
the 29 other resolutions that the Council has adopted.

My colleague the British Ambassador told us
horrific stories that he heard from other people. Perhaps
he has not heard about what the British forces have done
in Iraq, Palestine and Libya.

The British Government went to the Malvinas and
fought Argentina for an island that it does not own and
that is situated tens of thousands of kilometres away
from the United Kingdom. However, I say to my British
colleague that his Government - and I am not using
the term "regime", because I respect international
law - is preventing us from countering terrorism in
our own territories. We are not going thousands of
kilometres away, we have not been fighting in other
countries. It is in our own territories that we are
combating terrorism - terrorism that is supported by
the Government of the United Kingdom.
During the meeting on Thursday (see S/PV.8186), I
explained the reality of what is happening in Syria - the
suffering of civilians as a result of the actions of armed
terrorist groups. I assure members once again that the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has taken all
the de-escalation initiatives seriously and has observed
them so as to protect the lives of its citizens and to stop
those who have been trading in their pain and blood.
In that regard, I note that the Syrian Government has
complied with the Astana agreement on establishing
de-escalation zones and stipulated a number of
commitments, including compelling the signatory
armed groups to sever any ties they have with terrorist
organizations, especially the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front and all
other affiliated groups. At the same time, the Astana
agreement gave the Syrian Government the right to
respond in case of any violations by those armed groups.

It was not at all surprising to us that those terrorist
armed groups would not comply with any of those
initiatives, but would use them as an opportunity to
reorganize their forces and their terrorist fighters,
acquire more arms, military equipment, human and
logistical support and perpetuate their crimes against
the Syrian people. They are receiving instructions
from certain States members of the Council, as well
as regional actors that are practicing State terrorism to
ensure the obstruction and failure of those initiatives
and agreements.

Since the signing of the agreement on the
establishment of de-escalation zones, these armed
groups have systematically violated it. In responding
to the violations, the Syrian Government has exercised
extreme self-restraint to protect the lives of civilians
and salvage the agreement that terrorist armed groups
and the countries that sponsor them have been trying to
obstruct since the moment of signing it. However, these
violations have become repeated and serious and have
affected the lives of 8 million civilians living in the
capital, Damascus, and its suburbs. Attacks have been
waged by launching rockets and missiles and using car
bombs, with Syrian military sites being targeted. All
this has led to an unbearable situation that we cannot
condone. As a State, we bear a responsibility towards
our citizens and we have a sovereign right to counter
terrorism. We are also receiving repeated appeals
from Syrian citizens for protection - their families,
their children, their schools - from the acts of these
terrorist armed groups

In the light of these violations and terrorist acts,
the Syrian Government has had to take the necessary
steps to protect its citizens. We exercised our legitimate
right to defend them. At the same time, we have taken
all the steps necessary to ensure the safety of the
civilians who have been taken hostage by these groups
and used as human shields inside eastern Ghouta. In
cooperation with our Russian friends, we also ensured
the safe passage of civilians out of danger from 4 to
14 February. We have provided shelter and food and
necessary medical care. The Government has paid for
all that assistance. We have called upon armed groups
to lay down their weapons and stop their terrorism from
residential places and neighbourhoods, and instead
engage in national reconciliation initiatives.

Of course, the appeals of 8 million Syrians do not
reach the Secretariat or the representatives of the United
States, the United Kingdom and France, although they
receive appeals from their proxies - terrorist armed
groups and White Helmet terrorists, the new legitimate
representative of the Al-Nusra Front. It seems that these
countries decided today to replace the black flags of
ISIL and Al-Qaida with white flags in Iraq and the
White Helmets in Syria. We are therefore done with
using the black colour; we are using the white colour
now, white flags in Iraq and White Helmets in Syria.

According to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
which we all negotiated and reached consensus
on, the basic principle that governs the delivery of
humanitarian aid is respect for the sovereignty of the
country concerned as well as coordinating with it
fully in any activity in which the United Nations is
engaged on the territory of the country in question.
However, such principles lose all value when they are
subject to the political whims and double standards of
the Secretariat and some more influential countries,
particularly when it comes to implementing them in
Syria. How else can we explain that some countries
submit draft resolutions on the situation in Syria and
negotiate them for many weeks with all actors, but
excluding the country concerned? This is what I asked
the day before yesterday. How do we explain that the
Resident Coordinator in Damascus sends a note to
the Syrian Foreign Ministry on 14 February stressing
that the aid convoys reached 2.3 million Syrians in the
so-called besieged and hard-to-reach areas in 2017,
while the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs presented completely false figures yesterday to
tarnish the image of the Syrian Government and to give
Western countries in the Security Council justification
for targeting the Syrian Government and its partners?
The Resident Coordinator said that aid had reached
2.3 million Syrians. Butjust two days ago, Mr. Lowcock
said that aid had reached only 20,000 people.

Along with some members of the Council, we
have said repeatedly over the past seven years that to
end the suffering of civilians in Syria we do not need
non-consensual draft resolutions, nor do we need to
adopt new resolutions or hold regular or emergency
meetings. We do not need to deplete United Nations
resources to prepare periodic reports that rely on
unreliable sources. We do not need to establish a
committee here and a body there. We need to implement
the 29 - now 30 - Security Council resolutions
that have been adopted; it is quite a coincidence that
by adopting resolution 2401 (2018) today we have
reached 30 resolutions. These resolutions should
be implemented.

The Governments of some countries should stop
spending billions of dollars to support and finance
armed terrorist groups and provide them with arms.
The latest we have heard is that the United States of
America has allocated $4 billion to ublically fund the
terrorists in Syria. Those countries must stop opening
their borders and airports to facilitate the flow of
terrorist fighters to Syria. They must allow the Syrian
people to shape its future and restore its security and
stability without any foreign interference.

You said, Mr. President, that the Council rejects
anything that violates the purposes and principles
of the Charter. Yes, this is very precise. You called
also for the implementation of today's resolution
in all parts of Syria, which is how we interpret this
resolution in Damascus. Resolution 2401 (2018) must
be implemented in all parts of Syria, including Afrin,
United States-occupied areas and the Golan.

In addition, let me make it clear that the
Governments of the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and France and their enablers in the
region should stop holding meetings in Washington,
DC, Paris and London, establishing groups, bodies
or forums and devising what they refer to as strategic
plans reminiscent of colonial times. Following a
meeting in Washington, DC, they announced that they
had drafted a plan to divide Syria within a year - I
am just recounting what they said. The strategic plans
contained in the document adopted in Washington,
DC, are aimed at dividing Syria, changing its political
system by force, spreading terrorism and maintaining
an illegitimate military presence in our territories. I say
to my colleague the Permanent Representative of the
United States, who threatened us here at the Council a
while ago and no one has responded to her, that none
of the plans will succeed; they will backfire sooner
or later.

According to Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, my country has the right to defend itselfwith all
of the legal tools available. A United States occupying
military presence exists in our territories, and we have
the right to resist it. The representative of the United
States has threatened us. We, in turn, give her a warning
from this Chamber because, according to Article 51 of
the Charter, we have the right to defend ourselves.

We again stress that double standards will continue
to mar international efforts to counter terrorism as
long as there is a partial approach to addressing the
threat of armed groups in Syria. Some members of
the Council claim that they are concerned about an
area controlled by terrorist armed groups in eastern
Ghouta. The size of that area is 50 square kilometres.
They continue to ignore three illegally occupied Syrian
territories covering 50,000 square kilometres. They
focus on 50 square kilometres and ignore an area of
50,000 square kilometres, of American, Turkish and
Israeli occupation. That simple comparison reflects
the political hypocrisy of some Member States, and the
inaction of the Security Council and of other bodies of
the United Nations, as the Organization succumbs to
the political and financial polarization that has become
the main feature of its working methods.

In conclusion, we will continue, with the support
our allies, to counter terrorism regardless of where it
exists in Syria - I repeat, regardless of where it exists
in Syria. We are exercising our sovereign right of self-
defence and a constitutional right in our territory and
within our national borders. We do not send forces to
conquer areas thousands of kilometres away, as the so-
called illegitimate international coalition does in my
country, Syria, today. We do not follow the example
of French forces in Mali, the Niger and other African
countries, or of the United States and United Kingdom
in Afghanistan, Libya today and Iraq previously. We
defend ourselves and counter terrorism within our
borders. We did not go to Mali, the Niger or the Malvinas.

We need serious commitment from Governments
that issue instructions to armed terrorist groups. The
groups should be given orders to immediately stop
targeting civilians and perpetrating terrorist acts - I
repeat immediately and without delay, as the resolution
stipulates. I stress that the Syrian Government will
reserve the right to respond as it deems appropriate if
such groups target civilians in any part of Syria with
even a single missile.

I take it that we all understand that paragraph 1 of
resolution 2401 (2018) also applies to the aggression
of Turkish forces in Afrin and the repeated acts of
aggression by the international coalition against my
country's sovereignty and territories. Of course,
resolution 2401 (2018) applies also to the continuous
violations by Israeli occupation forces against Syria's
sovereignty, by supporting terrorist factions in the
occupied Syrian Golan. That is how we interpret the
resolution just adopted by the Council.

The meeting rose at 3.35 pm.
