Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): The delegation of
Indonesia would like to express its appreciation for this
special event initiated by the Pakistani presidency of
the Security Council on United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that connection, we thank the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan, His Excellency Mr. Khurshid
Mehmud Kasuri, for taking the time to personally
preside over the meeting this morning. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks.

Before I continue with my statement, permit me
to also pay tribute to those United Nations personnel
who, since the Organization's first peace supervision,
in the Middle East in 1948, have given their lives for
the cause of peace. Indonesia would like to remind the
international community of the importance of ensuring
that the price those brave men and women have paid
for all of us is never forgotten.

One of the main preoccupations of the United
Nations is peace. Indeed, peace is the first desire of the
heart of every one of us. That is why the United
Nations Charter begins with a strong declaration of the
determination of the peoples of the world to safeguard
the future for peace. In that regard, peacemaking
continues to be a desirable feature of, and contribution
to, our efforts at the United Nations to fulfil that
promise to our children and to ourselves. Peacemaking
is one of the main pillars of the maintenance of
international peace and security and deserves our
support.

In that respect, my delegation reiterates that
peacekeeping operations must continue to observe the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and must respect the basic principles of peacekeeping.
For that purpose, my delegation shares the view that,
given various developments in the peacekeeping arena
in recent times, it is now appropriate for Member
States to take a close look at the issue, evaluate the
strategic direction of peacekeeping operations and
future trends and redefine the way forward.

Peacekeeping has been, and will always be, a
series of important, interrelated tasks that require a
good deal of coordination. Like every other area of the
work of the United Nations, it is also an evolving
process. As part of that evolution, peacekeeping has
grown in the past five decades, not only through the
work of the Security Council, which is charged by the
Charter with the maintenance of international peace
and security, but also through the work of the
Secretariat, the General Assembly and other bodies. In
the case of the Secretariat, for example, the Secretary-
General has periodically written seminal reports that
have contributed in no small way to developing and
guiding the field. In that connection, the acclaimed
1992 report "An Agenda for Peace (S/24111)" and the
2000 report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (S/2000/809), widely known as the Brahimi
report, have become landmark documents in the
evolution and development of the practice of
peacekeeping.

Similarly, the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, working
under the agenda item entitled "Comprehensive review
of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects", has continued to deliberate on the
Brahimi report. In its report of 28 March 2003
(A/57/767), the Special Committee requested the
Secretary-General to submit a report on progress made
in the implementation of its recommendations, a
request fulfilled by the Secretary-General in his report
dated 26 January 2004 (A/58/694).

The Brahimi report was a timely response to the
challenge of improving the capacity of the United
Nations to undertake the increasingly complex
peacekeeping operations that arose in the 19905. While
the recommendations contained in the report are still
being discussed or implemented, Member States and
the Secretariat must both continue to strive to improve
the planning, conduct and management of
peacekeeping operations.

A key success story of the Brahimi report has
been the successful establishment of the Peacekeeping
Best Practices Unit. We must ensure that the Unit
continues to gather the best lessons from existing
operations and that those lessons are swiftly
implemented.

Let me also say a word about the role of regional
organizations. My delegation believes that United
Nations peacekeeping would do well to take advantage
of the potential of those organizations in working for
peace and stability. Since a regional organization is
always closer to any theatre of conflict and has a better
understanding of its region, we endorse partnership and
cooperation between such organizations and the United
Nations.

The objective of peacekeeping is peace, but it
must be sustainable. Looking closely at recent
developments on the subject of peacekeeping, it is the
view of my delegation that, while a lot of very useful
work has already been accomplished, much more
remains to be done to ensure the achievement of
sustainable peace by peacekeeping missions. In that
context, it is also important to pay attention to the root
causes of conflicts.

My delegation supports the endeavour to review
the effectiveness of mechanisms governing the
planning, establishment, deployment and conduct of
peacekeeping operations. Likewise, it is important to
evaluate the level of logistic, financial and political
support for peacekeeping operations and future
requirements.

Finally, Mr. President, it is our hope that this
timely debate under your leadership will yield
constructive and purposeful contributions towards
more effective peacekeeping.

