Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Peruvian presidency for having convened this
emergency Security Council meeting, at the request of
France, together with eight other Council members. I
also wish to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mr. Thomas Markram, for their insightful briefings.

There are times in the lives of nations where what
is essential is at stake: life or death; peace or war;
civilization or barbarism; the international order or
chaos. That is the case today following the dreadful
chemical carnage that once again pushed the boundaries
of horror on Saturday in Douma. We are aware that two
new and particularly serious chemical-weapons attacks
took place in Douma on 7 April. The provisional toll
of human life is appalling. There are nearly 50 dead,
including a number of children, and 1,000 wounded.
That toll is likely to be even higher, as assistance cannot
reach some areas. Once again, toxic substances have
been dropped to asphyxiate, to kill and to terrorize
civilians, reaching them even in the basements where
they sought refuge. Chlorine gas has the particular
characteristic of being a heavy gas, capable of entering
basements. For that reason, it is used. That is the level
of deadly cynicism that has been reached in Syria.

There are no words to describe the horror of the
images that surfaced on 7 April, nearly one year after
the Khan Shaykhun attack, which killed nearly 80
people. What we see in the thousands of photos and
videos that surfaced in the course of several hours after
the 7 April attacks reminds us of the images we have
seen far too often: children and adults suffocating due
to exposure to concentrated chlorine gas. What we
also see are people suffering from violent convulsions,
excessive salivation and burning eyes, all of which
are symptomatic of exposure to a potent neurotoxin
mixed with chlorine to heighten the lethal effect. As
I mentioned, in total more than 1,000 people were
exposed to that deadly chemical compound.

The experience and the successive reports of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism leave no room for doubt
as to the perpetrators of this most recent attack. Only
the Syrian armed forces and their agencies have the
requisite knowledge to develop such sophisticated toxic
substances with such a high degree of lethality. And only
the Syrian armed forces and its agencies have a military
interest in their use. This attack took place in Douma,
an area that has been subjected to relentless shelling
by the Syrian armed and air forces for several weeks.
Unfortunately, the use of such weapons enables much
swifter tactical progress than conventional weapons.

We are all aware that the Syrian regime has
already been identified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism as the party responsible for
the use, on at least four occasions, of chlorine and sarin
gas as a chemical weapon. There are no illusions as to
the sincerity of the declaration delivered by Syria on the
state of its chemical stockpiles in 2013. Unfortunately,
we once again we have proof in the form of empirical
evidence. This dovetails with the regime's strategy of
terror against civilians. We have already experienced
this. At the worst, this is bad faith or, even worse,
complicity. The Damascus regime clearly seeks, by
sowing terror, to accelerate the capture of other urban
areas that it wishes to control. What could be more
effective to prompt those who resist the regime to flee
than sieges, a tactic worthy of the Middle Ages, in
addition to chemical terror. Let us make no mistake: the
children frozen in an agonizing death are not so-called
collateral victims. They are deliberate targets of these
chemical attacks, designed and planned for the purpose
of waging terror. The Damascus regime is conducting
State terrorism, with its litany of war crimes and even
crimes against humanity.

The offensive and the shelling conducted by the
regime, as well as by its Russian and Iranian allies, over
the past 48 hours prove the degree to which they have
engaged in a military race without any consideration
of the human cost. This latest escalation of violence,
punctuated by a new instance of the use of chemical
weapons, brings us face to face with the destructive
madness of a diehard regime that seeks to destroy
its people completely. And that regime's Russian and
Iranian allies are either unable or unwilling to stop it.
We are aware of the fact, and the Russian authorities
have confirmed this on several occasions, that Russian
military forces have a presence on the ground and in
the air in eastern Ghouta. On 7 April, as the second
chemical attack took place in Douma, Russian aircraft
were also taking part in air operations in the Damascus
region. Russian and Iranian military support is present
on the ground and at all levels of the Syrian war
machinery. No Syrian aircraft takes off without the
Russian ally being informed. These attacks took place
either with the tacit or explicit consent of Russia or
despite its reluctance and military presence. I do not
know which is more alarming when it comes to our
collective security.

The stakes revolving around this recent attack
are extremely grave. This is the latest proof of the
normalization of chemical weapons use, which we
should attribute not only to a regime that has become
uncontrollable and continues to gas civilians with
complete impunity, but also to its supporters, including
a permanent member of the Security Council. That
member failed in its commitment to implement
resolution 2118 (2013), which it, itself, co-sponsored.
That member's responsibility in the endless tragedy
that is the war in Syria is overwhelming.

France therefore of course turns towards Russia
today in order to put forward two demands. The
first demand is a cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of an immediate ceasefire in Syria, in line
with resolution 2401 (2018), adopted on 24 February,
which to date has never been upheld by the Damascus
regime. France deeply deplores the fact that, although
it was unanimously adopted, it was not possible to
implement that resolution, which provides for a truce
and emergency humanitarian access. The second
demand is the establishment of a new international
investigative mechanism that will be able to document
all of the factors of the attack in Douma and ensure
that the perpetrators are brought to justice. The end
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism last November
due to two successive Russian vetoes has stripped us
of an essential tool of deterrence. For that reason, we
support any initiative to bridge that gap. And in that
spirit France has committed to a partnership to combat
impunity for the use of chemical weapons. In that same
spirit, we endorse the draft resolution that has been put
forward today by the United States.

With this attack the Al-Assad regime is testing yet
again the determination of the international community
to ensure compliance with the prohibition against
chemica-weapons use. Our response must be united,
robust and implacable. That response must make it
clear that the use of chemical weapons against civilians
will no longer be tolerated, and that those who flout
that fundamental rule of our collective security will
be held accountable and must face the consequences.
The Al-Assad regime needs to hear an international
response, and France stands ready to fully shoulder its
role alongside its partners.

Ultimately, we know that only an inclusive political
solution will bring an end to the seven-year conflict,
which has claimed the lives of 500,000 people and
pushed millions to take the route of exile. That is
why France will remain fully committed alongside
the United Nations Special Envoy and in line with the
Geneva process. However, in the light of this most
recent carnage, we can no longer merely repeat words.
Without being followed up by deeds, such words would
be meaningless. I wish to reiterate here what President
Macron has stressed on several occasions: France will
assume its full responsibility in the fight against the
proliferation of chemical weapons. France's position is
clear. It will uphold its commitments and keep its word.

