Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the important post of President of
the Security Council. I am convinced that, given your
wisdom, experience and outstanding talent, you will guide
the Council to complete its work this month in a
satisfactory manner. I also wish to thank Ambassador Graf
zu Rantzau, President of the Council last month, for his
successful guidance of the Council's work.

We have all along stood for a peaceful settlement of
the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and opposed resorting
to sanctions or mandatory actions in this connection, for
facts have proved that sanctions or pressure will not help at
all, but will instead further complicate and perpetuate
problems.

We are of the view that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is an important factor for restoring peace and
stability in the region of the former Yugoslavia. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been cooperating with
the international community, including on such questions
as closing its border with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
international community should constantly encourage and
support these efforts by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and translate such encouragement, first of all,
into the gradual removal of sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

The report of the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY), recently transmitted by the Secretary-
General to the Security Council, states that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continues to fulfil its commitment to close its border with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, that there have been no
commercial transshipments across that border and that the
Mission continues to enjoy full freedom of movement and
good cooperation from the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This constitutes the basis of the
resolution just adopted. Though the report of the Co-
Chairmen mentions some violations of the embargo, it
also points out,

"the qualities and characteristics of the problems are
not significant". (5/1995/510, para. 3 7)

Given the very long border between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has
done its utmost.

Here I wish to emphasize that some delegations,
including the Chinese delegation, have different opinions
regarding the resolution just adopted. Certain delegations
even have serious reservations. They made some very
useful and reasonable suggestions during the
consultations. Regrettably, however, some sponsors were
reluctant to have full coordination and incorporate them.
This practice will undermine the democratization of the
Council's work and will not help its work proceed
smoothly in the future. However, considering that the
main purpose of this resolution is to continue the partial
suspension of sanctions against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which is the first step towards the complete
removal of sanctions, and will help create conditions for

 

the peaceful settlement of the Bosnian question and
encourage the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to make
further efforts in that regard, the Chinese delegation voted
in favour of the resolution just adopted.

The long absence of a solution to the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia has not only brought tremendous
sufferings to the people of the region, but has also posed a
threat to peace and stability in Europe and the world as a
whole. We are deeply concerned over the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia and strongly urge the parties concerned
to seek a solution acceptable to all through peaceful
negotiations by taking into account the fundamental
interests of the people there. At present, the priority should
be to enter into a cease-fire.

We also maintain that the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the independent States of the
former Yugoslavia should be fully respected, their
boundaries not be changed - especially not by force -
and the countries in the region recognize each other and co-
exist in amity and good-neighbourliness so as to bring an
early end to the conflict and the war in the region. This will
serve the long-term interests of the countries in the region
and contribute to the maintenance of peace and stability in
Europe and the world as a whole.

