Mr. Gopinathan (India): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
to discuss the ever-worsening situation in the occupied
territories, which is a growing cause of acute concern
and deep distress for all of us. Since 29 March, we
have made two statements on this agenda item, setting
out our position before the Council. I shall therefore be
brief.

The statement recently made by Peter Hansen,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which underlines the grievous
situation of civilians in the Balata and Jenin refugee
camps, is indeed extremely distressing and speaks for
itself. Israel's military actions against innocent
civilians will in no way serve its best interests or
provide the security it seeks for its people. In fact, the
consequences will be to the contrary. There can be no
justification for directing violence at innocent civilians.

Resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), recently adopted by the Security Council,
provide a road map for the restoration of normalcy. We
once again call upon both parties to implement those
resolutions. Israel must withdraw its forces from the
occupied territories immediately, and there should be a
ceasefire followed by the resumption of negotiations.
That is the clearly expressed and uniform sentiment of
the international community.

We understand that the Security Council met with
the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine yesterday. We hope
that this interaction will contribute to the immediate
implementation of the Council's resolutions and will
pave the way for the resumption of dialogue and
negotiations, so that the people of Israel and the people
of Palestine can live side by side within secure and
recognized borders, also paving the way for lasting
peace in the region.

In our earlier statements, we emphasized that
President Arafat, who enjoys wide support and respect,
is the symbol of Palestinian nationhood. His well-being
and safety are also of paramount concern to the
international community. We reiterate that all
restrictions placed on him should be lifted forthwith to
enable him to play his rightful role.

Another cause of serious concern is the continued
violations of the Blue Line. These risk further
exacerbating the situation in the region. They also pose
a threat to United Nations peacekeepers. We urge that
the violations be brought to an end immediately and
that the sanctity of the Blue Line be respected.

The situation in the Middle East is frighteningly
grave. On 7 April, the Council called on the parties to
cooperate fully and in good faith with ministers and
Special Envoys of the "quartet" and with the Secretary-
General, especially in the context of the forthcoming
visit of the United States Secretary of State to the
region. We urge the Security Council to work
assiduously with the parties concerned to bring to an
immediate end to the violence that has engulfed the
region and which could have very far-reaching
consequences. We convey to the Council our full
support in its endeavours.

