Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin by

joining previous speakers in thanking Mr. Kai Eide,

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

Afghanistan, for his briefing and the Secretary-General
for his report.

In the past few months, the international
community has recognized the increase in challenges
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. Military
measures remain critical to responding to the security
challenges. However, other steps will be needed in
addition to a military approach.

The situation in Afghanistan must be managed
with a strategy that incorporates not only security
actions, but also the promotion of governance and the
rule of law, as well as socio-economic development.
Indonesia therefore attaches primary importance to the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, which
serves as a road map for comprehensive action over the
next five years. We also attach great importance to
making real progress in the implementation of the
Action Plan on Peace, Reconciliation and Justice.

As the drug economy has helped sustain the
activities of insurgents, continued efforts to circumvent
that challenge are also crucial. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decrease in opium cultivation and
the decline in its production.

Also critical to achieving sustainable peace in the
country is an Afghan-led reconciliation process. That
effort must be inclusive and all parties involved must
renounce violence, respect justice, equality, freedom
and tolerance, and promote consultation. We recognize,
in that regard, the various recent initiatives undertaken
by neighbouring countries to assist the commencement
of inter-Afghan dialogue and reconciliation. We are
hopeful that those initiatives will achieve tangible
results.

The protection of civilians remains a critical issue
in Afghanistan. As indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, a total of 1,445 civilians were casualties in the
first eight months of 2008. My delegation therefore
continues to underline the importance of compliance
by all parties with international humanitarian and
human rights law and the appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of civilians. We also call on
international forces in Afghanistan to take additional
robust efforts to mitigate the risk of civilian casualties,
in accordance with the Security Council resolution
1833 (2008).

My delegation is concerned over the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. As pointed out
in the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/617), the
intensifying conflict, exacerbated by natural disasters,
has worsened the situation. In that regard, we attach
particular importance to expeditious resource
mobilization in response to the impending crisis.
Attacks on humanitarian workers and aid convoys are
exceptionally deplorable. Such attacks will increase the
suffering of the population in need. My delegation
therefore urges that every step be taken to end such
attacks immediately and permanently.

With regard to Afghan refugees, Indonesia
welcomes the forthcoming international conference on
return and reintegration of Afghan refugees. We are
hopeful that the conference will mobilize support for
the current return and reintegration of Afghan refugees
and internally displaced persons.

Partnerships with regional States as well as the
international community will remain key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. President
Karzai's participation in the recent summits of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is a welcome
step. Most urgent at the international level is the swift
honouring of pledges made at the Paris Conference. We
welcome, in that regard, efforts to enhance the
coordination of donor efforts and to strengthen aid
effectiveness.

With regard to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), my delegation
believes that the Mission will remain pertinent in
assisting the country to tackle various challenges to its
security and development. We, however, feel
concerned over the obstacles arising from the
deteriorating security situation in the country that
continue to hinder the implementation of its mandate.
We welcome the ongoing preparation by UNAMA to
open its new provincial offices. We are hopeful that the
expansion will help bring about a political surge in the
country, as envisioned by the Secretary-General in his
report.

Finally, Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its full
support for UNAMA and its work and contribution to a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan.

