Mr. Mayr-Harting: I thank you, Madam President,
for giving the floor to the European Union (EU). The
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania; the
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

While the Arab world is witnessing fundamental
change, the need to ensure meaningful progress on the
Middle East peace process remains as important as ever.
The European Union wishes to stress once again the
central role of the Quartet in that context and to
express its full support for the ongoing Quartet process.
It reaffirms its commitment to all elements of the
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178).
The Quartet, meeting on ll April, renewed its call on
the parties to meet those objectives (see SG/2182).

Negotiations are the best way forward if there is
to be a lasting resolution to the conflict. The European
Union therefore welcomes the expected exchange of
letters between the parties initiated on 17 April, and
urges both sides to build on the momentum of the
current contacts in order to resume direct talks. A bold
and decisive demonstration of political leadership is
needed from both sides.

The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
a two-State solution. The legitimacy of the State of
Israel and the right of Palestinians to achieve statehood
must never be called into question. The European
Union reaffirms its clear positions on negotiations with
regard to parameters, principles and issues, including
the conclusions of the EU Foreign Affairs Council in
2

December 2009, December 2010, May, July and
October 2011, and January 2012, as well as the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union to
the Security Council on 21 April 2011 (see S/PV.6520).
The European Union also reiterates its support for the
Arab Peace Initiative.

The European Union calls on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution
by taking actions that can build confidence and create
the environment of trust necessary to ensure
meaningful negotiations leading to a comprehensive
and lasting peace. At this critical juncture, it is more
important than ever for the parties to refrain from
provocative actions that undermine the prospects for
continuing the dialogue re-established in January, and
to respect their obligations under the Road Map. That
includes incursions by Israeli forces into Area A of the
West Bank, which put in jeopardy the success of
Palestinian institution-building efforts and the mutual
obligation to end all forms of incitement.

The European Union reiterates its support for the
Palestinian Authority's institution-building efforts and
its recurrent budget, to which the European Union is
the largest donor. The continuing financial difficulties
of the Palestinian Authority risk putting in danger the
major achievements it has made so far, not least in
providing security in the West Bank. Therefore, the
European Union underlines the necessity for other
donors to identify and transfer funds to assist the
Palestinian Authority.

However, the majority of the Palestinian
Authority's budget is met by its own customs and
taxation revenues. The European Union therefore
continues to urge the swift implementation of
improvements currently being discussed between the
parties to the mechanism by which those are collected
and transferred, which should be transparent and
predictable. Furthermore, monthly transfers of those
revenues are an obligation.

Among the factors that will help the Palestinian
economy become sustainable is the relaxing of Israeli
restrictions on access to land, water, raw materials and
export markets. Area C of the West Bank constitutes
the largest area of land for the Palestinians. Ensuring
access to that area will help the Palestinian Authority
achieve greater economic potential. The EU calls on
the parties to cooperate in order to facilitate the social
and economic development of Area C, which is of
12-30747
critical importance to the viability of a future
Palestinian State.

The European Union reiterates that settlements,
the separation barrier where built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the approval of new construction in a range of
settlements, such as Shvut Rachel, Gilo and Har Homa.
The European Union is also deeply concerned about
retroactive approvals that have been granted for
housing built without previous Israeli authorization in
settlements and outposts. The European Union is
closely following developments with regard to Migron,
the largest such outpost.

As regards Gaza in particular, the European
Union has followed with concern the recent escalation
of violence in Gaza and southern Israel. The situation
in and around Gaza will remain fragile and
unsustainable as long as the West Bank and Gaza are
not reunited under the legitimate Palestinian Authority,
adhering to the commitments undertaken by the
Palestine Liberation Organization.

The European Union calls for the complete
cessation of all rocket attacks on Israel and all other
forms of violence. The European Union calls for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and the
Agreement on Movement and Access, for the full
respect of international humanitarian law, and for an
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings. Despite some welcome progress, Israel
needs to take further meaningful and far-reaching steps,
allowing for the reconstruction and economic recovery
of the Gaza Strip. The European Union calls for a
solution addressing Israel's legitimate security
concerns.

The EU has consistently called for intra-
Palestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas as an important element of the unity of a future
Palestinian State and of reaching a two-State solution.
12-30747

Finally, regarding Syria, the European Union
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012) establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). The EU calls for the
immediate implementation of resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012), and urges the Syrian Government to
ensure the effective operation and deployment of the
Mission and allow freedom of movement, access and
communication. The European Union reaffirms its full
support for the six-point plan of Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and calls upon the Syrian Government
to immediately and visibly implement all elements of
the Joint Special Envoy's plan, as it committed to do in
its 25 March and 1 April communications to Joint
Special Envoy Annan.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Syria and the fragility of the
cessation of violence, in view of reports of the use of
heavy weaponry in civilian areas. The EU calls on the
Syrian Government to show a visible change by
withdrawing all troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks in order to facilitate
a sustained cessation of violence. It calls upon all
parties in Syria to immediately cease violence in all its
forms.

The European Union reiterates its concerns about
the humanitarian situation in Syria and urges the
Syrian authorities to grant immediate, unimpeded and
full access of humanitarian organizations to all areas in
Syria to deliver humanitarian assistance, including
medical care.

