Ms. Rice (United States of America): It was an
honour to lead the portion of the trip in Southern Sudan
and to co-lead it with Ambassador Lyall Grant in
Khartoum.

I should like to begin by thank Special
Representative Haile Menkerios and his team, who on
very short notice were able to welcome the Council
and support our visit supremely well. I want to extend
the same thanks to the Secretariat, the entire staff of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
the United Nations security personnel, as well as the
Government of Southern Sudan, for working hard to
make this mission a success.

The purpose of our visit was to underscore that
the Security Council is united in its desire to see the
3

Sudan's referendums on self-determination carried out
in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). We delivered the message that the
referendums should be held on time, that they should
be credible and that the results must be respected. We
sought to assess the status of preparations for the
referendums, as well as UNMIS's performance in
providing assistance for CPA implementation. We
delivered the message that we expect UNMIS to have
full and unhindered access and emphasized the
importance of addressing the humanitarian and
development challenges facing Southern Sudan,
regardless of the outcome of the referendums.

When we arrived in Juba on 7 October, crowds
lined the street outside the airport to welcome the
Security Council as we drove to meet with Southern
Sudan's President, Salva Kiir. During that meeting,
President Salva Kiir told the Council that people are
"gripped with fever for the referendum". He said that
expectations in the South are very high and that people
are focused on the referendums' date of 9 January
2011. President Kiir also warned that he fears that the
North may be preparing for war and may be moving
troops southwards. He stated that the South proposes a
United Nations-administered buffer zone, spanning 10
miles to the north and south of the border, in which no
troops would be present. President Kiir also shared his
concerns about unresolved border demarcation, the
delay in preparing for the referendum in Abyei and the
slow progress in the popular consultations process and
in negotiations on post-referendum issues such as oil
and wealth-sharing. He assured the Council that if the
southern referendum is delayed, the South will not
issue a unilateral declaration of independence, but
rather will conduct its own referendum in the South
and in the diaspora communities abroad.

Later that evening of 7 October, we attended a
reception hosted by the Government of Southern
Sudan, during which we spoke with the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau, which is composed of a
Chairman and four members. At the reception, we also
met with a cross-section of members of civil society in
the South, including the Archbishop of Juba, the
Coalition of Civil Society Organizations in Juba, the
South Sudan Islamic Council and the South Sudan
Youth Forum, as well as women leaders. They spoke
about the very tight timetable leading up to the
referendums and relayed concern that the Abyei
referendum commission has not yet been formed. One
person said that the North is "beating the drums of
war". They asked for international pressure and
referendum observers on the ground.

The next morning the Security Council visited the
Rajaf police training centre, where Southern Sudan is
training a professional civilian police force. These
police, who will help provide security during the
referendums, demonstrated procedures for high-risk
arrests, VIP protection and crowd control.
Impressively, the South started this centre from
scratch, which demonstrated its commitment to
institution-building. There are now 5,400 new recruits,
more than 300 of whom are women, with 6,000 more
scheduled to begin basic training in November. Asked
by some members of the Council about their
motivation for joining the force, many of the recruits
said "for freedom and to secure our country".

We had intended that the last leg of our trip in
Southern Sudan would be a visit to the town of Wau in
Western Bahr al-Ghazal to obtain a perspective on the
experience of Southern communities outside of Juba.
We had planned to visit a school and a clinic and to
meet with civil society. Unfortunately, the United
Nations plane taking us there experienced mechanical
difficulties just before takeoff. That part was fortunate,
given the nature of the problem. We were very grateful,
however, to the Russian helicopter contingent at the
Juba airport, which hosted us on its base and gave us a
good understanding of how it lives and how it operates,
while we were reconfiguring our programme. And we
are also grateful to UNMIS, which provided an
additional extended briefing to us that afternoon.
UNMIS reported that the Mission has increased its
presence at the state and county levels and is working
with local authorities to mitigate risks throughout the
referendum process.

In conclusion, we found that Southerners are
simultaneously very hopeful and very anxious. The
message we repeatedly heard is that they are strongly
committed to the 9 January date for the referendums
and, yet, they are concerned that this expectation may
not be met. And there is some fear of a resumption of
violent conflict. The international community and the
Security Council must remain steadfast in support of
full implementation of the CPA, including on-time
peaceful referendums and respect by all parties for the
results of the referendums.

