Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing.

Our experience on the Council over the past two
years has reinforced to us the need for an effective
international accountability framework. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) plays an important
role in that framework. Its existence sends a clear
message that the international community has the
tools to ensure that serious international crimes will
not go unpunished. The Security Council's ability to
make referrals to the ICC is an important part of that
framework. However, as we have stressed numerous
times, the Council must remain scrupulous in avoiding
perceptions that it is using referrals as a political tool,
particularly in the midst of a conflict. Such actions
risk politicizing the Court and can prolong both
the conflicts concerned and the process of seeking
accountability. Furthermore, the Council should not
make referrals unless it is also prepared to follow up on
their implementation. Sustained non-compliance with
resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations calls into question the very credibility
of the Council and the authority of its resolutions.

In our view, costs incurred by the ICC as a result
of decisions by United Nations organs should be
attributed to, and accounted from, the United Nations
budget. At the very least, Council members should not
obstruct open discussions on the issue, but should defer
to the General Assembly, which has the prerogative and
mandate to determine funding issues.

Developments in Libya have not yet paved the way
for re-establishing effective Government authority,
restoring the rule of law, protecting basic human rights
and providing justice for past violations. The situation
remains extremely fragile. As a result, the environment
for the ICC in taking forward the Council's Libya
referral remains extremely challenging.

The current security environment makes it almost
impossible for ICC staff to undertake investigations
on the ground. Moreover, Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
remains in detention in an area outside the custody
and control of the Government of National Accord. We
nevertheless commend the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continued efforts, and we welcome the
ongoing cooperation provided by Libyan Prosecutor-
General's Office.

The ICC is ofcourse a court oflast resort. It was never
intended to take the place of national justice systems,
but rather to complement them. However, Libya's
current domestic judicial options remain significantly
constrained, especially its investigative and judicial
capacities. We believe the international community,
including the ICC, has a role to play in helping to build
Libyan capacities in this area. The ICC's interactions
with Libya have given it useful practical knowledge of
Libya's circumstances and needs in that regard.

We note the Prosecutor's active efforts to encourage
the development of coordinated investigative and
prosecutorial strategies with regard to Libya-related
cases in order to help to close the impunity gap for ICC
crimes. We welcome the agreement in principle at the
recent meeting convened by the ICC with judicial and
investigative agencies from Libya and various interested
States to work collectively and in a coordinated manner.

While we remain supportive of the Prosecutor's
efforts in Libya, we cannot pretend that this referral
is currently the most pressing issue facing either
Libya or the Court. Moreover, we must be cognizant
of the broader political context in which this work is
being undertaken. The ICC is currently facing an
unprecedented situation in its relationships with some
ofits African members. None ofus should be surprised.
That situation has been brewing for some time. There
are genuine substantive concerns, and they need to be
thoroughly discussed. But we also need to get much
better at listening to, and engaging with, African States
on issues of concern to them.

New Zealand has tried to play its part in facilitating
such a dialogue in the ICC context as well as in the
General Assembly and here in the Security Council.
We were disappointed that the meeting between the
Council and the African Union ministerial committee
on the ICC, which we scheduled during our September
presidency, did not proceed. We need to see greater
willingness to prioritize such engagement. The recent
announcement by three African States that they intend
to withdraw from the Rome Statute should concern us
all. African States were among the earliest and strongest
ICC supporters, and we do not believe it is in anybody's
interests to now see them walk away.

Now is the time for an open, honest and respectful
dialogue between the Council, the ICC and its African
members, aimed at finding a way through the current
crisis that best serves our common goal of ending
impunity. As a friend of both the Court and of Africa,
New Zealand is committed to playing its part.

