Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and wishes to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.

My country joins in the expressions of appreciation
for the work that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its Head, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom, have
done and welcomes the renewal of the mandate just
approved by the Security Council. We also thank the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his exhaustive briefing.

The first year of Afghanistan's transformation
decade has been difficult and complex. There has
been a troubling deterioration in the security situation
due to an escalation in indiscriminate violence by
insurgent groups and terrorist attacks. The latest data
is unequivocal - 2015 broke yet another tragic record
in terms of civilian deaths. The increase concerns
mainly the weakest categories of society, including
women - up by 37 per cent from 2014; and children,
up by 1 per cent. As noted in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/218), there has also been a 78 per cent
increase in internal displacement and an increase in
migration. In this context, the Afghan forces have shown
great courage and resistance, at the cost of many lives
lost, but the threat of destabilization and the challenges
before Afghanistan today continue to be formidable and
to demand the support of the international community
as a whole.

Italy hereby reiterates its support for the efforts
made to establish peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan, and to protect the achievements reached
so far in the fields of democracy and civil and social
development. Among the most prominent of these are
the gains made in the rights of women and girls, which
we must do our utmost to preserve and consolidate. To
this end, together with our NATO partners, we have
renewed our presence in the framework of the Resolute
Support Mission. With our military contingent - which
is still the third-largest presence in the country, deployed
mainly but not exclusively in Herat - Italy fulfils its
role as framework nation for the western region of the
country, helping the Afghan National Security Forces
to strengthen capacity and address autonomously the
violent actions of insurgent groups.

We support the efforts of the National Unity
Government in the peace and reconciliation process
in Afghanistan. We salute the constructive dialogue
forged in recent months among the countries of the
region, in particular between the Governments of
Kabul and Islamabad, and we support the efforts of the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan Peace
and Reconciliation Process to foster peace talks between
the Government, the Taliban and other groups willing
to negotiate. In this context, it is essential to ensure
the active involvement of women's representatives in
negotiations, and we appreciate the will expressed in
this regard by the Afghan Government.

Improving the security situation is also crucial
to enabling Afghanistan to achieve growth and
self-sustaining development and to overcome the
current precarious economic situation, which creates
uncertainty and has driven many citizens to migrate.
That is why it is absolutely necessary for Afghanistan
to implement effectively the reforms outlined by the
National Unity Government within the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. Concrete
progress in economic governance, the rule of law,
the fight against corruption and respect for human
rights - and especially the human rights of women,
ensuring women's empowerment at every level of
society - are all priorities.

It is also more urgent than ever to continue to
pursue electoral reforms, in view of the parliamentary
and district votes scheduled for next fall. This will
enable the consolidation of the partnership with the
international community on the basis of the principle
of mutual commitments, in particular in view of the
Brussels conference and, above all, in the interest of
the country and its people.

