Ms. Amos: I would like to compliment the political
report (S/2015/298) presented by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis, along with a more
specific report (S/2015/305) on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq.

Since my previous briefing to the Security Council,
in November 2014 (see S/PV.7314), the number of
Iraqis requiring humanitarian assistance has grown
to over 8.2 million people, an increase of 3 million
in 5 months. That includes the 2.8 million people
Who have been internally displaced since the conflict
began in the Anbar governorate in January 2014. Half
of the displaced are children. All 18 governorates in
Iraq have been affected. Iraq also continues to host
approximately 250,000 refugees from Syria. Conflict,
targeted attacks on Civilians and intimidation - often
along ethnic and sectarian lines - continue to plague
the country. New displacement continues unabated,
with the displacement of an estimated 120,000 people
from Ramadi last month, which is a stark example of
the fragile situation in Iraq.

As the duration and scale of the Iraq crisis increases,
so does its urgency. Families can no longer afford to
sustain themselves. The resources of host communities
have been drained. Public services and infrastructure
are overloaded. Poverty and unemployment have
increased, and the cost of living has soared. Newly
displaced families are finding it increasingly difficult
to find safe areas of the country where people can host
them in their time of need.

I am also extremely concerned about the well-
being of the millions of Iraqis who live in areas outside
Government control, including under the control of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Next
month will mark one year since the attack on Mosul
and the spread of ISIL in the country. Reports indicate
deteriorating conditions in those areas, including
diminishing access to clean water, medical care and
food. Most of those areas, however, remain largely out
of the reach of humanitarian organizations. People are
becoming more and more cut off from the rest of the
country, with reports that many are now not allowed to
freely leave those areas or to communicate with those
on the outside.

I have reported to the Council on many occasions
about the flagrant violations of human rights that
persist in conflict situations. Iraq is no different.
Women and girls continue to experience horrific acts of
sexual violence, physical abuse and enslavement. Many
of the estimated 1,500 women and children who were
abducted by ISIL last year remain under the group's
control. The few women and girls who managed to
escape in the past few months tell appalling stories of
systematic rape, physical abuse, forced marriage and
human trafficking. Communities have welcomed those
women and girls upon their return, but are struggling to
cope with the magnitude of suffering that their mothers,
sisters and daughters have endured.

An entire generation of Iraqi children has been
put at risk by the conflict. They have been forcibly
recruited into armed groups, used as suicide bombers
and exposed to profound levels of violence, which will
affect them for the rest of their lives.

I am also concerned by reports that other parties to
the conflict are violating international law. Restrictions
on the freedom of movement of civilians by security
forces and armed groups are growing worse, thereby
limiting the ability of civilians to flee conflict and
enter safer territory or to return home after areas have
been retaken. In April, security or civilian authorities
in seven governorates restricted the entry of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) fleeing conflict in Ramadi.
Those acts are fuelling tensions between communities
and deepening fissures that will require significant
mediation over time to overcome.

The crisis in Iraq has also had a significant
impact on the availability of basic services, food and
shelter. Nearly 7 million people - or 20 per cent of
the population - are unable to access essential health
services and water and sanitation services due to the
conflict. At least half of them are estimated to be
women, and 18 per cent are children under the age of 5.
Dozens of hospitals and pharmacies have been damaged
or are closed. The Fallujah General Hospital has been
damaged over 30 times. Maternal and neonatal services
are nearly non-existent in the worst-hit areas. Water
and sanitation needs are particularly acute in non-camp
situations, where over 90 per cent ofIDPs live. The risk
of disease due to poor sanitation and limited access
to health services is a major concern, particularly as
cholera is endemic and measles is present.

Food insecurity has increased by 60 per cent in six
months; 4.4 million people now require food assistance.
The Government's public food distribution system is
operating, but the coverage is uneven. Reduced planting
and limited access to agricultural areas still under ISIL
control means that the prospects for future harvests are
bleak.

Over 1 million displaced Iraqis need shelter,
particularly in the central and southern areas of the
country, with more than 28 per cent of all IDPs living
in public institutions, including schools and mosques,
and some in unsafe buildings.

The United Nations and its partners have continued
to further scale up their operations to respond to needs.
Nearly 1 million displaced people have been provided
with non-food items, such as blankets, plastic sheeting
and jerry cans. Some 368,000 people have received
help with shelter, including though the 30 camps built
by the Government, the United Nations and other
partners since July 2014. Another 13 camps are under
construction.

On 7 April, Iraq celebrated one year of being polio-
free. The United Nations continues to support the
Iraq Ministry of Health in maintaining its polio-free
status through regular vaccination campaigns targeting
over 5 million children under the age five. The United
Nations is also 3 million people through the provision
of essential drugs and medical equipment.

Despite that support, we face immense challenges
in providing assistance in Iraq. Access remains a key
challenge. On 28 April, the Iraqi Government sent
a request to the United Nations asking for urgent
humanitarian assistance to be sent to areas in Haditha
district, in the Anbar governorate, which is cut off
by ISIL forces. People are short of food, water and
medicines. Due to insecurity, a United Nations convoy
meant to has not been able to reach the 26,400 people
trapped in the area.

We are working to expand humanitarian access,
and now have a team of access and negotiation experts
on the ground. With the support of key Member States
and other influential actors inside and outside Iraq, we
hope to increase our reach to those areas.

Other challenges are emerging in areas of return.
Those who wish to return home are afraid for their
safety, so the number of returnees remains limited.
Ongoing security operations, the widespread presence
of improvised explosive devices and the lack of public
services have also dissuaded return. Returns must
continue to be voluntary, when conditions are right.

Funding shortfalls are also restricting our ability to
scale up even further. Increasing needs have exhausted
the generous contributions to last year's appeal. This
year, only 11 per cent of the $1.2 billion required for the
year has been received. Last week, health services in the
Arbat IDP camp in Sulaimaniyah were interrupted due
to alack of funding. In April, food distributions were
scaled back in the Dohuk governorate - the area with
the highest number of IDPs - to half-rations for those
living outside of the camps. The food pipeline is due
to break fully in June. A new humanitarian response
plan will be released in Brussels on 4 June, and I hope
donors will give generously.

The humanitarian outlook in Iraq remains deeply
worrying. The number of people in need of assistance
has grown seven-fold in just under a year. This number
is likely to increase further before the end of the year
as the conflict continues and as fear of sectarian-
motivated retaliation spreads through newly accessible
areas. We must do more to protect Iraqi civilians from
these rising levels of violence. We must work to expand
the assistance provided to affected people in all parts
of the country.

Addressing the humanitarian needs in Iraq requires
collective action. However, humanitarian assistance
alone will not bring about a solution to the crisis in
Iraq. The ongoing political and security conflicts must
be resolved in order to end the displacement and the
suffering of one quarter of the country's people.

