Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Greenstock, for taking the initiative to schedule this
discussion. I also want to join in commending the work
of our friend and colleague Jorge Navarrete, and to
wish him well.

It is certainly right to meet today to take stock of
our counter-terrorism efforts, and I want to commend
Ambassador Greenstock for his leadership and
organization of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. The Committee has been exemplary in the
pace and seriousness of its work, and innovative in
maintaining close touch with the United Nations
membership as a whole. Ambassador Greenstock's
briefing today demonstrates clearly that it will continue
to be so as it enters the next phase of its important
work of examining national reports. I also agree with
his comments about the goal of seeking consensus
while at the same time not condoning that which is not
acceptable. Our goal throughout should be to build and
maintain the strongest consensus possible.

The events of 11 September changed the way all
of us look at, and respond to, terrorism. The work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee is an important
element of strengthening international cooperation and
encouraging stronger efforts by each nation. Resolution
1373 (2001) set the standard that terrorism is
unacceptable and illegal, and is to be opposed. Nothing
could be clearer. All States now have the legal, as well
as political and moral, obligation to act against it. This
scourge, as we have recognized, threatens all nations,
all peoples and, indeed, each individual. The
requirement to address terrorism is operational now,
and the United States is working hard to see that it is
met.

I noted the Secretary-General's insightful
comments about not losing sight of the other important
issues on the international agenda - and we agree -
as well as his comments about the connection between
the struggle against terrorism and human rights. Those
are both very important points to keep in mind. I also
note the global, social, political and economic impact
of the 11 September attack, and how they undermine
that very fabric and that agenda. We will be living with
that for some time.

The struggle against terror must be won if we are
to make progress together in building the more
prosperous, tolerant, secure and democratic world that
the vast majority of the world's people aspire to. This
is the world foreseen in the United Nations Charter and
the Millennium Declaration. To achieve that victory
will take time. We must also be clear about the threat
and the response. There are numerous means for
attacking it, but it will simply no longer do to justify
terrorism.

As is often the case when the United Nations
membership has difficulty in finding the way ahead,
our Secretary-General has helped define the issue. He
told us last year, on 1 October, that there is a need for
moral clarity and that there can be no acceptance of
those who would seek to justify the deliberate taking of
innocent civilian life, regardless of cause or grievance.
If there is one universal principle that all peoples can
agree on, he said, surely it is this. He was right; and the
United Nations membership should conclude at once
the comprehensive convention against terrorism on the
basis of the compromise proposed by Australia.

After 11 September inadequate counter-terrorism
programmes and infrastructures cannot be tolerated.
Resolution 1373 (2001) addresses this head-on. The
United States has been gratified by the roll-up-your-
sleeves spirit of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
members, and of United Nations members more
broadly. We are all attacking the difficult, but essential,
job of analysing our anti-terrorism capabilities and
identifying areas for improvement. The task is also best
done collectively, and it is being undertaken that way.
No country can afford to be complacent.

We recognize that some countries will need
material and technical assistance. The United States
offers a broad range of counter-terrorism assistance
programmes in a number of areas. Topics include
money-laundering and financial crimes, customs,
immigration, extradition, police science and law
enforcement, and illegal arms trafficking. The
programmes are set forth in detail in our submission to
the Committee.

We hope other Governments have reported, or
will report soon, to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on the assistance they are able to provide. Many States
need such help in implementing resolution 1373
(2001). Today I want to stress that we are eager to be
helpful, and we suggest that using regional
organizations in this effort may help stretch scarce
assistance resources. Even in so important an area as
counter-terrorism, there is never enough money.

Let me close by reiterating how encouraged we
are by the work so far of the Committee. We must not
lose sight of the utmost urgency of our collective effort
or lapse into a business-as-usual approach.

