Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): Sir, my
Government congratulates you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We thank
you and the other members of the Council for
convening this open meeting and for the opportunity to
speak today.

My delegation acknowledges the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, whose leadership and advice
have been invaluable at every level.

Timor-Leste would like to commend the
Secretary-General on his comprehensive report
(S/2003/449) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET). We thank him for his
continued commitment to ensuring that the intent and
goals of the relevant Security Council resolutions are
accomplished.

Timor-Leste continues to appreciate the wisdom
that Security Council members showed in having
resolution 1410 (2002) provide for a constant
reassessment of security needs. Accordingly, we thank
all members for their unanimous decision last month on
resolution 1473 (2003), which adjusted the downsizing
schedule.

The violence of December of last year and the
terrorist activities in the border area in January of this
year created some fears about future security. However,
the firm and transparent response by the United
Nations and the Government of Timor-Leste has
provided reassurance and has reasserted confidence and
stability.

The mission of UNMISET has been and
continues to be effective. Much progress has been
made in the capacity-building of the Timorese police
and military. In that regard, we would like to say at the
outset that Timor-Leste fully endorses the Secretary-
General's present recommendation that the mandate of
UNMISET be extended for a further year, until 20 May
2004.

We continue to strive for responsible governance
and the furtherance of democratic institutions and
traditions of pluralism that are necessary for a secure
and stable democracy. On 16 April 2003, Timor-Leste
deposited with the Secretary-General its instruments of
accession to seven multilateral treaties or protocols
relating to human rights. Our Parliament has also
ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons plus other treaties concerning weapons of
mass destruction, the instruments of ratification of all
of which will be deposited in the coming days.

The recent appointment of the President of the
Appeals Court by President Gusmao was a step
forward in the strengthening of our justice sector. The
Government is fully committed to building a robust and
independent judiciary. However, this sector continues
to require support from the international community.

The work of the Serious Crimes Unit continues
without any interference from other institutions. The
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
continues its work and expects to complete its duties
next year.

The Government recognizes that a stable political
and social environment cannot be sustained without
addressing the basic needs of our people. In less than a
year, the Government, with help from the international
community, has had to address decisively many
challenges in the sectors of human development,
natural resources and the environment, infrastructure
and private sector development, defence and security,
and regional development and poverty reduction.
We have inherited a country with a per capita
income of less than $400, an infant mortality rate of 80
to 145 per 1,000 live births, a maternal mortality rate
of 400 to 800 per 100,000 live births, and a 20 per cent
unemployment rate. It is a country in which 80 per cent
of infrastructure was destroyed in September 1999.

While the development of human resources is a
great investment for the medium and long terms,
efforts are also being made in the areas of agriculture,
fisheries and tourism. The majority of the Timorese
live in rural areas.

The agriculture sector represents approximately
21 per cent of the gross domestic product. It employs
approximately 74 per cent of the labour force, but it
has the lowest productivity rate in the region. The
Ministry of Agriculture, with the help of various
countries, has focused its attention on improving the
irrigation system and providing help in reducing food
insecurity, which affects 20 per cent of the rural
population, and has taken the initial steps to create
conditions for the transition from subsistence to export-
and industry-oriented agriculture and fisheries.

Timor-Leste shares the Secretary-General's
appeal for full support from the international
community. As his report has emphasized, the role of
bilateral contributions and other assistance will
continue to be of great importance. For example,
Timor-Leste deems crucial the provision of the full
number of 228 development advisers. It is critical that
the pace of capacity-building be maintained.

As noted in the report, Falintil-FDTL is indeed
making steady progress. By the end of this year, two
infantry battalions will be operational. But the
provision of decent infrastructure to those battalions
remains to be fully achieved, and further bilateral
cooperation in those areas continues to be most
welcome.

In addition to focusing on our internal
development, we are committed to engagements with
our neighbours and the international community. We
hope that Timor-Leste will soon be admitted to the
Association of South-East Asian Nations as an
observer. Our relations with Indonesia and Australia
are encouraging. We recently signed the Timor Sea
Treaty with Australia, which will bring economic
benefits to our people. Discussions on recognized
international borders at sea and on land will continue.
We have had significant progress with Indonesia, and
we look forward to completing negotiations by 30 June
of this year. We expect that the next official visit by
Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri to Indonesia will bring
new impetus to our cooperation.

We will continue to establish diplomatic relations
with countries of the United Nations family. We hope
that our recent inclusion in the United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific will bring a new dynamism to economic
cooperation. As our bilateral and multilateral relations
continue to develop, we appeal to the donor community
to remain engaged in furthering the building of our
nascent democracy.

On 16 April 2003, Timor-Leste deposited with
the Secretary-General ratifications of seven multilateral
treaties and protocols relating to human rights.

We appreciate the prudence the Council has
shown in dealing with the Timor-Leste situation, and
we would like to say once again that Timor-Leste fully
endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the mandate of UNMISET be extended for a further
year, to 20 May 2004.

