Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate Kuwait through you,
Mr. President, on the start of its presidency of the
Security Council. You can rely on France's support in
the month to come. I would also like to thank Izumi
Nakamitsu for her usual very informative briefing.

This is the second time we have met in less than
two weeks after reports of four new cases of the use
of chlorine against Syria's civilian population, some of
them in Idlib province, which is a de-escalation zone.
We are examining the information that is available
and waiting for the conclusions of the investigative
mechanism, but the reality is that resorting to toxic
substances as weapons has never ended in Syria. I
would like to remind the Council that the Syrian regime
has already been identified as the perpetrator in four
such cases, one of which involved the use of sarin, in
violation of international humanitarian law and the
obligations that Syria assumed when it acceded to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

The challenges go beyond the Syrian issue. A
century after the end of the First World War, in which
mustard gas was used on a massive scale against
civilians, what we are seeing is shocking. These
weapons, which we had thought were a thing of the
past, are once again being used methodically and
systematically by the Syrian regime against its own
people. Furthermore, there is a real threat of such
weapons falling into the hands of terrorists. The threat
is all the greater given the fact that the dismantling
of the Syrian chemical-weapon programme remains
at a deadlock. The cooperation of the Syrian regime
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has for months taken place in a
piecemeal manner, and suspicions remain about the
status of Syrian stockpiles.

I would recall that OPCW expert teams have
repeatedly found at Syrian sites indicators of
undeclared substances, without any convincing
explanation being provided by the country. Given that
chemical weapons continue to be used, it seems that
Syria has lied and maintained clandestine capacities.
The situation is aggravating regional instability,
undermining the non-proliferation regime and
weakening the international security architecture, as
well as jeopardizing the security of each of our States.
It represents a violation of the law and flouts the most
fundamental principles of humanity.

The international community cannot downplay the
situation and allow the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes to remain unpunished. It is the responsibility of
the Security Council to prevent this; it is our shared
responsibility. The criminals who chose to design and
use these barbaric weapons must be punished. At stake
is the future of our collective security system; no one
can be allowed to undermine its foundations without
facing consequences.

The hindrances and obstructions facing the
international community's initiatives within existing
bodies contribute to promoting impunity, and this we
cannot accept. For that reason, France launched in Paris
an open, pragmatic partnership that brings together
States that reject impunity for individuals involved
in chemical-weapon attacks or in the development of
chemical-weapon programmes. It brings together all
the States concerned about the threat of erosion of the
non-proliferation regime and of strategic stability. It
was designed to support all international bodies and
investigative mechanisms in their efforts. This universal
partnership applies to all instances of the use of such
weapons throughout the world by all perpetrators, be
they State or non-State actors. The partnership is open,
and States that embrace these principles are invited
to join.

Like everyone else here, we hope that a mechanism
for the identification of those responsible will be
recreated as soon as possible. However, any sincere
and credible effort to that end must align with the
basic standards of independence, impartiality and
professionalism that underpinned the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, as the very reason for the establishment
of such a regime is to determine the truth. Within the
Council, France will be very vigilant with respect to the
principles listed and will not accept a lesser mechanism.

Impunity in Syria is not an option. The perpetrators
of all of the crimes committed in Syria will be held
accountable, sooner or later. The International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria, which
we support, is a part ofthat process. That is the only way
to ensure lasting peace in Syria, and this can come about
only in the framework of an inclusive political solution
in Geneva, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which
more than ever before represents our shared compass.

The repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria
has been proved. We cannot turn a blind eye to
this, for no one can now say that they did not know.
Denial or hypocrisy, or a combination of of the two,
cannot be presented as a strategy. The persistent use
of chemical weapons in Syria represents a violation
of the universal conscience as well as the most
fundamental principles of international law. It also
poses a potentially lethal threat to the sustainability
of the international non-proliferation regime, which
is the most comprehensive and successful of all of the
international non-proliferation regimes. To allow it to
be undermined without any response would be to accept
the erosion of the entire international regime for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction that
we have built together, stone by stone, over the course
of decades and which constitutes the very backbone of
the international security architecture as well as one of
the paramount gains of multilateralism.

On behalf of France, I call on all members of the
Security Council to shift their attitudes and adjust their
focus. The heavy responsibility that we all bear requires
that we join together and take action.

