Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I would
like to offer my delegation's deep appreciation to you, Sir,
and Ambassador Andjaba for taking the initiative of
organizing this open debate on the important issue of
children and armed conflict. I am particularly honoured to
participate in this debate under the presidency of Your
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia.

My delegation welcomes today's meeting as a timely
effort to build on the previous Council debate, of June last
year, on the same subject. I also note that this meeting is
yet another step forward towards promoting transparency in
the work of the Council. I am particularly grateful to my
dear friend, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, for his informative
and inspiring statement.

Almost a decade after the end of the cold war, the
rampaging ethnic conflicts within national boundaries still
persist, inflicting a heavy toll, particularly on children, the
most vulnerable component of our societies. Given the
appalling statistics presented by Mr. Otunnu time and again,
children remain exposed to unspeakable suffering and
mistreatment in situations of armed conflict. These harsh
realities, unfortunately, overshadow the significance of
celebrating the anniversaries of the entry into force of the
important international instruments for the protection of
children in armed conflict: the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989. As
we celebrate these instruments, we have to use this unique
opportunity to rekindle our commitment to the protection
and welfare of children in conflict situations. In this
connection, we welcome last year's adoption of the
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
provides for jurisdiction over several child-specific
crimes.

Ambassador Otunnu, as always, today before the
Council made another thoughtful, thought-provoking
statement that covered wide-ranging issues of importance.
As the New York Times reported on 8 August, there is
growing recognition of Ambassador Otunnu' s activities by
the international community. My delegation takes this
opportunity to pay high tribute to Ambassador Otunnu
and his office for their tireless efforts to advance the
cause of the protection of children in armed conflict, and
for what they have achieved so far. We also commend the
work done by the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other agencies in this field.

We strongly urge the Security Council to continue to
expand its involvement in this issue. My delegation will
therefore welcome the adoption by the Council today of
a draft resolution that endorses a number of
recommendations contained in Mr. Otunnu's reports and
his statement. We hope that this draft resolution will
serve as a firm basis for further Council actions in the
months to come.

Having said that, allow me to make a few points that
in our view warrant the urgent attention and action of the
international community. First of all, my delegation
believes that the issue of child soldiers constitutes the
most challenging part of today's subject and should be
addressed immediately. From the lessons learned during
recent conflicts, it has become clear that the problem of
child soldiers requires a comprehensive approach ranging
from peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-building
activities.

It is indeed a daunting task to disarm child soldiers
and to keep them from rearming. My delegation is of the
View that the Security Council should take a more
proactive role in ensuring that the long-term rehabilitation
of child soldiers is dealt with from the early planning
stages of peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, my delegation believes that it is important
to widen and strengthen the institutional safety net to
prevent the practice of recruiting child soldiers, as the
recruitment of child soldiers increases their chances of

 

falling victim to armed conflicts. In this regard, my
delegation welcomes the prevailing recognition by the
international community of the need to raise the existing
legal standards. We note that the United Nations has taken
the lead by announcing its unilateral decision last year not
to recruit peacekeepers below the age of 18 from Member
States.

In particular, the Working Group on the optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child has
been considering raising the minimum age for recruiting
soldiers. We hope that, sooner rather than later, the
Working Group will put forward practical recommendations
acceptable to the majority of United Nations Members.

Thirdly, we believe that in order to prevent the use of
child soldiers, the Security Council should be vigilant
against the supply of small arms and light weapons in
actual and potential conflict areas. Small arms are
considered physically best matched to child soldiers, who
can only carry light weapons. In this regard, we welcome
the ongoing efforts of the Council to enhance the effective
implementation of the arms embargoes already imposed.
The need for appropriate monitoring and strict enforcement
of arms embargoes cannot be overstated.

Finally, I would like to welcome the recent Secretary-
General's bulletin regarding the observance by United
Nations forces of international humanitarian law, which was
issued and became effective on the recent occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. This
bulletin, setting out fundamental principles and rules of
international humanitarian law applicable to forces under
United Nations command and control, stipulates special
respect and protection for children by United Nations forces
in operations. We hope that this bulletin will also serve as
an example for all parties in conflict situations to follow.

Since children are our hope for the future, all of us
have a special obligation to support and protect them from
the evil of conflict. More often than not, children do not
understand why they have to be involved in conflicts and
suffer from them. Given how much they trust and rely on
adults as their protectors, we adults must not betray their
trust, but provide them with an environment suitable for
their safety and welfare. My delegation wishes to reaffirm
the strong commitment of the Republic of Korea to
continue to contribute to the international community's
efforts to create a safer and better environment for children
in conflict situations.

