Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): Thank you,
Madame President, for the opportunity to speak at this
meeting.

Allow me, first, to thank all the delegations that
have expressed their sympathies and condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince. We appreciate their
support and solidarity. I would also like to extend our
condolences to the people and Government of Turkey
for their losses caused by the earthquake that struck
their country.

I further want to point out that we align ourselves
fully with the statement made by the Egyptian
Ambassador on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
(spoke in Arabic)

At the outset, I am honoured to express my
gratitude to you for convening this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.

This meeting is being held at a time when the
Palestinian people are paying for the reluctance of the
international community and the Security Council to
deter Israel from its actions against the Palestinian
people, such as killing, displacement, imprisonment,
blockades, annexation of land, confiscation of property
and plundering the wealth of Palestine. All those
actions subject the Palestinian people to further intense
oppression and torture, with the goal of forcing them to
surrender and despair.

The Israeli Government persists in its
intransigence, refusing to give the Palestinians their
basic rights. It proceeds with its illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, riding roughshod over
international will, countries' condemnations and United
Nations resolutions issued in this regard. Israeli
settlements surround most cities of the West Bank and
seize nearly half of their water resources, making it
difficult for any Palestinian Government to work
effectively.

Furthermore, it is unethical that the occupation
forces impose a blockade on an entire people and
continue their settlement activities, secure from any
accountability. Most of the countries gathered here,
including the permanent members of the Security
Council, have issued individual statements against the
continuation of Israeli settlement activities. What they
need to do now is to take an international, collective
stand that clearly reflects that existing unanimity. It is
high time for Israel to realize that it cannot continue to
exempt itself from full compliance with the rules of
international law-based behaviour.

The "Apartheid Wall" embodies irrefutable
evidence of the extent of the Israeli occupying Power's
persistence in violating United Nations resolutions,
particularly General Assembly resolution 181 (II), on
the pretext of legitimate self-defence. In fact, the true
purpose of building the wall is to change the facts on
ground and to evict the Palestinian people, prevent East
Jerusalem from escaping Israeli sovereignty and secure
control over water resources, in addition to establishing
as many settlements as possible for the settlers. The

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates that security can be
achieved neither by building symbols of oppression
and occupation nor through the unjustified use of
military force. Rather, security can be achieved by
respecting human rights and the rule of law.

The situation in the besieged Gaza Strip
constitutes another factor that exacerbates the problems
that the Palestinian people face. In fact, the Gaza Strip
has become one big prison, as a result of the unjust
blockade imposed by Israel against the Palestinians,
preventing them from exercising their natural rights
and accessing their necessary services and needs.
Meanwhile, a generation of Palestinian children in the
Gaza Strip are born and raised with nothing in their
minds but devastation, destruction and the world's
failure to support them in exercising their natural
rights- which are the same as those of any other
children in the world. Therefore, in this Chamber, we
urge the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities by lifting the siege on Gaza and
opening the crossings that lead to it.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon the
international community to compel Israel to take the
necessary procedures to protect the holy sites and
places of worship in Palestine, particularly in
Jerusalem. In addition, the Kingdom urges the
international community to force Israel to release the
remaining Palestinian prisoners, some of whom have
not seen their families for decades.

The Kingdom would not make such demands
without extending a hand of peace and proving its
commitment to a just and comprehensive peace. In this
vein, the Kingdom introduced a peace initiative that
was adopted by all Arab States in 2002, known as the
Arab Peace Initiative. That Initiative reiterates the
Arabs' commitment to achieving a just and
comprehensive peace based on the rules of
international law. Nevertheless, we have not seen any
similar commitment from Israel. Rather, Israel has
evaded its duties and responsibilities and continued its
many violations against the Palestinian people and
their rights.

We therefore, now more than ever before, call
upon the Security Council to support the Palestinian
people and recognize their State, within the borders of
4 June 1967, and with Jerusalem as its capital. Israel
and the children and people of Palestine must be made
to see clearly that the international community has
agreed, albeit belatedly, to support the Palestinian
cause by granting Palestine full membership in the
United Nations. We call upon Israel to withdraw fully
from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967.

In conclusion, peace in the Middle East requires
the commitment of all States of the region to be
guaranteed security. We cannot talk about peace in the
Middle East without referring to the recently
discovered plot to assassinate the Ambassador of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the United States of
America. According to the evidence provided by the
competent authorities of the United States, it is clear
that the perpetrators who planned and supported the
implementation of this heinous crime either work for
the Iranian Government or are affiliated with it.
34

The Kingdom reiterates its denunciation and
condemnation of any attempt to tamper with its
security or assault any of its citizens or officials. The
Kingdom will not stand idle in response to those who
play foul with its security. Furthermore, the Kingdom
reaffirms its full cooperation with the international
community and the Security Council, which is
entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security, to ensure that anyone involved in that plot,
whether State or individual, be held accountable.

