Mrs. Smith (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the informal group of like-minded States
comprising Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Germany,
Finland, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Sweden,
Switzerland and my own country, Norway.
The members of the European Union (EU) in this
group also align themselves with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union.

We thank the respective Chairpersons for their
briefings today. The Council and the 1267 Committee
have taken significant steps to further strengthen the
due-process elements in the work of the Committee. It
is against that backdrop that the informal group of like-
minded States makes this intervention today.

In doing so, I should underline that the group
supports and fully recognizes the application of
targeted sanctions as a useful and necessary tool to
effectively combat international terrorism. Our position
has been guided by the goal of strengthening the
regime established by resolution 1267 (1999) in order
to make that regime more credible and thus more
effective.

First of all, we commend the 1267 Committee,
under the leadership of Ambassador Thomas Mayr-
Harting of Austria, for having completed the review of
all the persons and entities on the Committee's
Consolidated List on 30 July this year. The review is an
important achievement, as the removal of 45 entries,
including 9 deceased persons, strengthens the
credibility of the system. Many Member States have
made important contributions to the Committee's
review. We should also like to recognize the efforts and
hard work of the Secretariat and the Monitoring Team
in that process. We are also pleased to note that the
number of narrative summaries posted on the
Committee's website continues to grow.

In the view of the like-minded States, the
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) is a major step
forward in strengthening due-process guarantees, in
particular for persons or entities that wish to be
removed from the Consolidated List. The creation of
the position of an Ombudsperson to assist the
Committee when it considers requests for de-listing is
of course the main feature introduced by resolution
1904 (2009).

We commend the Secretary-General for the
appointment in June this year of Judge Kimberly Prost
to serve as Ombudsperson. Judge Prost has a wealth of
experience in a number of legal disciplines as well as
in the counter-terrorism field. We are confident that she
will execute her important mandate to the full
satisfaction of all involved parties, and we pledge full
support to and cooperation with Judge Prost and her
office.

The Ombudsperson receives and considers
requests for removal of entries from the Consolidated
List. To that end, she engages with individuals, entities
and States in order to obtain a clear picture of why a
given person or entity has been listed by the
Committee, and also in order to assess the current
justification for the listing.
The Ombudsperson cannot function effectively
without the full cooperation of Member States. We
therefore call on all United Nations Member States, not
only the members of the Security Council, to respond
promptly and adequately to the Ombudsperson's
requests for information and assistance. It is of
paramount importance that the Ombudsperson has
access to all relevant information, including
confidential and classified documents, regarding the
listing.

We have taken due note of the Ombudsperson's
initial priorities of safeguarding the independence of
her office and of raising general awareness of the role
of the Ombudsperson. All Governments should assist
the Ombudsperson in making the office's mandate
widely known by, for example, bringing the existence
of the Ombudsperson's website to the attention of
relevant non-governmental organizations and to
national bar associations. States should also be
encouraged to include information in their periodic
reports to the 1267 Committee on what steps they have
taken to generate publicity about the mandate of the
Ombudsperson.

Furthermore, all States should receive the
necessary general information about the work of the
Ombudsperson. Such information will contribute to a
deeper appreciation of the role and needs of the
Ombudsperson and of any possible challenges in the
exercise of her mandate. More knowledge on the part
of Member States in that area could in turn strengthen
the cooperation with the Ombudsperson. We therefore
look forward to the biannual reports of the
Ombudsperson.

The informal group of like-minded States would
also encourage the Ombudsperson to consider giving
regular interactive briefings on her role and activities,
as has become the practice for other key United
Nations entities in the field of counter-terrorism, such
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.

The Ombudsperson cannot -and is not intended
to - function in a vacuum. She will need to engage
with States and petitioners when performing the key
functions of her mandate. That activity may require
resources for travelling. Furthermore, the
Ombudsperson might benefit in her work from
participating in relevant seminars or obtaining country-
specific information. We therefore call on the Council

to provide the necessary resources and thereby
consolidate the independence of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson.

One of the major improvements that came with
resolution 1904 (2009) is that the Committee will meet
to discuss the report that the Ombudsperson submits to
it after she has considered a request for de-listing. We
assume that in such cases, where the Ombudsperson
has been involved and has thus given the request for
de-listing a thorough assessment, there will be less
need for putting requests on hold. The current practice
of placing de-listing requests on hold is sometimes
justified by a need for additional information before a
final decision can be made. That justification might be
less compelling in a situation where the Ombudsperson
has provided the Committee with all relevant
information.

The informal group welcomes all the progress
made so far, and we will continue to closely follow the
functioning of the mandate of the Ombudsperson. We
support any measures that are suitable to maximize the
effectiveness of that mandate.

At the same time, we will continue to consider
further steps towards strengthening the due-process
rights of those listed. In our View, we should continue
to reflect on how the current system could be
enhanced, including in terms of guaranteeing its
effectiveness and credibility, without calling into
question the very important progress that has been
achieved so far.

I would like to once again encourage the Council
to continue its open and inclusive dialogue with
interested States on issues pertaining to sanctions. I
would, in this regard, reassure you that the informal
group of like-minded States stands ready to engage in
such a dialogue and offer our views and perspective on
the way forward on those important issues.

