Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General F ernandez-
Taranco for his briefing. I have also listened attentively
to the statements made by the representatives of
Palestine and Israel.

Currently, the situation in the Middle East
continues to be complicated and volatile. The
international community should continue to work to
create conditions conducive to resolving tensions
between the parties concerned and achieving lasting
peace. On the Middle East question and the issue of
achieving lasting peace in the region, China has always
maintained that differences should be settled through
negotiation and dialogue between the parties
concerned.

China supports the early establishment of an
independent State of Palestine living in peace with
Israel, arrived at through political negotiations between
Palestine and Israel. The direct negotiations that began
in early September represent an important opportunity
for the peace process in the Middle East. China hopes
that the negotiations will continue and will yield
substantive progress at an early date.

Currently, those negotiations have been brought
to a standstill by the issue of settlements. China is
profoundly concerned about this. The direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine did not come
about easily. China hopes that Israel will be able to see
the big picture and extend the freeze on the
construction of settlements, so as to create the
necessary conditions for the continuation of
negotiations. We call upon Israel to immediately and
completely freeze the construction of settlements and
of the separation wall on occupied Palestinian territory,
including the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem.

The humanitarian situation in occupied
Palestinian territory, and in particular in the Gaza Strip,
continues to be grave. That situation should not be
allowed to continue. We welcome the recent Israeli
easing of restrictions on the access of some assistance
in the form of humanitarian goods and commodities to
the Gaza Strip. However, it is not enough to alleviate
the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. China
calls upon Israel to immediately and completely lift the
blockade on the Gaza Strip and to once again allow the
people there the space necessary for a normal and
dignified existence, life and development. We call upon
the international community to pay continuing
attention to the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
and to provide greater support to its people.

China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinian people to achieve their legitimate national
rights. We hope that all factions in Palestine will settle
their differences and achieve reconciliation through
dialogue and consultation at an early date, so that they
can work together for the long-term interests of the
nation by achieving independent Statehood, whereby
the Palestinian people can enjoy peace and stability.

On 13 and 14 October, Mr. Wu Sike, China's
Special Envoy on the Middle East issue, visited Israel
and Palestine. China is ready to work actively and
constructively on the peace process in the Middle East.
China has taken note of the efforts made by the Quartet
on the question of the Middle East. However, the
Quartet cannot replace the role of the Security Council
in promoting the Middle East peace process. The
Security Council should assume its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
with regard to the Middle East issue.

China supports the two-State solution, with
Palestine and Israel living in peace with one another, as
well as the achievement of a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the Road
Map.

