Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): As always, we are grateful to Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, as we
are to Ms. Adele Raemer.

Unfortunately, the current state and trends of
the situation in the Middle East continue to cause us
great concern. We are witnessing an ever-worsening
downwards spiral, jeopardizing the possibility of
achieving just, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the only viable solution to the protracted
conflict - two States that align with the 1967 borders
and supported by serious dialogue between both parties.

We would once again like to reiterate our
position concerning the Israeli settlement activities
taking place throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem.
The Dominican Republic considers the Israeli policy
to be illegal under international law, including under
resolution 2334 (2016), and that its continuation also
has serious consequences for the civilian population,
which is forced to move without protection guarantees.
Not only do the settlements contribute to an escalation
of tensions on the ground, but they increasingly hinder
and reduce the possibility of a peaceful two-State
solution based on social inclusion and hope for lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians.

Atthe sametime,theDominicanRepublicrecognizes
the need for an intra-Palestinian reconciliation process
that allows for the national consolidation necessary to
advancing the country's legitimate aspirations and paves
the way for a process of political renewal based on free
and inclusive elections. We encourage the Palestinian
leadership and the international community to direct
all their efforts towards strengthening national unity
and supporting the election process. Restoring hope
among Palestine's young people should be a priority
for the authorities, which bear the responsibility for a
better future for them and future generations.

The Gaza Strip continues to be a theatre for
persistent violence that undermines the right of both
Israelis and Palestinians to coexist in conditions of
peace and security. While the humanitarian situation
in that area is less severe, the constant threat of fresh
violence makes it more fragile and hampers economic
development, leading to an increase in poverty,
unemployment and food insecurity, as well as other
central drivers of humanitarian need. We therefore
support the 2020 humanitarian response plan for the
occupied Palestinian territory and encourage donor
countries to contribute to its full funding so as to meet
the most basic needs ofthe Palestinian population living
under occupation and working to lay the development
foundations to break free from it.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its emphatic condemnation of rocket launches on
areas populated by civilians. There is no justification
whatsoever for carrying out those indiscriminate attacks
that end the lives and dash the dreams of real people.
It is imperative that we undertake all efforts necessary
to achieving a speedy, comprehensive and definitive
de-escalation of the situation. We urge all parties to
act with the utmost restraint in order to guarantee the
maintenance of the ceasefire and the protection of the
civilian population.

