Mr. Kouliev (Azerbaijan) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
appreciation, Mr. President, for your important initiative to
convene an open debate on a very acute and pressing
matter: the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This
topic undoubtedly represents the fundamental challenge
facing the international community and in particular the
Security Council.

On 12 February, we had an opportunity to listen to the
thoughtful and illuminating briefings by Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and Mr.
Cornelius Sommaruga, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. The Council members also
expressed their views and ideas on the matter. On the same
day, the Council adopted a presidential statement that we
believe will have far-reaching significance. The Azerbaijani
delegation welcomes and fully supports the Council's
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing concrete recommendations to the Council by
September 1999 on ways in which the Council, acting
within its sphere of responsibility, could improve the
physical and legal level of protection provided for civilians
in situations of armed conflict.

The issue under discussion today has, in our view, at
least two levels. Therefore, it must be adequately addressed.
The first level concerns the problem of the protection of
civilians in terms of their physical protection and their
physical survival, which needs to be dealt with immediately
by the Security Council, within its mandate. The second
level is a complex one that involves a specific mechanism
consisting of various interrelated elements, ranging from the
body of international humanitarian norms and provisions to
the agencies authorized to ensure the rights of the civilian
population in situations of armed conflict and to provide
humanitarian assistance for them, and so on.

During the previous meeting of the Council on this
subject, almost all speakers concurred that in contemporary
conflicts civilian populations are being deliberately and
indiscriminately targeted and subjected to violence and
physical destruction. The Azerbaijani people have
 

experienced all this, having been exposed as they were to
external aggression. It is a sad coincidence that the
Security Council is taking up the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict at this time, when seven
years ago, on the night of 25 February and in the early
hours of 26 February 1992, the Armenian armed forces,
with the assistance of the 366th motor-rifle regiment of
the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, invaded
the Azerbaijani town of Khojaly. Having razed the town
to the ground, they killed hundreds of innocent people,
not even sparing women, children or the elderly.
Thousands were imprisoned and subjected to brutal
violence and humiliation. In our country 26 February was
proclaimed the day of the Khojaly genocide and a day of
national mourning in Azerbaijan.

To prevent the reoccurrence of a Khojaly-type
tragedy anywhere at any time, the Security Council must,
in a timely and adequate manner, use its full authority, as
enshrined in the Charter, and to use means ranging from
political and diplomatic to military.

We fully support Ambassador Turk of Slovenia, who
said,

"The basic aim of United Nations humanitarian
action should be human security, with the key
to security being physical rather than only legal
protection." (S/PV.3977, p. 11)

Providing human security is one of the main
responsibilities of the Security Council. In this
connection, conflict prevention assumes ever greater
importance. This is the best way to protect the civilian
population. Unfortunately, the Council has had to deal
more frequently with open conflicts.

The main method, if it can be put that way, of
conducting so-called combat operations during
contemporary armed conflicts is ethnic cleansing,
whereby a part of the territory of a sovereign State is
cleansed of its local population, who, in turn, become
displaced persons and virtual refugees on their own soil.
The scale of ethnic cleansing can vary. In Azerbaijan, it
involves approximately 20 per cent of the occupied
territories and about 1 million refugees and displaced
persons. I would like to point out that ethnic cleansing
allows invaders to ignore the Geneva Conventions,
thereby actually resorting to Stalin's ominous "joke": "No
man - no problem".

 

Today, throughout the world, this category of the
population includes more than 20 million people who
urgently need adequate attention from the international
community. Mr. Otunnu, in his statement and further
remarks, particularly drew attention to the fact that the most
vulnerable group of an affected population is displaced
persons and that there is no agreed framework for providing
protection for these people. There are arrangements for
providing relief, but there is no framework for providing
actual protection to these populations. Our delegation
believes that it would be entirely appropriate for Mr.
Francis Deng, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Internally Displaced Persons, to
participate and to speak in the debate.

In discussing the issue of civilians in armed conflict,
we must devote particular attention to the question of
children as victims of conflict, either as immediate
instruments of war or as the recipients of physical,
emotional or psychological traumas and injuries. The
statements made by Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu at the
previous meeting of the Council contained new and
constructive ideas and practical proposals. We are
convinced that these could make an important contribution
to addressing the matter under consideration. Azerbaijan, as
a member of the Executive Board of UNICEF, attaches
great importance to the problems of children and armed
conflict as well as to alleviating the effects of armed
conflicts on children. It is actively involved in elaborating
various rehabilitation programmes under the auspices of
UNICEF.

In this respect, we are particularly concerned by illicit
transfers of arms into conflict zones, and we must naturally
redouble our efforts to curb this process. It is worth
recalling, as underlined by the Secretary-General in his
report on Africa, that halting the flow of arms to areas of
chronic instability is an essential element of any strategy to
reduce the level of brutality against civilian and
humanitarian workers. We share the view of Ambassador
Sergey Lavrov of Russia that we need to highlight the task
of curbing arms flows into conflict areas, because this has
a direct impact on better enabling humanitarian agencies to
assist refugees and to perform their other tasks.

In this context, violations of arms embargoes imposed
by the Council give rise to great concern. If the Council's
sanctions are being ignored, then what reaction could be
expected to the Council's appeals not to transfer arms into
conflict areas? We should at least concur here with the
Secretary-General when he states in his report on Africa
that exporting countries have a responsibility to exercise

 

restraint, particularly with respect to the export of
weapons into zones of conflicts or tension.

Last, but not least, it is alarming that the gap
between the norms of humanitarian law and their
application has never been wider. The task of ensuring
their application by all actors without exception is
therefore a matter of top priority. There is no doubt that
the Security Council has the potential constructively to
contribute to strengthening international humanitarian law
and ensuring its application. We believe that the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council must also
address this complex question. Given the nature and scale
of the problem, we believe that it would be appropriate to
include the question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict on the agenda of the Millennium
Assembly.

