First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffith, Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, the Executive Director of the World Food Organization, David Beasley, and the founder of Solutions for Sustainable Society, Omer Badokhon, for their valuable briefings on the unfolding situation in Yemen. The situation in Yemen is still a source of grave concern. Despite the efforts of the United Nations and the repeated calls for a ceasefire and de-escalation, the conflict is intensifying, especially in the areas of Al-Jawf, Ma'rib and the north- east. The situation threatens to jeopardize negotiations, exacerbate the humanitarian crisis, destroy the infrastructure and damage the economy and living standards for the Yemeni people. We remain convinced that constant military escalation complicates the situation and undermines efforts to find a solution. We call on all Yemeni parties to the conflict to commit to a comprehensive and lasting political solution that would bring an end to the conflict through direct, peaceful political negotiations under United Nations auspices, in accordance with the terms of reference for a solution set forth in the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the All-Inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 2216 (2015), so as to preserve the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. The path of dialogue requires accepting necessary agreements and concessions and putting the national interest first. My delegation welcomes the recent prisoner release, which shows that the parties to the conflict are willing to reach a comprehensive solution. It hopes that work will continue until the agreement includes all male and female prisoners for the sake of social harmony at the national level. We wish to reaffirm the importance of a commitment to implement all the provisions of the Stockholm Agreement. We support all efforts to implement the Riyadh Agreement with a view to establishing a new partnership government. We call on the parties concerned to keep building on the positive atmosphere that characterized the negotiations overseen by Saudi Arabia. We support the efforts of the Special Envoy to push for a political settlement. We hope that the parties of the conflict will respond positively to the draft joint declaration, including by complying with the comprehensive ceasefire, resuming political consultations and taking the necessary humanitarian measures to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. We hope that the adoption of the joint declaration will be a starting point to ensure the protection of the civilian population and facilities, and to bring to fruition direct political negotiations leading to a definitive solution. In order to make the peacebuilding process successful and long-lasting, the discussions must be comprehensive and participatory. They must bring together all components of society, and include the effective participation of women, young people and representatives of civil society. Yemen is now facing the worst humanitarian disaster in the world. My country is deeply concerned at the situation. The armed conflict has helped to spread the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and exacerbated the threat of famine facing millions of Yemenis, particularly children, women and vulnerable categories, especially given the deterioration of the health care infrastructure, the shortage of food sources and the steep decline of the economy. We hope that the international community will agree to alleviate and contain the suffering. My country also wishes to highlight the risk of an alarming environmental, humanitarian and economic crisis in the Red Sea owing to the precarious condition of the abandoned oil tanker FSO SAFER off the coast of Hudaydah governorate. A swift intervention is needed in order to assess the damage and make the necessary urgent repairs. We urge the Houthis to respond to the appeals of the international community and allow the United Nations Panel of Experts to inspect the tanker and take the necessary actions. Such vital issues must be detached from their political context.
