Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is grateful to the Secretary-
General for his report on children and armed conflict
(S/2002/1299). In addition, we thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, and
Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund, for their important
statements.

The causes and manifestations of the world's
armed conflicts are myriad, but, whatever those causes
and manifestations may be, as long as there are armed
conflicts, children - as the most vulnerable group -
will be affected by them to varying degrees. Therefore,
the international community must work hard to find an
effective solution to the problem.

The protection of children in armed conflicts is an
issue with many aspects. The parties to conflicts and
the international community as a whole must work
together to find an integrated and comprehensive
solution. We urge all concerned parties to observe the
relevant international laws, to implement in earnest the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol, to abide by the provisions governing age
limits for recruitment and conscription, to work
together with the international community to put an
end to the enlistment and use of child soldiers, and to
carry out the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former child combatants.

At the same time, the international community
must step up its efforts to eliminate poverty, to promote
universal education and development and to maintain
stability. Only when the factors that lead to the abuse
of children's lives and interests are eradicated and
when an environment that allows their growth and
development is created can the protection of children
be guaranteed.

We agree that the Security Council should
continue to be concerned about the protection of
children from the perspective of safeguarding
international peace and security. As far as the Council
is concerned, taking effective measures to prevent, curb
and eliminate armed conflicts is its major responsibility
in the protection of children in armed conflicts. In
certain regions today, including the Middle East, there
are continuing armed conflicts whose most direct
victims are children and women. In debating the
question of children and armed conflict, the Council
and the international community as a whole must attach
great importance to undertaking effective measures to
protect children in those regions, especially Palestinian
children. Moreover, in tackling this issue, the Council
must respect and coordinate with other United Nations
agencies in order to allow full play for the overall
strength of the United Nations.

We should like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
United Nations agencies, as well as other
organizations, for their efforts and achievements over
the years with regard to protecting children from the
harm of armed conflicts. The Chinese Government will
continue to actively support and coordinate with the
international community in its efforts to protect
children and to make our due contributions to those
efforts.

