Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenca; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller; the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Mr. Ertugrul Apakan; and the
Special Representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-
Office in Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group,
Mr. Martin Sajdik, for their insightful briefings on the
crisis that Ukraine has endured for almost five years.

While some may forget it, the Ukrainian conflict
remains one of the deadliest on the European continent
today. A few striking figures are worth recalling. A
total of 12,800 people have died since April 2014 in the
Donbas, including 3,300 civilians. Despite commitments
to respecting the ceasefire, the situation on the line of
contact remains as tense as ever. The OSCE Mission
identified more than 30 victims in January alone. Let
us not forget that Ukraine is now the third most mined
area in the world, after Iraq and Afghanistan, and that
it will take several decades to clear it.

As my German colleague and friend said, since the
onset of hostilities France and Germany, in conjunction
with the OSCE, have spared no effort in the so-called
Normandy format to bring the parties closer together,
facilitate the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements by the latter and contribute thereby to
ending the conflict. In order to achieve that objective,
three points deserve our full attention.

First, much remains to be done to implement the
commitments that were made several years ago to
improve security conditions, which include respecting
the ceasefire; withdrawing heavy weapons from the
line of contact; disengaging from three pilot areas
that were identified by the September 2016 framework
agreement; clearing mines, on which no significant
progress has been noted; and lastly, protecting critical
civilian infrastructure and its workers. We regret the
lack of political will to implement commitments that
were made at the highest level.

Beyond the Donbas, France reiterates its concern
about Russia's illegal use of military force in the Kerch
Strait. Equally worrying are the excessive inspections
that have been carried out by the Russian coast guard in
the Sea of Azov since last spring. Following the serious
naval incident in November, there is a greater need than
ever for commercial and military ships to enjoy safe,
free and unhindered passage, and for the 24 illegally
detained Ukrainian seamen to be released immediately
and without condition.

Secondly, in the context of open conflict in eastern
Ukraine and tensions related to the illegal annexation
of Crimea, the civilian population is on the front line.
Ukraine is facing one of the largest humanitarian
crises of the past 10 years. In total, as mentioned by
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, 3.5 million
women and men, particularly the most vulnerable
older persons - representing nearly 10 per cent of the
population- depend on humanitarian assistance.

France once again calls on the parties to facilitate
the crossing ofthe line of contact by civilian populations
and spare them the suffering associated with waiting
in inhuman conditions, especially given the opening of
new crossing points. We must not forget that more than
10 people have died in recent weeks due to the extremely
harsh crossing and waiting conditions on both sides of
the line of contact. Similarly, every effort must be made
to ensure safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
organizations and United Nations agencies, particularly
in the territory controlled by separatist entities.

On 6 June 2018, in presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/l2, the Security Council called for the
United Nations to take action to respond appropriately
to the humanitarian crisis. In that regard, we welcome
the humanitarian response plan for 2019-2020, prepared
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as the upcoming launch of a common
finance fund for Ukraine. That initiative is a step
towards greater awareness, and we fully support it.

Thirdly and in conclusion, an end to the crisis is
first and foremost the responsibility of the parties,
especially Russia. We encourage them to stop posturing
and to implement all their obligations under the Minsk
agreements, in the interest of a civilian population that
is caught between heavy weapons and mines. Contrary
to what we heard some minutes ago, the actual conflict
is not the product of a so-called Western plot. Sitting
around this table there is an aggressor country and a
country that is subject to that aggression. The OSCE
Mission, the outstanding work of which we commend,
plays a central role in achieving that objective and
resolving the crisis. We urge the parties, in particular
the separatist entities, to allow observers to move freely
throughout Ukraine to the Russian-Ukrainian border.

Pending the return to a lasting peace, to which
we are striving tirelessly to contribute, the Ukrainian
people can count on the full and complete support
of France.

