Mrs. Leahy (Canada) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all, on behalf of Canada, to convey our
condolences to the Government of Guatemala and to
the families of the victims following the deaths on
23 January in the Democratic Republic of Congo of
eight Guatemalan military personnel with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

I thank Tanzania for having taken the initiative to
invite the Security Council, which regularly considers
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi, to hold a debate on the regional
environment in the Great Lakes region.

This is a timely debate. The process of political
transition in both Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has reached a significant stage
thanks to the determination of the Burundian and the
Congolese peoples and the support of the international
community. The electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be concluded. Not only is
a successful electoral outcome in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo crucial for the citizens and
political institutions of that country, but it would also
contribute to the stability of the region.

We believe that those national achievements will
be consolidated only if the leaders of those countries
and of neighbouring States normalize their relations
and work together to eliminate the root causes of
recurring conflict. To that end, leaders of 11 countries
are negotiating a Security, Stability and Development
Pact in the context of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. In itself, that Conference is a
confidence-building measure. It has already helped
obtain a greater convergence of views on aspects such
as the draft protocol on non-aggression, mutual
defence and the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The
Conference is the only forum in which countries of
three African subregions can deal in an integrated way
with the linkages between conflict, the exploitation of
natural resources, governance and development. It also
provides for the participation of civil society.

Canada urges the countries of the Conference to
finalize the proposed Pact and to hold the second
Summit as early as possible. We look forward to
learning about the priority commitments that they will
be undertaking to bring about peace in the core of the
region and about how they intend to ensure follow-up.

We draw the Council's attention to resolution
1625 (2005), which requests the Secretary-General to
implement measures agreed by the concerned countries
in addressing the root causes of armed conflict, which
is what they are doing in the context of the
International Conference for the Great Lakes Region.

For those reasons, as a partner and as co-chair of
the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region,
Canada calls on the United Nations to continue its
support, in partnership with the African Union, to
enable the Conference to successfully conclude its
work.

This debate is essentially an appeal to the leaders
of countries to fulfil their responsibility to protect their
populations, as hundreds of thousands of people are
suffering as a result of situations of conflict and
insecurity. At the 2005 world summit, our leaders made
a firm commitment to implement the principles of the
responsibility to protect, through the Security Council.

Not only do the leaders of the countries of the
Great Lakes region bear the responsibility for ensuring
lasting peace in their region, but they must shoulder
that responsibility with respect to people who were
victims of the two worst humanitarian crises in the
world, which have been ongoing for a decade in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in northern Uganda. We believe it is essential that
the draft resolution recognize that responsibility.
Moreover, we underline the importance of the
responsibility to ensure the security and access of
humanitarian personnel and assistance to vulnerable
persons.

During the open Security Council debate on
9 December 2005, we had the opportunity to revisit the
issue of the physical and legal protection of civilians.
We emphasized that it was important that the Council
ensure that that issue remain a top priority in its
decisions and actions.

We therefore fully support the reference made in
the draft resolution to the provisions of resolution 1649
(2005) aimed at putting an end to the activities of the
militias and foreign armed groups in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo - the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, the former
Interahamwe, the Forces nationales de liberation and
others - which continue to destabilize the heart of the
region.

(spoke in English)

We commend the efforts made by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Operation
in Burundi and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, and we encourage the Secretary-General to find
ways for United Nations missions to further support
Governments in protecting their citizens.

We again draw to the Council's attention the
atrocities perpetrated by the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) in northern Uganda. The LRA is a tragedy for
Ugandans - particularly women and children at
risk - and is hindering United Nations missions in the
region. Once more we call on the Council to include on
its agenda the situation in northern Uganda and to
examine the possibility of adopting a resolution dealing
with the destabilization caused by the LRA in the
region.

We know that there can be no peace without
justice in the region and that there can be no justice
without reconciliation. We acknowledge and support
the efforts in various quarters to put an end, through
political negotiation, to the many intolerable situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the
Sudan and northern Uganda.

As for the challenges facing the Sudan, and in
View of the impunity with which the militias are still
carrying out their activities in the Darfur region, we
urge the Council to ensure the implementation of the
measures it has taken with regard to war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including the monitoring and
implementing of its resolutions.

Because atrocities, sexual aggression and sexual
violence persist, justice also requires an end to the
impunity with which perpetrators violate human rights
and humanitarian law. To that end, we strongly support
efforts to build independent and reliable national
judicial institutions, and we call upon each country in
the region to cooperate with and support the
International Criminal Court in its investigations of
crimes against humanity.

In its resolution 1265 (1999), the Council
committed itself to responding to situations where
civilians were being targeted or where assistance to
them was deliberately obstructed. Our delegation
firmly believes that the Council must be timely in its
engagement and vigilant in its monitoring and that it
must have the political will to draw upon the full range
of measures at its disposal in support of civilian
protection.

(spoke in French)

The demographic and physical aspects of the
region, as well as decades of population displacement,
are challenges that can be overcome only by joint and
sustained efforts on the part of the region's leaders and
help from the international community. We believe that
the appropriate regional and subregional bodies, in
conjunction with the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, must work much more closely
together on priority projects aimed at, inter alia,
facilitating the reintegration of young people into
productive life, recognizing the right of displaced
persons to property and establishing infrastructure.

We reiterate the Council's demand, in resolution
1649 (2005), that all States neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
Government of National Unity and Transition, impede
any kind of support to the illegal exploitation of
Congolese natural resources, particularly by preventing
the flow of such resources through their respective
territories.

We welcome the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission at the world summit. We
believe that the Commission could focus its attention
not only on countries, but also on their regional
dimension. Furthermore, we believe that this is an
opportunity for the Security Council to follow up on
resolution 1631 (2005) by inviting the African Union
to cooperate with the Peacebuilding Commission on
this issue, thus reinforcing the partnership between the
United Nations and the Union.

