Mr. Menon (Singapore): As a neighbour of
Myanmar and a fellow member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), it is with a heavy
heart that we speak today. Recent events in Myanmar
cannot be overlooked or ignored, even by Myanmar's
friends and neighbours.

That is why, on 27 September, we issued a
statement in our capacity as ASEAN Chair. All ASEAN
members were present, including nine of ten Foreign
Ministers. The statement expressed revulsion over
reports that the protests were being suppressed by
violence. It called for restraint, national reconciliation,
the release of political detainees, including Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, and for Myanmar to work towards a
peaceful transition to democracy. In addition, the
statement expressed support for the visit of United
Nations Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari. It also
referred to the serious impact on ASEAN's credibility.
It therefore cannot be just an internal matter of
Myanmar.

On 29 September, my Prime Minister, Mr. Lee
Hsien Loong, wrote to Senior General Than Shwe to
convey his deep concern and to urge Myanmar to work
with Mr. Gambari to find a way forward. On 2 October,
my delegation in Geneva delivered a statement at the
fifth special session of the Human Rights Council on
the draft resolution on Myanmar and stressed the
importance of supporting Mr. Gambari's mission. On
3 October, Prime Minister Lee met with Mr. Gambari
to assure him of ASEAN's full support and to
encourage him to press on with the United Nations
efforts.

But we are here today to look forward, not back.
To move forward, there are certain realities that we
have to acknowledge. First, we need to recognize that
the United Nations efforts, as embodied by
Mr. Gambari, are unique and irreplaceable. At this
stage, Mr. Gambari represents our best hope and is also
the only game in town. Mr. Gambari is an experienced
and gifted diplomat who seems to have gained the trust
of both sides. The international community should
buttress his position and invest him with the requisite
support, authority and prestige. Mr. Gambari should
return to Myanmar and resume his good offices role as
soon as possible to sustain the momentum. We urge the
Myanmar Government to continue to cooperate with
the United Nations and Mr. Gambari.

Secondly, we should avoid falling into the trap of
over-simplification. The situation in Myanmar is
complicated. As the Secretary-General himself has
noted, we should not prematurely try to pigeonhole Mr.
Gambari's visit as a success or failure. He has
succeeded in beginning a process that can bring change
to Myanmar. The fact that Myanmar has allowed
Mr. Gambari to visit three times, most recently in the
midst of the present crisis, is encouraging. It shows
that the Myanmar authorities want to maintain a line to
the United Nations.

There are also reports that the authorities have
released some of those detained. Unfortunately, many
others are still being detained and arrests reportedly
continue. Yesterday, Senior General Than Shwe
announced that he was willing to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi, but he imposed preconditions on that
meeting and, most regrettably, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
remains in detention. Mr. Gambari's visit is the start of
a long and arduous process.

Thirdly, we have to be pragmatic. It would be a
grievous mistake to think that if the State Peace and
Development Council (SPDC) left the scene tomorrow,
all would suddenly be well and all problems would
automatically be resolved. The military is a key
institution in Myanmar that cannot be wished away.
Any peaceful solution to the crisis will have to involve
all parties, including the military. If the military is not
part of the solution, there will be no solution. If the
process is mishandled, it could result in greater
instability and more suffering for the Myanmar people.
Thant Myint-U, a former United Nations Secretariat
official and grandson of U Thant, warned recently that
the world must be careful that the change it wants to
see in Myanmar does not lead to the anarchy seen in
Iraq.

Myanmar is not a homogeneous State. There are
many armed ethnic groups that are opposed to central
Government rule. Only a very tenuous ceasefire
prevents the renewal of hostilities. That should not be
an excuse for delaying necessary steps forward, but
neither do we want a Yugoslavia in South-East Asia.

There has also been talk about additional
sanctions. My delegation can understand the impulse to
punish unacceptable behaviour. Indeed, we should not
rule that out. But we have to pause to consider
dispassionately what the real impact of additional
sanctions will be. How will they affect a regime that is
only tangentially connected to the rest of the world?
Will they help or hinder the role of the United Nations?
How will they affect the willingness of the SPDC to
cooperate with Mr. Gambari? What is their impact on
the people of Myanmar? All such actions should have
only one objective, which is to strengthen
Mr. Gambari's hand as an effective mediator.
Fourthly, ASEAN will take a responsible
position. Myanmar is part of the ASEAN family.
Whatever we may think about the behaviour of a
family member, it is still a family member. But
ASEAN's influence is limited. That was underscored
last year when the Myanmar authorities refused to
seriously engage the ASEAN envoy. Yet, the same
authorities received Mr. Gambari and arranged a
substantial programme for him, which included
meetings with Senior General Than Shwe and Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi. That was a clear signal of
Myanmar's preferences.

It is in everyone's interest to keep Myanmar in
the ASEAN family, but we are not Myanmar's only
neighbour. China and India are two large countries
with a long history of engagement with Myanmar. We
believe that they are uniquely placed to play a role. In
that regard, allow me to commend China for its quiet
efforts, which we believe were instrumental in securing
a substantive and useful visit for Mr. Gambari. We
20

hope that India will play a similar role. Likewise,
Japan has a role to play, because it is a major aid donor
to Myanmar. All of us - the international community
as a whole - must do our part. Because of the size and
complexity of the undertaking, the good offices of the
United Nations and Mr. Gambari offer the only new
way forward.

