Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
expressing my appreciation and that of my delegation
for your contribution, Sir, to the work of the Security
Council during the past six months and particularly, for
the manner in which you led the Council during your
presidency this month. But professionalism, efficiency,
transparency and impartiality have characterized you
throughout your rich career. I wish you all the best in
your future endeavours.

Let me start by thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing and for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2009/323). In the same vein, my delegation would
also like to thank Mr. Eide for the leadership he has
provided under extremely harsh circumstances. We
also wish to welcome Mr. Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, to the Council table.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me here to make some brief additional remarks.

The crucial political moment of the year that will
have a significant impact on Afghanistan's future -
the presidential and legislative elections - is fast
approaching. Croatia is encouraged by the adherence of
the Independent Election Commission to the election
timetable, especially regarding voter registration and
candidate vetting. We particularly welcome the
growing number of women registered as provincial
candidates, as compared to the elections held in 2005.
It is of utmost importance to secure the full
participation of all Afghans in the upcoming elections,
as well as its absolute credibility.

In that context, Croatia strongly supports the role
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the election process,
especially the technical and political incentives it has
provided in close cooperation with the relevant Afghan
institutions, as we believe that those incentives will
help considerably in creating conditions and an
atmosphere conducive to free, fair and transparent
elections.

In addition, we welcome the appointment of the
Electoral Complaints Commission, as well as the
decisions by the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to send an
observation mission and election support team to
monitor the conduct and outcome of the elections.

Notwithstanding the positive momentum, Croatia
is concerned by the deterioration of the security
situation in the country, especially in the south and the
east, as well as by the expansion of the insurgency in
the previously calm north and the fresh influx of
foreign fighters into the country. On the other hand, we
note with satisfaction that further progress in
coordinating key Afghan security institutions is making
headway, that the security situation in and around
Kabul has improved and that there has been a sharp
decrease in the number of aid workers killed or
maimed during the reporting period. We support the
further Afghanization of security operations and the
continued effort to avoid civilian casualties.

It is important to stress that, although we see the
military effort as an important and integral part of the
global solution in Afghanistan, we agree with the
overall assessment that military means alone will not
bring final success in the country. A carefully planned
and attentively implemented national reconciliation
programme based on respect for the constitution and
relevant Security Council resolutions could, in our
opinion, greatly contribute to that aim.

Croatia welcomes the progress made in some of
the priority areas identified as essential for
Afghanistan's long-term economic growth, especially
agriculture, private sector development and higher
education. In that context, we welcome the
establishment of much-needed new mechanisms aimed
at better coordination and coherent allocation of
resources, including the development assistance
database set up in order to increase aid effectiveness
and to coordinate the flow of donor resources.

Furthermore, we welcome the newly established
United Nations Development Assistance Framework,
which sets the course for United Nations action in
Afghanistan from 2010 to 2013 and creates a common
fund, with the main aim of addressing the imbalance in
assistance provided to provinces.

Croatia strongly supports the so-called civilian
surge aimed at massive capacity- and institution-
building and the comprehensive plan put forward in
that regard by the Afghan Government following the
Hague Conference. We share the view that that new
surge has to be Afghan-led and primarily focused on
the subnational level. In that context, we eagerly await
the finalization of the Government's priority plan and
implementing mechanisms as necessary tools for the
full implementation of the aforementioned strategy.

In our view, the fight against corruption remains
one of the main tasks for the Afghan authorities. We
therefore welcome the establishment of a specialized
anti-corruption unit, as well as the development of
anti-corruption plans by the recently created High
Office of Oversight for the Implementation of the
Anti-Corruption Strategy.

The regional dimension of the problems in
Afghanistan cannot be overestimated. It is self-evident
that military action in Afghanistan needs to carefully
take into account and to adequately deal with political
and military situations in neighbouring countries.

At the same time, Afghanistan's economic growth
is inconceivable without substantial regional
coordination and cooperation. Croatia welcomes the
outcomes of several recent conferences devoted to
regional cooperation and their efforts to further
mobilize donor support for Afghanistan. We are
similarly pleased to see progress in bilateral relations
between Afghanistan and its neighbours, especially
Pakistan.

We fully understand UNAMA's current focus on
the elections and its determination to include all
relevant stakeholders in the development of the
benchmarks, as requested by resolution 1868 (2009).
We support UNAMA's endeavours to undertake wide
consultations on that issue, and we look forward to a
finalized set of benchmarks, to be presented in the next
report of the Secretary-General, due in September.
Bearing in mind the importance and magnitude of
the tasks assigned to UNAMA, Croatia supports the
further strengthening of UNAMA, as well as its
intention to further expand and establish offices in all
provinces of Afghanistan.

