Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
take this opportunity, Sir, to convey to you and your
team our appreciation for the very skilful way in which
you have guided our work, as well as for your
commitment. I shall heed the recommendation that we
should speak briefly, perhaps for only three minutes.

My first comment relates to our public meeting
on Africa. It was a timely, useful debate with excellent
participation from the membership of the Organization.
Here, the delegation of Mauritius deserves special
commendation.

I have two points to make regarding the future.
The first is that we should perhaps narrow the focus of
our debate on the African continent to a few specific
points that could in turn be set out in a more concrete
manner in a presidential statement. Secondly, we are
glad there has been an agreement about creating the ad
hoc working group to follow up on the African
situation and the topics of the presidential statement, as
well as on working in coordination with the Economic
and Social Council. During the year that organ will
examine the creation of a special advisory group to
meet the needs of countries emerging from conflict,
and we enthusiastically welcome the intention of the
British delegation to take up this matter again during
its presidency in July.

I would also like to say something about the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and about
resolution 1390 (2002), which spells out the mandate
of the Committee established under resolution 1267
(1999). It clearly emerged during the open meeting this
month that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has been
advancing in a quiet and perhaps somewhat invisible,
but intensive manner. It is having a considerable effect
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
The members of the Council are dedicating
considerable time and effort, and certainly have done
so throughout the month of January, to accomplish a
task that should be duly appreciated by the
international community. The adoption of resolution
1390 (2002) opened up a new modality for the Council,
because, in practice, it established the only sanctions
regime that is not linked to a specific territory or
country, but rather has global application. That is why
its implementation will require new mechanisms, and
we will have to discuss substantive topics never before
tackled in the Council. I would offer as an example the
discussion of the procedure to elaborate in a flexible
manner the lists of individuals, entities or organizations
involved in international terrorism without diminishing
the flexibility of action that is required.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the
importance of this wrap-up exercise. We should not
measure its impact only by the size of the audience,
which is again small. With this only criterion, we
would have to reach the absurd conclusion that other
public meetings regularly held on other topics on the
Council's agenda should be eliminated, because they
do not draw a massive number of representatives of
non-members of the Council. This exercise leaves a
record of our individual vision of the work of the
month, and this in itself is very important. We hope
that in the future we will agree on procedures and
content that will be enthusiastically welcomed by all
members of the Council and by a greater number of
non-members as well.

