Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation welcomed yesterday's
official signing, at the Paris Peace Conference, of the

 

General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Annexes thereto by the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and other interested parties.
That was a significant event, which my delegation applauds,
for, together with the Basic Agreement on the Region of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, it permits
us to hope for a peaceful settlement in the region of the
former Yugoslavia and for the end of a conflict that has
brought unspeakable suffering to the peoples of that area.

We were also pleased by the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference, held at London on 8 and
9 December, on the need for the creation of a climate of
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
establishment of political arrangements that will lead the
country along the path of democracy and the rule of law,
for the protection and promotion of human rights, for the
return of refugees and displaced persons, for the rapid
commencement of national reconstruction, and for the
normalization of relations with neighbouring States and
with the international community. My delegation supports
the objectives and tasks set out at the Conference, and
hopes and expects that the international community will
lend its support to this fresh opportunity for the inhabitants
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to rebuild their lives in a
climate of peace and prosperity.

The transition from the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) to the multinational military
Implementation Force (IFOR) is an important aspect of the
implementation of the military aspects of the Peace
Agreement. That step will ensure continuity in complying
with the Agreement on the cessation of hostilities, the
withdrawal of forces from the Zone of Separation agreed
upon for the purposes of the cease-fire, and assistance in
ensuring freedom of movement to the civilian population,
refugees and displaced persons as well as supervision of de-
mining activities and, in so far as possible, assistance to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and other international organizations in
their humanitarian missions.

My delegation agrees with the establishment of the
multinational Implementation Force under unified command
and control to carry out the duties set forth in annexes l-A
and 2 of the Peace Agreement. We urge the Government of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to cooperate with
the multinational Implementation Force and to afford it
every facility in carrying out its tasks.

 

The paramount objective of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has been to protect the
carrying out of humanitarian activities. In carrying out its
mandate, UNPROFOR has provided invaluable support to
UNHCR, which, under annex 7 of the Peace Agreement,
is to continue to coordinate humanitarian aid and the
implementation of a plan for the return of refugees and
displaced persons. There are over a million refugees and
displaced persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and their
movement must be facilitated. We therefore View it as
essential that help be provided by the multinational force
for the implementation of the Peace Agreement to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other humanitarian organizations. Similarly,
my delegation is of the view that measures must be
adopted to build confidence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and, in view of the human rights situation, that an
International Police Task Force must be established to
monitor respect for human rights, to ensure law
enforcement and to oversee and assist in the training of
personnel responsible for such activities and to help the
parties to create conditions for the holding of free and fair
elections in the country.

The human rights situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be carefully monitored. Thus, an
important step towards the implementation of annex 6 of
the Peace Agreement was the decision taken at the Peace
Implementation Conference that the High Representative
should preside over a human rights task force at Sarajevo
to be made up of the organizations and bodies involved
in this task.

My delegation recognizes and emphasizes the
enormous importance of the adoption of this draft
resolution to implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support it and we will vote in favour of it.

I should like to conclude by expressing our
admiration and respect for all the personnel who, with
great courage and dedication, have participated in the
peace-keeping operation in the former Yugoslavia and our
appreciation for all the efforts in favour of peace that
have been made by the Secretary-General's Special
Representatives and the commanders of the United
Nations Protection Force.

