Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on this very important day in the history
of East Timor.

First of all, we welcome the fact that the elections
on 30 August for the Constituent Assembly in East
Timor were conducted in a peaceful and orderly
manner. The very high turnout is a clear testimony to
the East Timorese people's determination to participate
in the nation-building process. It is also the result of
the strenuous efforts made by the Independent
Electoral Commission, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
Japanese Government pays high tribute to all those
organizations which have contributed to the success of
the elections.

Recognizing the importance of the elections,
Japan dispatched a team of electoral observers and
provided financial support amounting to $1.2 million
through UNDP electoral assistance projects.
Now that the elections have been successfully
held, we would like to urge all parties to fully respect
the results and to unite towards nation-building. It is
particularly important that the new Constituent
Assembly work on the drafting of the constitution in a
balanced, inclusive and cooperative manner, for the
purpose of their work is to create the very foundation
of nation-building in East Timor. Needless to say, the
way the Constituent Assembly discharges its
responsibility will have a defining impact on the future
governance of the country.

The forthcoming formation of the Timorese
Transitional Government will be an important step
towards self-governance, but we have to acknowledge
that there will remain certain areas where UNTAET
must continue its activities in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. Close
cooperation between UNTAET and the Timorese
Government will therefore be essential to attain the
orderly transition to independence.

The planning for a follow-on mission of
UNTAET is another important issue which the
international community must address. In order to
make the future process predictable and therefore
stable, it is critical for the Security Council to clearly
define at an early stage the shape of the follow-on
mission, including its function, composition, required
financial resources, necessary procedures and time-
frame, taking into account the needs and security
conditions on the ground in East Timor and, indeed, the
wishes of the Timorese people.

In light of what we see on the island, we strongly
believe that the United Nations should continue its
military and civilian police presence, as well as a
minimum and indispensable civilian personnel
presence. We hope that the Secretary-General will
carefully examine such needs as he compiles his
recommendations to submit to the United Nations
membership in October.

The successful elections are truly a cause for
celebration for everybody involved, but the elections
are only one step, albeit a major one, towards the
achievement of an independent East Timor. Many more
difficult issues will have to be addressed by the
Timorese people, as well as by the international
community, in order to ensure the successful
attainment of independence for that island nation.

External support and assistance will be essential
for nation-building not only before, but also after
independence. I would therefore like to conclude this
statement by reaffirming the Japanese Government's
commitment to supporting East Timor as it engages
itself in nation-building in the years to come.

