Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/373) notes, it is a sad fact that
20 years since the Council's adoption of resolution
1265 (1999), the state of the protection of civilians
is tragically similar to that time. Members speaking
today will no doubt express their outrage at this state of
affairs, yet we continue to see the erosion of respect for
the basic principles of international humanitarian law.
As we reach the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1265 (1999), and of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, it is important that we reflect
on what is working and what is not.

New Zealand recognizes the importance of
monitoring, including of human rights, and calls for the
continued inclusion of monitoring within peacekeeping
and political mandates. Monitoring is crucial to
evidence gathering for two reasons.

The first reason is evidence gathering for
accountability. We reiterate our support for domestic
mechanisms as the primary method of accountability.
But where domestic mechanisms fail or countries are
unwilling to investigate, the international community
has a responsibility to act. We must be prepared
to call out breaches of international humanitarian
law by States and non-State actors where we see
them. We must be prepared to support international
mechanisms such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 in order
to reinforce that breaches of international humanitarian
law are not without consequence.

The second reason is evidence gathering for
improvements. We must collectively grapple with the
changing nature of conflicts. Urbanized, asymmetric
conflicts pose an increased risk to civilians. That must
be factored into the assessments required by the law of
armed conflict before engagement. Such assessments
must include the means and methods of attack and,
notably, must therefore review the choice of weapon to
be used in any conflict.

Specifically with regard to that issue, I note that the
Secretary-General's report usefully draws attention to
the direct and indirect humanitarian harm that can be
caused by the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. Reflecting on our own strong concern about the
need to better protect civilians from the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, New Zealand warmly
welcomes the initiative taken by the Government of
Austria to host a conference in October this year to help
chart a way forward on that important topic.

The Secretary-General's report notes the wide
range of causes of insecurity that can affect the safety
and well-being of civilians. Our international responses

must consider the entire conflict cycle in a holistic way.
That includes the provision of humanitarian assistance.
We have heard today of the continued and pervasive
humanitarian access constraints, which we urge all
parties to address. Bureaucracy should never be an
impediment to saving lives. To ensure a holistic approach
to ending conflict, there is a need for greater focus on
the parts of the population that are disproportionately
impacted by armed conflict. That necessarily includes
women, children and persons with disabilities.

New Zealand also deplores the ongoing attacks
and violations being committed against health-
care facilities and health-care workers. All parties
to conflicts, States or otherwise, must abide by the
principles of international humanitarian law and their
obligations to protect civilians. We must do better.

