Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): This Council
last discussed the disturbing situation in Afghanistan in a
formal meeting on 16 October last year. It is useful that
we should do so again, particularly while we are able to
take advantage of the presence of Mr. Holl, the Head of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, here
in New York.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned at
the continued fighting in Afghanistan and at the suffering
of its people. We hope that spring will prove to be the
season for a peace offensive, not a military offensive. The
continued search for peace remains vital.

At the forefront of this search are Mr. H011 and the
United Nations Special Mission. The United Nations
Special Mission deserves the full support of this Council
and all Member States. General Assembly resolution
51/195 described the United Nations as a universally
recognized intermediary and set out its central and
impartial role in seeking a peaceful solution. We fully
endorse this description.

Among their other achievements, we particularly
applaud the success of Mr. H011 and the United Nations
Special Mission in getting the Afghan parties together in

 

Islamabad on two occasions in recent weeks. It is essential
that the Special Mission be afforded every assistance in
building on these contacts. It must be able to benefit from
the influence of States in the region over different factions.
We hope that the United Nations Special Mission's contacts
with these States will intensify, as foreseen by General
Assembly resolution 50/88. All States should give their full
backing to the United Nations Special Mission and refrain
from parallel initiatives which could cut across its efforts.

We are concerned that the parties continue to receive
arms from outside, despite the clear call in Security Council
resolution 1076 (1996) for this to stop. The European
Union has adopted an embargo on arms sales to
Afghanistan, which has been supported by associate
countries. Other countries should adopt a similar position of
restraint.

There can be no military solution which offers lasting
peace in Afghanistan. We hope that the factions will learn
this lesson without inflicting another round of fighting on
the long-suffering Afghan people. The United Nations
Special Mission's priority must be the negotiation of an
immediate ceasefire. It must also continue to work for a
settlement which offers a fully representative, broad-based
transitional government and preserves the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan. Peace cannot be lasting
if the country is riven by ethnic divisions. All factions must
be open to working together with others and to respecting
the rights of different faiths and different ethnic groups.

United Nations agencies can also discuss practical
measures with the factions which can improve
Afghanistan's future. The factions need to have a better
understanding of the costs of war, the benefits of peace and
the need for Afghanistan to play a constructive role in
restoring stability to the region. These issues include health,
demining, return of refugees and economic reconstruction.

A particular priority is rooting out the criminal drug
culture which pervades Afghanistan and has an invidious
effect beyond Afghanistan's borders. The factions are
committed to working with the international community to
tackle this problem. We expect those commitments to be
honoured. For its part, the United Kingdom has donated
£900,000 to the United Nations Drug Control Programme
to combat drugs in Afghanistan, conditional upon the
parties cooperating fully with the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme, and we have
pledged a further £1 million.

The United Kingdom remains one of the largest
donors of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. It donated £7
million in 1996-1997. We will continue to work with
other donors to ensure that aid reaches all Afghans,
regardless of gender and consistent with the approach of
Security Council resolution 1076 (1996), which denounces
discrimination against women and girls. We were glad to
participate in the donors' meeting in Ashgabat in January,
which reaffirmed this approach. We would encourage all
agencies working in Afghanistan to continue to work to
a single set of opportunity criteria in this respect.

The meeting also agreed upon arrangements for
improved United Nations coordination of humanitarian
aid. These now need to be implemented in full. It also
makes sense for the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to Afghanistan
and the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to
work closely together. They share a common desire for
peace in Afghanistan, and they should exploit the
synergies between the aid effort and the political process.

We applaud the work of the humanitarian agencies
in Afghanistan. They are working tirelessly, often in
dangerous circumstances, to help the victims of the
conflict. The factions should respect the aid agencies,
which are there are to help the Afghan people.

The people of Afghanistan have suffered for too
long. The international community should send a clear
message that they want this spring to be a season of
peace, not further fighting and misery. The United
Nations Special Mission should intensify its efforts to find
a solution. Its success depends on all States offering their
full support, cutting off external support to the factions
and continuing to provide aid to the people. We call on
all States to do just that.

