Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Sir, let me welcome the initiative taken
by your country's presidency to convene this open
meeting of the Security Council. This provides an
excellent opportunity for joint reflection on United
Nations response to so-called complex crises.

As the presidency emphasizes in the paper that
has been distributed as a basis for our discussions, such
complex crises are conflicts that have not only military
and security dimensions but also political, economic,
social and humanitarian aspects. They often spill over
national borders and increasingly are taking on
regional dimensions.

The briefing we heard this morning - for which
we are most appreciative - by Mr. Jan Egeland,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
emphasizes the tremendous challenges posed by such
complex crises for the peoples afflicted, the regions
most directly affected, the entire international
community and, of course, the United Nations system.

It is generally agreed that the emergence of failed
or collapsed States poses a threat to regional stability
and even, in some cases, to global stability.
Accordingly, the international community must
decisively tackle such situations.

Political instability is but one factor - although
an important one - in the emergence of such complex
crises. Other factors also play an important role,
whether by provoking such crises or by aggravating
them, and are often a result of the crises themselves. I
refer here to environmental aspects and to problems
such as extreme poverty, inadequate sanitation,
difficulties resulting from serious social or gender-
related inequalities, and the forced displacement of
peoples, among others.

The challenges inherent in complex crises are
quite unlike those posed by other, more traditional,
types of threats, and, as a result, prompt the
international community to engage in a discussion on
the necessary balance between State sovereignty and
collective action. We are speaking here of threats that
do not respect borders and can be dealt with only
through international cooperation and effective
international action.

In an analysis of complex crises, the line between
conflict prevention and the maintenance and building
of peace becomes blurred. Peace-building often starts
in the peacekeeping phase, as reflected in the mandates
adopted in recent years by the Security Council for
certain complex and multidimensional missions. The
peace-building phase also has an important preventive
aspect, in order to prevent the fragile situation typical
of States emerging from a crisis from degenerating into
yet another armed conflict.

Let us not forget that the majority of conflicts
today are essentially internal and that they often recur.
Approximately 40 per cent of States that have emerged
from a conflict situation find themselves once again
involved in a dynamic of armed confrontation
relatively soon - a percentage that rises to 60 per cent
in the case of Africa. Thus the prevention of conflict
recurrence is as important - perhaps even more
important - than prevention of conflict emergence.
That aspect must be given due consideration in the
work of the Security Council.

In tackling complex crises, prevention, as
emphasized by Mr. Egeland, plays a pivotal role.
Conflict prevention must be based on a broad concept
of security that comprises political aspects, good
governance, sustainable development, respect for
human rights, and combating inequality and
marginalization.

In terms of prevention, early warning must be
accompanied by an early response. It is not very useful
to get the necessary information on a potential crisis if
the international community is not prepared to take
decisive action to prevent it. Sometimes the need to
deal with ongoing crises distracts us from potential
conflicts. Early warning is of no use either if no effort
is made to contain and mitigate the conflict situation
immediately. Early warning and response require an
analysis of the situation that includes the root causes of
the crisis, follow-up to the processes and factors
involved, and an intervention complemented by
mechanisms and measures geared to responding to the
root causes of the crisis.

Early warning and response require an
understanding of a situation achieved by analyzing the
bases of a conflict, anticipation through an analysis of
the processes of a conflict and its particular contextual
circumstances, and intervention based on a broad
inventory of ways and means suitable to that situation.

While there are many early warning systems
within the United Nations, we believe that the time has
come to give serious consideration to how they can be
coordinated so that the information at their disposal can
contribute effectively and immediately to the decision-
making process. In that connection, the role of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Article 99 of the Charter
is critical. In particular, the Secretary-General's
initiative to appoint a special adviser for the prevention
of genocide and other especially serious crimes is
promising, in that it will ensure that the relevant
information will reach the highest decision-making
bodies early enough.

In the prevention of a crisis or its recurrence, the
Security Council should not be the only body involved.
The task must be shared by the system's agencies and
organizations. This raises the crucial issue of the
Organization's requisite institutional architecture. We
must determine whether it is suitable, in particular in
the post-conflict transitional phase, for moving towards
stabilization, rehabilitation and reconstruction.

Increased interaction between the Security
Council, other major United Nations bodies and the
High Commissioners for Refugees and Human Rights
has become ever more necessary to providing a
consistent and integrated response to the challenges
inherent in complex crises. In this regard, I wish to
welcome among us the President of the Economic and
Social Council. We highly appreciate her contribution
to the discharge of tasks and the adoption of measures
undertaken by the Security Council in this connection.
The Economic and Social Council is certainly highly
suited to performing such work, pursuant to Article 65
of the Charter. One specific example of the increased
interaction between the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council will be the participation of
representatives from one of the Economic and Social
Council's ad hoc advisory groups in the Security
Council's forthcoming mission to West Africa in June.

Once a crisis has erupted and the Security
Council and other bodies of the United Nations system
have begun to respond to it, it must be met by the joint
and consistent implementation of the following
measures.

First, there must be strong local leadership with a
broad social base that enjoys the firm support of the
international community. Otherwise, international
efforts to provide assistance may be doomed to failure,
particularly in the humanitarian sphere. Secondly, we
must prepare an integrated plan, adapted to the
situation on the ground, and resist the temptation to
make a hasty exit. Initial military success does not
guarantee the resolution of the deep-rooted cause of a
complex crisis or emergency. Thirdly, we must
mobilize sufficient resources to implement the
integrated plan and make consistent use of the
appropriate tools with a view to ensuring that those
resources are not wasted. Fourthly, we must maintain
constant monitoring of the plan and of the evolution of
the situation on the ground with a view to responding
to changing circumstances.

In the context of complex crises, we cannot fail to
note the relevant role of the competent regional
organizations and, with respect to African
crises, of the African Union and such bodies as the
Economic Community of West African States in
particular. In the European sphere, of which Spain is a
part, we would emphasize the active work of the
European Union to implement the Joint Declaration on
strengthening cooperation in the civil management of
crises, signed with the United Nations in September
2003.

The role of international civil society, in
cooperation with Governments and international
organizations, is also critical. In this connection, I
would note the adoption in Dublin in April of an
Action Agenda on the Prevention of Violent Conflict.
The Agenda is the outcome of dialogue among more
than 200 participants, including organizations from
civil society, Governments and multilateral
organizations. It contains interesting recommendations
on cooperation between civil society and the United
Nations system in the areas of early warning and
response and of assessing post-conflict situations.

Ultimately, the success of efforts to change the
dynamics of conflict that characterize complex crises
into a dynamic for peace depends on the firm long-term
commitment of the international community, including
through an integrated plan with clear objectives, the
firm resolve of the authorities of the State emerging
from crisis, the implementation of measures necessary
to building peace and ensuring national reconciliation,
the political and financial support of the international
community for transitional institutions, and the
provision of tools adapted to the challenges of peace-
building in the post-conflict period.

