Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Japan, Yukio Takasu, on
his appointment to the post of Chairman of the
Commission. We would also like to thank the previous
Chairmen, Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins and Kenzo
Oshima, for the efforts they made in the work of the
Commission and the initial stage of its institutional
formation.

On the whole, we have a positive View of the first
year of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. A
new institutional mechanism has been created, which
has been given important objectives for coordinating
peacebuilding activity. The procedures, format and
priorities for activity have been set down. The body
has considerable potential and is capable, with time, of
becoming one of the key international instruments in
this sphere.

A great deal of work has been done on the
Commission's country-specific files on Burundi and
Sierra Leone. In particular, the existing challenges and
gaps in the area of peacebuilding in those countries
have already been determined. At the present stage, the
objective is achieving progress in the field through a
coordinated implementation of the Integrated
Peacebuilding Strategies in the launching of
monitoring mechanisms, with a leading role played by
the Governments of the countries that are recipients of
assistance.

At the same time, the Commission has not yet
been able to overcome the difficulties it encountered in
setting up its work. Particular attention should be paid
to issues of improving cooperation onsite in all areas of
peacebuilding processes and a harmonious
coordination of the activities of the Commission with
the existing mechanisms for coordination, first and
foremost within the United Nations.

In addition, there is a need to establish a clear
balance between the responsibilities of Governments
and international partners without overloading national
authorities with excessive obligations and without
duplicating assistance programmes. Any peacebuilding
activity must be based on broad national dialogue with
all political forces.

In that sense, we are naturally concerned by the
existing political and institutional crisis in Burundi in
connection with the refusal of the opposition factions
to participate in the joint mechanism for verification
and observation of the ceasefire. We believe that the
Government of Burundi and the international
community must make all possible efforts to defuse the
political situation in the country and ensure the speedy
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement of 7 September 2006. We welcome of the
mediation efforts of the Republic of South Africa and
the regional peace initiatives, in particular of Uganda
and Tanzania.

We would like to express our satisfaction at the
presidential and parliamentary elections that took place
in August 2007 in Sierra Leone. The Sierra Leone
leadership and people demonstrated their readiness to
follow the path of democratic progress and sustainable
development. Four priority areas for peacebuilding
activities have been identified in Sierra Leone. Now,
the Government, with the support of the Commission,
the donor community, civil society, nongovernmental
organizations and regional and international partners,
must focus on developing a strategy for cooperation in
the area of peacebuilding. We believe that work will be
concluded on the draft by the end of this year.

Of great significance also is the functioning of
the monitoring mechanisms of the Integrated
Peacebuilding Strategies and other assistance
programmes, most notably the poverty reduction
strategy. In Burundi, work on the establishment of a
monitoring and control mechanism is already under
way and the proper functioning of the partners'
coordination group must be ensured. In Sierra Leone,
particular support to national control mechanisms is
needed, in particular the recently created United
Nations office for development coordination.

In our view, the objectives of the Commission are
enhancing the coordination and productivity of the
international community's peacebuilding activities in
defining, in close interaction with the Government of
the country that is the recipient of assistance, high-
priority areas for peacebuilding and the mobilization of
donor resources. Of particular importance is the
objective of strengthening the integral link between the
Commission and the Security Council on the issues on
the agenda of both bodies. It is important to ensure a
timely exchange of information and to see that the two
bodies complement each other in partnership fashion.
We believe that the Council, in its work on Burundi
and Sierra Leone, must take into account the
recommendations of the Commission. Naturally, this
will take place in parallel to the development of links
by the Commission with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and also with other
United Nations bodies, programmes and funds, the
donor community and regional organizations.

Currently, the Commission has before it the
inclusion of new countries in its agenda. We believe
that a decision, after appropriate open discussion,
should take into account whether a given country has a
real need for international assistance in post-conflict
recovery, together with the progress made by the
Commission on the country files under its
consideration, as well as on the understanding that the
Commission is not an additional source of external
financing but is, above all, a coordinating and
consultative mechanism.

