Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
his statement and to align myself with the statement to
be made later by the Ambassador of Finland on behalf
of the European Union.

The briefing we have just heard demonstrates that
the protection of civilians remains a current and
compelling concern. All parties to armed conflict must
strive to prevent harm to civilians. Parties must comply
fully with the requirements of international law on the
protection of civilians, especially concerning the bans
on physical attack, sexual and gender-based violence,
the use of child soldiers and forced displacement. They
must ensure that specific measures for the protection of
civilians are included in peace agreements. New
peacekeeping missions should be given the mandates
and the resources they need in order to protect
civilians, and peacekeepers must be trained to
understand the issues involved.

I have just spoken of a lot of imperatives - a lot
of "musts", and rightly so, because it reflects those
things which we have no choice but to do.

Like the Under-Secretary-General, the United
Kingdom is deeply concerned about the high number of
internally displaced persons. A stronger framework is
needed to ensure that international humanitarian
responses meet their needs. Human suffering does not
recognize national boundaries.

We commend those United Nations agencies,
peacekeeping troops and non-governmental
organizations that provide vital humanitarian
assistance, often in difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We condemn attacks that target them, in
the strongest terms. Jan Egeland raised some important
points today about the safety and security of such
personnel.

I believe there would be advantage in a briefing
to the Council on these very issues by the Department
of Safety and Security, because impunity cannot be
tolerated - not for attacks on humanitarian and United
Nations workers, not for attacks on journalists, and not
for attacks on civilians. Such acts should be properly
investigated and guilty parties must be held
accountable. Where States are unable or unwilling to
do this, the international community should be
prepared to take action. We welcome the developments
that have taken place in 2006, with the arrests of
individuals accused of terrible crimes, such as Charles
Taylor and Thomas Lubanga.

When disasters happen, the world looks to the
United Nations and to Jan Egeland to lead the
international response. If this response is to continue to
be effective, however, the United Nations must
continue to identify and embrace new ways of meeting
humanitarian challenges. The United Kingdom
commends the groundbreaking work of the Under-
Secretary-General in this respect. The Central
Emergency Response Fund is an example of a new
initiative that has successfully provided an easier way
for quickly getting the right aid to the right places in a
crisis situation, and doing so immediately. We should
build on successful initiatives like this to ensure that
we are able to continue to meet the humanitarian needs
of the vulnerable in times of crisis.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
the impact of armed conflicts on civilians around the
world. Over the past year specifically, there have been
increased military campaigns against the insurgents in
eastern Burma. Civilians, including children, in the
conflict areas suffer from the repercussions of these
campaigns. We call on the Government of Myanmar -
Burma - and other actors to work towards a peaceful
resolution to these conflicts. We also call on that
Government to cooperate with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and United Nations
agencies on this issue.

In the Middle East, the conflict in Gaza has
caused unacceptable suffering to civilians. We
welcome the recent ceasefire agreement and call on
both sides to do all they can to preserve the ceasefire
and to extend it to the West Bank.

The United Kingdom recognizes the threat posed
to vulnerable civilians by the uncontrolled spread and
accumulation of small arms and light weapons. A
poorly regulated arms trade allows weapons to flow
into the hands of those involved in conflict or human
rights abuses. We are committed to taking forward on a
legally binding basis, a treaty on the trade in all
conventional arms.

I would like to conclude on a more personal note
by thanking Jan Egeland for his tireless efforts over the
past three years, which I know have involved personal
sacrifices to him and his family. He has been an
innovative leader of the reform agenda and has frankly
served as the moral conscience of this Council and of
the United Nations on many occasions. Humanitarian
briefings are now a regular feature of our work in the
Council. To that, we owe a great deal - a debt - to
Jan, and he has our best wishes for the future. Because
of the priorities he has set out today, they, as well of
the rest of his work, should help guide our ongoing
discussions and work on these crucial issues in the
future.

