Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank Italy
for putting this very important issue on the Council's
agenda and for convening an open debate for all of us.
I would also like to recognize the work of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and to join others
in thanking Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
Special Rapporteur Maria Grazia Giammarinaro for
their informative briefings. Hungary fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

Human trafficking is a global threat, and we must
fight it together globally. In that regard, we welcome
the Council's adoption today of resolution 2388 (2017),
of which we were a sponsor, as it is an important step
forward in the fight against such heinous crimes and
the wave of human rights violations they have led to.
We are especially appalled by the recent news reports
showing migrants in Libya apparently being sold as
slaves. Horrendous crimes are being committed again
and again.

Hungary is of the view that a number of steps
must be taken if we are to fight this global threat more
effectively. First, an approach to human trafficking that
is genuinely centred on human rights and survivors
should be based on protecting those survivors, with a
special focus on women and children. Furthermore, our
response should be gender- and age-sensitive, as well as
specific to the particular type of exploitation involved.
We must ensure a holistic approach from the local to
the global level, using the tools available within the
United Nations system.

Secondly, in order to effectively implement the
relevant resolutions at the national and international
level, close and comprehensive cooperation and effective
partnerships are needed among States, international
organizations, civil society and business groups. We
recognize the importance of international cooperation
in combating human trafficking from the perspective
of both law enforcement and victim assistance. In
that spirit, Hungary maintains close cooperation
with destination countries for human trafficking. For
example, we have established a transnational referral
mechanism with the Netherlands and Belgium, and we
recently concluded a similar project with Switzerland.
Internationally, we continue to cooperate actively both
during investigation and asset recovery, and Hungary's
police have participated in numerous joint actions. In
our opinion, inter-agency cooperation must start at the
national level. In Hungary, significant measures have
been taken to combat human trafficking, including
establishing a national coordination mechanism.

Thirdly, we advocate for greater compliance
with international humanitarian law, and for greater
accountability, by ending impunity and bringing the
perpetrators to justice. Certain acts associated with
trafficking in persons, such as sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy and other forms of
sexual violence, may constitute war crimes, in our
view. Furthermore, acts associated with trafficking in
persons could constitute elements of genocide or crimes
against humanity. Hungary therefore supports including
perpetrators of trafficking in persons on United
Nations and unilateral sanctions lists. As a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, Hungary is committed to supporting all
initiatives aimed at preventing and ending genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, including the
adoption of a code of conduct in the Security Council.

Lastly, we should also explore the role that existing
mechanisms tasked with investigating allegations of
violations of international humanitarian law could
play in ensuring that those crimes are investigated by
the competent authorities. Last year, for examople,
Hungary became a member of the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission. We actively
support national and international efforts in that
regard, and we greatly appreciate the work of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Recognizing that
women can be especially vulnerable to trafficking in
persons in conflict situations and to conflict-related
sexual violence, Hungary is proud to contribute to the
invaluable work of the gender advisers deployed in the
framework of the collaboration between UN-Women
and the Justice Rapid Response initiative, as well as the
work of UN-Women on preventing violent extremism.

