Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his briefing.
We also warmly welcome First Deputy Prime Minister
Ivica Dacic' and Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj to the
Council and thank them for their statements today.

First, the Republic of Korea congratulates Kosovo
on holding successful elections for the Assembly of
Kosovo. In particular, the large participation of various
ethnic groups and minorities, including the Kosovo
Serbs, is a welcome development. We believe that these
elections represent a big step forward for Kosovo's
genuine democracy. Looking ahead, we hope that a
new Government can be formed in a timely manner so
that a new leadership can proceed to address the key
challenges facing the country.

Secondly, we are pleased to note that Belgrade
and Pristina are steadily moving forward in their
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. Although high-level dialogue between both sides
has not taken place due to the electoral processes,
progress on the ground has been sustained in many
important areas, notably the adoption of new municipal
statutes by the Serb majority municipalities in the
north. Building upon such achievements, we encourage
Serbia and Kosovo to resume the high-level dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU) and to continue
to scale up their efforts towards the normalization of
their relations.

Despite these positive developments, we remain
concerned over violent incidents in northern Kosovo,
in particular the actual violence committed during
the demonstration in South Mitrovica. We commend
the timely and appropriate responses of the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force, and support
the establishment ofa special working group under EU
auspices to prevent a further escalation of the tensions.

Such incidents are a clear reminder of the importance
of a genuine reconciliation process between the
communities. Unless the root causes of ethnic tensions
are duly addressed, the ongoing political process may
face more difficulties. At the same time, it is also vital
to strengthen the rule of law and ensure accountability.
In that regard, we welcome the statement of the Chief
Prosecutor of the European Union Special Investigative
Task Force in connection with the allegations of war
crimes (S/2014/558, annex II). It is also encouraging
that the Kosovo Assembly has authorized the extension
of EULEX's mandate, including the establishment of a
specialist court. We note with appreciation that Kosovo
has taken concrete action to investigate crimes and
promote reconciliation.

Finally, we once again commend the entire staff
of UNMIK and EULEX, as well as other international
partners, for their tireless efforts to ensure the peace
and stability of Kosovo and the region.

