The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Brazil. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Mr. Fonseca (Brazil) Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on East Timor.

As the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
draws to a close, we have good reason to feel proud of
the United Nations.

I want to pay tribute to my fellow countryman,
Sergio Vieira de Mello, who will be soon stepping
down as Special Representative and Transitional
Administrator. Under his competent and steady
guidance, UNTAET turned out to be one of the most
successful achievements of the United Nations. We are
grateful for what Sergio and his staff were able to
accomplish together with the people and the leadership
of East Timor. It is the spirit of sacrifice of highly
motivated international civil servants like him which
makes this Organization great and provides a vivid
example of what the values enshrined in the United
Nations Charter are all about.

The Security Council will soon establish a new
mission in East Timor, to be headed by our esteemed
colleague, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, of India. We
all admire his personal qualities, skills, intelligence and
dedication to the cause of the United Nations. The East
Timorese people could not rely on a better friend as
they undertake their journey as an independent country.

Brazil is delighted to join in celebrating the
successful presidential elections held in East Timor.
Xanana Gusmao had his charismatic leadership
confirmed and blessed at the polls. His tenacity and
unmistakable commitment to democracy, peace,
tolerance and reconciliation will prove to be essential
in the crucial years immediately after independence.
His presence among us on the first day of this debate
was an opportunity for the United Nations and the
international community to pay tribute to his leadership
role. Brazil joins its voice in greeting this extraordinary
leader of the East Timorese people. We were also
pleased to have among us Chief Minister Alkatiri. We
admire his determined and dedicated leadership, which
will continue to be crucial as he takes up the position
of Prime Minister.

The foundations of the future State of East Timor
have now been established. Nevertheless, the tasks and
the responsibilities of the United Nations in East Timor
are by no means over. We are approaching not the end
of United Nations engagement in East Timor, but rather
a new beginning that will require continued political
commitment.

At this critical moment, it is important to convey
a clear message of encouragement and unflinching
support for the East Timorese people. Independence
Day, on 20 May, will mark the launching of a new
phase in which our steadfast cooperation and support in
a vast array of critical areas will be required to
underpin the exercise of sovereignty by the East
Timorese.

The magnitude of the challenges facing this new
nation calls for a generous pledge of assistance from
the international community. We must ensure a smooth
and seamless transition to independence, so as to
preserve stability and security, as well as continuity in
the public administration. This will require securing a
predictable source of funding.

Brazil supports the establishment of a successor
mission to UNTAET, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, comprising military, civilian, and civilian
police components. We will continue to participate in
this effort not only with our troops, but also through
the programmes developed under the umbrella of the
Brazilian Agency for Cooperation.

Given the limited pool of professional and
administrative expertise in East Timor, it is particularly
important that the civilian component include the 100
key functions within the administration to guarantee
continuity and ensure on-the-job training for East
Timorese officials. Moreover, the downsizing of the
military and the civilian police components must be
commensurate with the capacity of the East Timor
Defence Force and the East Timor Police Service to
provide external and internal security. I am confident
that stability will be preserved in East Timor as
democratic institutions mature and reconciliation
efforts gain momentum.

We must base decisions concerning the level of
the force and the duration of its presence on a clear
assessment of the concrete needs of the future
sovereign State of East Timor. No one wants an open-
ended mission in East Timor, let alone the perpetuation
of dependency. A clear exit strategy is necessary, one
that takes into account the need for capacity-building
and does not jeopardize the progress achieved so far.

Our enthusiasm about East Timor's independence
must not lead us to lose sight of the huge problems that
await the future Government just around the corner.
East Timor is a developing country, mired in poverty
and in desperate need of international assistance. The
high unemployment rate is unlikely to be reversed in
the short run. The so-called windfall of gains from the
exploitation of oil and gas in the Timor Gap will not
come tomorrow or the day after. This is an area that
requires investments that will only mature over time.

In this context, it becomes even more pressing to
continue to bring income-generating projects into
operation, maintain the flow of international aid and
create the conditions for sustainable development and
good governance. In addition, it is essential to retain
the current level of public services after independence.
The deterioration of such services would hurt the most
vulnerable and could constitute a blow to public
confidence in the future State.

To put it in a nutshell, the international
community as a whole must continue to provide
generous support for the rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development of East Timor.

Independence Day will mark a new era in East
Timor and represent the fulfilment of the legitimate
aspirations of an admirable people. It will also be a
moment to reflect on the multiple challenges that lie
ahead in making the independent State of East Timor
work for each and every one of its citizens. Brazil is
sure that democracy will flourish through the Vibrant
participation of the people in the affairs of the
community. Democracy must be nurtured by the sense
of empowerment that comes not only with civil and
political rights, but also with economic and social
improvement.

We offer our best wishes for the progress and
happiness of the East Timorese, and we are looking
forward to working side by side with them in the
community of the United Nations as well as in the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries.

The President (spoke in Russian): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.


