Ms. Wensley (Australia): I would like to extend
the Australian delegation's appreciation to you and to
Argentina for bringing this issue before the Security
Council. It continues the important debate begun a year
ago under Canadian leadership on the related question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

It is a deeply disturbing truth that United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers have increasingly
become the targets of violence. It seems that the
principles of neutrality and impartiality, the provisions of
international humanitarian law and the emblems of the
United Nations and of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent are simply no longer sufficient to assure the
safety of international humanitarian workers and
organizations.

As we have heard so frequently today, this last year
has seen an alarming number of attacks on United
Nations and humanitarian personnel. Australians have
been among those who have suffered, and in two cases -
most notably in Angola - have lost their lives. In
Australia these casualties have created significant public
interest in the issue that the Council is discussing today,
as did another case, that of the three CARE Australia aid
workers who were imprisoned in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

 

What happened to those three raised many disturbing
questions and, we believe, merits very close examination
for the lessons that might be drawn for the future, so as to
help avoid the same thing happening to other humanitarian
workers. I have not got time to go into the details; the case
has been well documented. Steve Pratt, Peter Wallace and
Branko Jelen spent a combined total of 19 months in prison
on charges of espionage which the Australian Government
and which CARE maintains were manifestly false. This was
these men's reward for working under extraordinarily trying
conditions to attend to the suffering of ordinary people all
over Yugoslavia. They had left behind their families and
their friends; they had taken on the risks and the hardships
inherent in working in a conflict environment because they
were committed to the principles and the goals of
humanitarian assistance. They are representative of
hundreds of thousands of individuals around the world
committed to helping others.

Those three are now in Australia, back with their
families, and have begun new lives. But their release came
about only as a result of protracted diplomatic activity and
pressure. I would like to take this opportunity publicly to
record Australia's gratitude to the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General and many of their colleagues in
the United Nations - particularly in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) - for their
unflagging support, practical and political, which was
central to the effort to get Pratt, Wallace and Jelen released.
While their capture and imprisonment must have disturbed
all humanitarian workers around the world - and must
indeed have deterred some from taking up this calling -
many others must at the same time have drawn reassurance
from the determination and the perseverance with which the
United Nations and the international community fought for
these men's release.

I have talked a little bit about this because I think it
is important to put a practical face on the rhetoric of our
discussions. It is just one of many cases that underline the
seriousness of the issue and, above all, the need for
concerted effort by the international community to
strengthen the protection of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. It is a challenge that we think
should be tackled through a combination of measures.

Responsibility for ensuring the safety of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel rests, first and
foremost, with Governments within whose jurisdiction
humanitarian activities are taking place. Governments
should recognize and respect the independence and the
impartiality of United Nations personnel and humanitarian
workers and allow them to operate without threat or
hindrance. States must guarantee immunity and protection,
according to the law, and provide whatever physical
protection and assistance possible. In this respect, States
perhaps need to be well informed about the realities of
contemporary aid workers. One of the reasons that Pratt,
Wallace and Jelen got into trouble was that they were
carrying sophisticated equipment that international
humanitarian agencies use today as a matter of course -
sophisticated maps, sophisticated wireless, sophisticated
systems - that made them objects of suspicion. I think
that is one of the lessons we should be drawing and
thinking about as we move forward in this debate.

Governments must also denounce - and denounce
strongly - attacks against United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers and take all measures to bring
perpetrators of violence to justice. Impunity, as so many
of my colleagues have emphasized in this discussion,
cannot be allowed. Practical measures can be taken by
Governments to promote understanding and observance of
international humanitarian law within their own
communities, especially among military and security
forces, but also among civilian populations, including by
disseminating information about international
humanitarian law. It is a coincidence, but today there is
an important seminar taking place on this very subject
elsewhere in New York, emphasizing that United Nations
and humanitarian workers must also be properly trained
about their responsibilities. Building a spirit of partnership
between international personnel and local governments
and communities can also be a particularly crucial
ingredient in averting tensions and threats.

Of course, many measures that may seem simple to
implement in stable communities are far more difficult in
zones of conflict. Absence of effective central
Government control or military command has been a
feature of a number of recent, and current, conflicts in
which United Nations and humanitarian personnel have
been threatened or killed. The nature of international
peacekeeping, much of which now has a large
humanitarian component, blurs the distinction between
enforcement action and humanitarian work.

To minimize these risks, the Security Council
should ensure that appropriate plans are in place as part
of peacekeeping operations to ensure the proper protection
of humanitarian personnel. It is for this reason that
Australia supports the use of Chapter VII authority to
ensure the protection of United Nations personnel where
this is warranted, as we did, for example, in the case of

 

recent Security Council resolutions for the International
Force in East Timor and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor. The authority of the United
Nations and the Security Council must be brought fully to
bear when violence is committed or threatened against
United Nations staff or personnel of legitimate humanitarian
organizations.

The importance of international humanitarian law in
protecting United Nations and humanitarian workers has
been referred to by almost everyone in this debate and
cannot be overstated. The international community must
make efforts to strengthen those protections already
provided for, in particular the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel, to
which the Deputy Secretary-General referred in her
statement at the beginning of the debate this morning. My
own Government signed this Convention in December 1995
and is currently in the process in our federal system - and
it is quite laborious - of enabling its ratification. Subject
to our parliamentary and federal system processes, the
necessary legislation is expected to be passed later this
year, with the aim of full ratification by the end of 2000.
We strongly urge Member States that have not already done
so to take the necessary steps to ratify this basic and very
important Convention.

The enforcement of international humanitarian law
must also be strengthened in order to bring those
responsible to justice and to send a clear message of the
international community's intolerance of this violence.
Intentionally attacking humanitarian personnel who are
legitimately going about their business is a war crime, and
has been specifically codified as such in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We support the ICC as
a powerful instrument for bringing to justice perpetrators of
crimes against humanitarian personnel, as well, obviously,
as perpetrators of other war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The ICC will do this not only by providing a
mechanism for the investigation and prosecution of such
crimes where no State is able to do so, but also through the
imperative that it will place on States, through the
complementarity regime, to investigate and prosecute such
crimes themselves. Even more important, we believe, will
be the deterrent effect of this interlocking of national and
international jurisdictions. We therefore consider, as an
important part of these several measures that the
international community could take on this subject, that
States should be urged to begin their domestic processes for
ratification of the ICC Statute to ensure its early entry into
force.

Much more still can and must be done to improve
protection for United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
Argentina's initiative in convening this debate, in our
View, will greatly assist the Council and Member States
to consider further how to deal with this issue. We
appreciate the earlier report that was provided by the
Secretary-General on the related issue, and we very much
look forward to the follow-up report of the Secretary-
General, which, we are very confident, will give us more
valuable ideas.

