Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your work as President of the Security Council
this month, and express our appreciation for your
decision to hold an open debate on Timor-Leste.

I am pleased to welcome His Excellency
President Jose Ramos-Horta, who honours us with his
presence today. It is a great joy to see him fully
recovered from the tragic attacks that he and Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao suffered last year. We also
appreciated the presence of the Secretary-General this
morning, and we sincerely thank him and his Special
Representative, Mr. Atul Khare, for the outstanding
work being carried out in Timor-Leste.

The bonds between Brazil and Timor-Leste are
strong and reflect a deep sense of friendship and
solidarity, as well as a shared heritage, as stressed by
President Lula during his latest visit to Dili, in July
2008. The fact that this visit was the first by a foreign
head of State after 11 February 2008 should not be
overlooked, as it shows our firm confidence in the
Timorese people and in their exceptional capacity to
overcome challenges. The intensity of our relations is
also attested to by the fact that earlier in the same year
President Lula had welcomed President Ramos-Horta
in Brasilia.

The close link between Brazil and Timor-Leste is
evident in our bilateral cooperation, which encompasses
several areas, such as judiciary training and legal
development, education, agriculture, health, capacity-
building, military cooperation, the fight against hunger
and poverty, the training of diplomats and sports. The
possibility of extending such cooperation to projects in
the fields of renewable sources of energy, the
environment, culture, and budget planning is now
being considered.

My delegation is encouraged by the progress
made by Timor-Leste in normalizing the political and
security situation. We celebrate the lifting of the state
of exception introduced after the events of February
last year. The fact that the constitution has been upheld
since the adoption of those exceptional measures is no
small deed, especially in a young democracy. Such a
display of political and institutional maturity deserves
our full recognition and active support. The efforts
made by the President and the Prime Minister to foster
dialogue among the political parties and forces are also
key to building a culture of cooperation for the
common good.

We commend the Timorese Government for the
significant improvement made in ensuring the return of
internally displaced persons. We hope that the
remaining camps will be closed soon. We agree with
the Secretary-General that long-term success depends
on further socio-economic and security-related
measures. We also praise the Timorese Government for
successfully addressing the situation of the petitioners;
continued efforts will be needed to ensure their full
social integration. In both cases, the international
community must support Timor-Leste, as requested by
the Timorese authorities.

At the same time, we are concerned that
substantial challenges still remain. Deep poverty is not
only disturbing from a human point of view but also
far-reaching in its potential impact. The persistence of
deprivation calls for renewed efforts by the
international community to support the Timorese
Government and people. The United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2009-2013
and the Government's decision to designate 2009 as the
year of infrastructure, rural development and capacity
development provide the necessary guidance and basis
for our common endeavours.

Regarding the key issue of security sector reform,
it is encouraging that continued efforts have led to
further progress in the registration, screening and
certification programme for the national police and that
the Government and UNMIT have reached broad
agreement on the resumption of policing responsibilities
by the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). We
understand and support the willingness of the Timorese
Government to assume such responsibilities and view
the phased approach to the transfer of functions as an
adequate means to achieve the shared goal of full
institutional normalization in the security area in a safe
and orderly manner.

The resumption of responsibilities by the PNTL is
a gradual process that will take time to materialize.
When it does, the Council will be able to assess its
effectiveness. While, as a rule, developments on the
ground should be reflected in the composition and
functions of any given mission, we cannot afford early
downsizing that might later prove to be unsustainable. I
am convinced that the Council is fully aware of the
need to avoid such an undesired scenario anywhere,
including in Timor-Leste.

Another important aspect to be considered with
regard to security in Timor-Leste is the function of the
military. We support efforts to address relevant matters
such as the separation of internal and external security
roles and responsibilities between the national police
and the military, the strengthening of legal frameworks
and the enhancement of civilian oversight and
accountability mechanisms.

Brazil was touched by the decision of the
Timorese parliament to establish the Sergio Vieira de
Mello Human Rights Awards for Timor-Leste. It is a
fitting tribute to Sergio Vieira de Mello and a welcome
initiative to make his legacy a continued source of
inspiration.

In concluding, I believe that we all agree on the
overall assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste. The
country is on the right track thanks to its dedicated
efforts and the cooperation of the international
community. Such partnership needs to be strengthened
in the years to come in order to consolidate gains
already made and successfully overcome the remaining
challenges. Brazil is fully committed to continued
cooperation with the Timorese Government and other
international actors to build a stable and prosperous
Timor-Leste.

