Mr. Seck (Senegal): (spoke in French): Senegal
would like to take its turn in recalling that nothing can
or must be used to justify something as horrific as the
use of chemicals as weapons, including during conflicts
and against civilians who undergo unspeakable
suffering as a consequence.

The draft resolution that was voted on today
(S/2017/172) begins by recalling the Protocol for
the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare. It also recalls the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction (CWC). And I wish to stress the
words "stockpiling" and "use".

In 2013, when Senegal was not yet a member,
the Council, by resolution 2118 (2013), welcomed the
decision of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to send a fact-finding
mission to investigate the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. Two years later in 2015, at which time Senegal
was still not yet a member of the Council, the latter,
by resolution 2235 (2015), created the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which
built on the work of the Fact-Finding Mission to, among
other objectives, identify the persons, entities or groups
that had perpetrated, organized, ordered or in some
way participated in the use as weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic of such substances as chlorine gas or
other toxic chemicals.

These are the reasons why Senegal, which remains
faithful to its position of principle and is a party to
the CWC, voted in favour of the draft resolution that
was submitted today. Having said that, given the three
votes against, the three abstentions and the nine votes
in favour, the Council can only accept that the draft
resolution did not enjoy consensus. Therefore, after the
encouraging dialogue in Astana, it is essential during
the talks in Geneva that the Council support the JIM,
in which we have placed our renewed trust. Those
who used chemical weapons - and they were indeed
used - must be brought to account. The Council must
show unity to ensure that justice is done and in order
to finally resolve the ongoing Syrian crisis, which has
gone on for far too long.

