Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): First and
foremost, my delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to Mr. Annabi for the comprehensive and
informative update on the developments in East Timor,
particularly the improved security situation. We believe it
is always important for Council members and the general
United Nations membership to be informed of the
developments and efforts made by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), as
this will provide an opportunity for Member States of this
Organization to make an assessment of the progress made
thus far. In this regard, we would like to thank you, Mr.
President, for holding this open briefing, which my
delegation fully supports.

We welcome the Memorandum of Understanding
signed recently between UNTAET and the Indonesian
Government on cooperation to maintain security along the
border. We are convinced that adherence to its guidelines
will help avoid the recurrence of any untoward incident and
ensure safety and security on the border while facilitating
the repatriation of the remaining refugees from West Timor.
My delegation wishes to express its support for the efforts
being made by UNTAET to create employment and rebuild
infrastructure in East Timor. It is reassuring to note that
some projects have begun. However, we cannot but notice
that many more have not got off the ground.

This seems to be the main concern of the people of
East Timor, as slow progress has made them impatient and
disgruntled, given the high hopes and expectations for
economic and social salvation by the United Nations. In
fact, the sense of frustration among the East Timorese
was recently highlighted by the media. Persistent efforts
must therefore be pursued to accelerate disbursement of
funds for reconstruction projects, as delays will only lead
to malaise and discontent.
My delegation strongly believes that it is imperative
that the East Timorese be involved in the planning and
execution of these programmes, as this will instil a sense
of ownership, pride and responsibility regarding those
projects. This will also prevent the culture of dependency
from becoming entrenched and rooted in the community.
The local population must be given the opportunities and
facilities to be the main implementers of these
programmes. At the same time, the international
community owes it to the East Timorese to help them see
the whole process through, until the birth of a stable,
independent and sovereign nation.

We believe that UN TAET must address the growing
discontent and desperation among the population to
ensure that it does not lead to violence and lawlessness.
This would only destabilize the fragile situation, which
would be exploited by elements of the militias.

We also welcome Indonesia's decision to allow the
extradition of criminals to East Timor and to share
witnesses and evidence with UNTAET. This will help
facilitate efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice and
ensure that nobody can escape punishment for their
crimes. The Memorandum of Understanding is the kind
of cooperation that is needed between Indonesia and its
neighbour to resolve the questions of accountability and
spheres of jurisdiction over criminals and aggressors in
Indonesia and East Timor.

Finally, we wish to reiterate Malaysia's support for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of East Timor, and in
this regard to express our appreciation to Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and his team for their work thus far.
Malaysia has been consulting with the East Timorese
leadership and received Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello just
two days ago; we understand Mr. Vieira de Mello met
our Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.

As a concerned neighbour, Malaysia has assured Mr.
Xanana Gusmao, who visited Malaysia two months ago,
and Mr. Vieira de Mello of Malaysia's preparedness to
assist East Timor to the extent possible. We look forward
to forging a close and constructive relationship with East
Timor in the pre- and post-independence period.

 

