Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French): The situation in Afghanistan has greatly
deteriorated in recent months; this is marked in particular
by new fighting and by the unfolding of a major military
offensive by the Taliban. France is particularly concerned
at these developments, which run counter to the search
for a lasting political settlement to a conflict that seriously
threatens regional and international security and that has
caused serious, deep suffering for the civilian population.

 

The Security Council has already laid down the
fundamental principles for a settlement of the conflict in
Afghanistan, including in its resolution 1076 (1996). The
Afghan parties must put an end to hostilities without delay
and without preconditions, and must engage in true political
dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation. Outside
interference, especially in the form of arms supplies, must
cease. The United Nations has a central role to play in
settling the conflict.

It must be said that no progress can be discerned on
any of these points, and that through their obstinacy the
Taliban have greatly contributed to the failure to put in
place a peaceful settlement of the conflict. This unfortunate
fact must not make us indifferent; on the contrary, it must
prompt us to do what we are doing today with the
consideration of the draft resolution before us: to stand
firm, which is the only way to preserve the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan in the long term.
France condemns the 21 August attack in Kabul
against two United Nations staff members working with the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan. We
urgently call upon the Taliban to investigate the
circumstances of this heinous act and immediately to
inform the United Nations of the results of that
investigation. The name of Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine
Calo of Italy, who was murdered in a cowardly attack as he
worked to promote the cause of peace, may be added to the
long list of those who have been the victims in Afghanistan
of the most reprehensible intolerance.

We also deplore the flagrant Violation of international
law and of the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic Relations
and on Consular Relations: the occupation by the Taliban
of the Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran at
Mazar-e-Sharif. France is gravely concerned at the
disappearance of staff members of the Consulate-General
and of several other Iranian nationals, and we join in the
urgent appeals to the factions, and in particular to the
Taliban, to locate these diplomats.

The conditions that prevail in Afghanistan, and in
particular the position of the Taliban, have caused the
departure from Kabul of non-governmental organizations,
United Nations agencies and other international
humanitarian organizations. This could lead in coming
months to a further exacerbation of the humanitarian
situation and of the fate of the Afghan people.
Responsibility for this state of affairs lies with those who
in Afghanistan have increasingly taken measures that flout
fundamental human rights, and in particular the rights of
women and girls; with those who have rejected the
application of principles set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights; with those who have
imposed increased constraints upon humanitarian activities
and who have deliberately undermined international
humanitarian law.

Although everything must be done to facilitate the
return to Afghanistan, in conditions of security, of the
international organizations and the non-governmental
organizations in order to ease the suffering of the civilian
population, we consider it to be of paramount importance
that the United Nations and the international community
not compromise on the question of respect for universally
accepted principles.

We cannot fail once again to demand - as does the
draft resolution on which the Council will be voting
today - that the Afghan factions cease harbouring and
training terrorists and their organizations, and that they
put an end to the trafficking in illicit drugs.
The French delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution because it expresses the determination of
the Security Council, in keeping with its Charter
responsibilities, to consider all other measures that might
be necessary for the implementation of the draft
resolution, and to restore peace, stability and full respect
for human rights and international norms in Afghanistan.

