Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I, too, would like to
welcome Foreign Minister Azubalis to the Council and
to congratulate him on assuming the chairmanship-in-
office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE). We thank him in particular for his
lucid and insightful briefing on the Organization's
plans and priorities for 2011, and we wish him a very
successful tenure.

The OSCE remains a key component of European
security. Its importance for building strong and
genuinely cooperative relationships among its 56
member States was quite evident from the briefing we
have just heard this morning. We are pleased that the
OSCE is not only making noteworthy progress as a
regional organization, but also enhancing cooperation
with the United Nations in the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
this regard, we commend the collaboration between the
OSCE and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia that facilitated
the peaceful settlement of the 2010 inter-ethnic conflict
in the Kyrgyz Republic. We also commend the close
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

Nigeria welcomes the high priority that the
Chairman-in-Office has placed on resolving protracted
conflicts in the region, including the renewed
Transdniestria settlement talks in the Republic of
Moldova and the efforts to resolve the Nagorny
Karabakh conflicts.

We also welcome the OSCE's efforts to promote
cooperation in border security management in
Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan and the deployment of a
good offices mission to defuse political tension in
Albania. We believe that concrete results could be
achieved within the Geneva international discussions
framework, and that the United Nations experience in
supporting regional conflict management will be
invaluable in this process. We therefore support the
Minister's requests for full-fledged United Nations
representation at the Geneva discussions.

The emphasis Mr. Azubalis placed on human
rights, women's and civil society issues, freedom of the
press and the promotion of democracy on the agenda of
the OSCE deserves our encouragement, and indeed our
broad support. Our expectation is that the Vilnius
conference on journalistic freedom to be held in June
will serve as an important platform to genuinely
address the threats to journalistic freedom and
consolidate the progress under way.

It is also our expectation that the relationship
between Belarus and the OSCE will be restored on the
basis of shared goals and anticipated mutual benefits.
We believe that the OSCE efforts to promote tolerance
through education and student-exchange agreements
will guarantee long-term inter-ethnic harmony in the
whole region.

Going forward, pressing challenges such as the
ongoing tensions in South Ossetia, the pursuit of
freedom of the press and the safety of journalists and
the settlement of territorial disputes in the southern
Caucasus region present the Lithuanian presidency
with a unique opportunity to promote change in the
region. To achieve this credibly, the organization must
also address the stagnation in arms control, vigorously
engage in Afghanistan and confront the challenges of
energy security.

We share the Minister's commitment to
effectively cope with transnational threats to
international peace and security, such as human
trafficking, drug trafficking and cyber security. Since
transnational crimes are not limited to territorial
boundaries, combating them requires complete
cooperation. For this reason, we urge the OSCE to
continue to create opportunities for cooperation and
information exchanges with regional security agencies,
including the Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services ofAfrica.
We believe that the need for coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the fight against global security threats was a point
that was vividly made by Mr. AZubalis at last month's
special meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council in
Vienna, and indeed in today's briefing.

Nigeria believes that the vision that the Minister
has outlined ensures a very promising future for the
organization. It is a vision that will promote regional
stability and international peace and security. Such an
agenda advances the work of the Security Council, and
is thus deserving of our support and endorsement. But
the OSCE must strengthen its role in the region. It must
retain its fundamental character as the most inclusive
Atlantic forum for consultation and joint action.

