Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I would like to start by
expressing my delegation's immense pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, preside over the deliberations of the Security
Council for the month of April. I wish you success and
assure you of my delegation's full support in your
work.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement made in the Security Council on 3 April by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa in his capacity as
Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Middle East has been boiling up in violence
for the past several months. The violence has further
escalated and the situation further deteriorated in the
past week after the reoccupation of the West Bank and
Gaza Strip by the Israeli security forces. This cycle of
violence has caused a colossal loss of precious lives,
Israeli and Palestinian alike, and is about to destroy the
very foundations on which a long-term and lasting
peace could be erected in the region.

There is simply no moral basis to justify the
killing of innocent people, regardless of who does it or
how it is done. The use of force has not produced a
durable peace in the Middle East. It never will. The
relative calm after the Oslo process began did not lead
to a comprehensive peace, either. We now know that a
ceasefire and calm must be accompanied by a political
process that should fulfil the Palestinian aspiration for
a politically and economically viable State and the
Israeli aspiration for security. Only this will bring a
comprehensive peace to the Middle East.

Left to their own devices, Israel and Palestine do
not appear to have the necessary political will to find a
negotiated settlement to the crisis. The international
community must come to their assistance. Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) provide
the basis for resolving the acute conflict in the Middle
East and the landmark resolution 1397 (2002)
envisions the end goals for both sides. But before we
begin to focus on the long-term solution to the Middle
East problem, Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) must be implemented and
Israel must immediately withdraw from the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip. Once that objective is achieved,
both sides must come to the negotiating table to find a
comprehensive solution without further delay. If
necessary, the Security Council must take appropriate
measures to implement those resolutions.

Evidently, the parties themselves will have to
agree to find a comprehensive peace and stability in the
region. The international community's constructive and
active involvement, however, will be critical to
achieving that goal. In this context, we welcome the
determination of the United States Administration to
fully engage itself in helping to resolve this painful
crisis.

