Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate the Austrian delegation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. We also express our thanks for the
convening of this open debate on this important matter.
We wish to welcome the personal participation of the
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and also thank
Mr. Holmes for his briefing.

The primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies with sovereign States. But in situations of
conflict, the protection of civilians lies at the heart of
United Nations activities and operations, including its
peacekeeping missions. The ability of the United
Nations to protect civilians is widely seen as a test of
the Organization's relevance and legitimacy in the eyes
of ordinary people in times of crisis. While the United
Nations cannot be an absolute guarantor for the safety
and security of civilians within its areas of operations,
all Member States have the responsibility to ensure that
civilians are protected during armed conflict.

The deliberate targeting of civilians in armed
conflicts, together with the indiscriminate use of force,
gender-based violence, forced displacement, lack of
safety and access to humanitarian personnel, all have a
devastating effect on civilians and wide ramifications
for their societies.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the
consideration of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict by the Security Council, we should seize this
important opportunity to take stock of the progress
made on the efforts to enhance protection, help those in
need and address the major challenges that lie ahead.
In resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, the Council expressed its willingness
to consider how peacekeeping mandates might better
address the harmful impact of conflicts on civilians.
We are therefore pleased to note that United Nations
peacekeeping mandates not only address the protection
of civilian in conflict situations, but are also specific in
addressing the protection needs of the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.

This year, South Africa celebrated its ten years of
participation in peacekeeping within the Southern
Africa region, on the continent and in the world at
large. This afforded us the rare opportunity to assess
our contribution, take stock and plan for the future. In
all, we are proud of the opportunity given our country's
men and women in uniform to contribute to the
achievement of peace in other parts of the world. We
pledge to continue to make our contribution, within
available resources, for we know peace is indivisible.
Our own peace, security, stability and prosperity are
inextricably linked to peace and security all around the
globe.

However, we have also drawn critical lessons
from our participation in missions such as those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
elsewhere, especially with regard to the principal task
of protecting civilian during conflicts. Our direct
experience informs us that the failure to protect
civilians derives from a number of factors, the most
important of which is the question of the limited
resources available to United Nations peace missions

deployed in specific circumstances. By resources we
also mean sufficient and clear mandates equal to the
posed threat, capacity and capabilities provided to
peacekeepers to deal with any eventualities that will
give rise to the need to protect civilians. We believe
that a lot remains to be done to match the constant and
evolving threats that civilians face in conflict situations
with the capacity and resources provided to United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

This situation is compounded by the vague
mandates that this Council issues, the lack of a clear
political framework within which those missions are
expected to deploy, the lack of clear identification of
civilians needing protection and their specific needs,
and the lack of coordination and cooperation - and at
times even competition - among members of the
international community in the areas of operation. We
therefore subscribe to the view that improving the
protection of civilians is not purely a matter of physical
threats alone; it should be approached from a holistic
point of view that should include humanitarian, human
rights, rule of law, political, security, development and
other threats facing civilians as a result of conflicts.
The United Nations must do more to achieve a
coordinated and coherent response to this challenge.
We therefore concur with the report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2009/277) that protection of civilians is not a
military task alone. Rather, it is a complex effort
requiring coordinated efforts from all parts of the
United Nations system and the wider international
community.

We are also of the firm view that the protection of
civilians should be addressed in partnership with
regional organizations, through regional mechanisms
and enhanced dialogue and cooperation between the
Security Council and regional organizations. As the
responsibility of peacekeeping in Africa is increasingly
being shouldered by the African Union, the ongoing
capacity and resource limitations pose a great
challenge to effective protection of civilians at all
levels. It is with that consideration in mind that South
Africa renews Africa's call to the United Nations and
international community to provide the African Union
with flexible, predictable and sustainable financial
assistance when deployed to keep peace.

We will conclude by adding that civilians in
conflict situations need and expect the same attention
and assistance from the United Nations and the
international community, wherever they may be in the
world. The Security Council should not allow the
hopes of others to be extinguished as it bears witness to
their demise from hunger and disease, whilst others
receive the utmost attention. Our approach to the
protection of civilians should be holistic and
indiscriminate. The people and civilians in conflict
situations such as Somalia and the occupied Palestinian
territory also look up to this Council for assistance and
protection. We call on the Council to shoulder its
Charter responsibilities in this regard.

South Africa, as a signatory to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its Additional Protocols,
wishes to underline the importance of adhering to the
principles contained therein, and we call for the full
implementation of the commitments made by all States
parties to those basic texts of international law. We
therefore hope that the process of addressing the
challenges of protecting civilians in armed conflict will
be undertaken in ways that contribute to increased
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
and human rights law.

