Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I would
like to thank Luxembourg for holding this debate and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the other briefers, for providing the Security
Council with timely information and analysis on the
impact of armed conflicts on children around the world.
We especially commend Mr. Sawaneh for his inspiring
words and the courage to share his experiences with us
here today.

Liechtenstein strongly condemns the widespread
intentional attacks on children and teachers at schools.
We also deplore the military use of schools, which
gravely endangers civilians and deprives children
of their education. Those are clear violations of
international humanitarian law, and we urge States to
take all the necessary steps to end those practices and
to protect children's right to education. In that context,
we particularly welcome the draft Lucens guidelines
and we hope for their widespread endorsement.

Liechtenstein reiterates its firm support for the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and welcomes the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign. We are happy to see the willingness of
Governments to sign national action plans and end
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. But most
of the parties listed in the annex to the Secretary
General's report (S/2113/245) are non-State actors. Of
the 11 persistent perpetrators, 10 are non-State actors.
We therefore fully support the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's efforts to engage with
all the relevant parties to conclude action plans and
promote their implementation. The early conclusion of
such action plans is also in the interest of the States
concerned. They should therefore allow unconditional
access for and facilitate the United Nations important
work in that regard.

Liechtenstein was shocked by the findings of the
Secretary- General's recent report on children and armed
conflict in Syria (S/2014/31), which listed a number of
horrendous violations and abuses against children. We
are deeply concerned about those ongoing violations
and abuses by both parties to the conflict and ask them
to immediately put an end to them. The recent adoption
of resolution 2139 (2014) is of particular importance for
the situation of children, who suffer disproportionately
from the armed conflict in Syria. We were relieved to
see the Council take meaningful, albeit long overdue,
action on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We hope
that the Council will continue acting with resolve
and impose appropriate sanctions should the parties
fail to comply with the resolution. In addition, the
Council should finally live up to its responsibility to
ensure that those committing atrocity crimes in Syria,
in particular crimes against children, are brought to
justice. In the current circumstances, only a referral
to the International Criminal Court could jump-start
accountability efforts in Syria.

Let me conclude by drawing the Council's attention
to the outcome of a workshop on strengthening the
children and armed conflict agenda, which we convened
together with our non-governmental organization
partner Watchlist and the Liechtenstein Institute on
Self-Determination in December last year. The report
was recently published as an official document and it
contains a number of useful recommendations that we
recommend for all stakeholders in the field of children
and armed conflict.

