Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I too would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, and the Netherlands on a
very successful presidency and for convening today's
very important debate.

We would also like to begin be welcoming the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative announced by
the Secretary-General earlier today. We are in broad
agreement with its six priority areas.

With the operating environment becoming ever
more volatile, we are hearing increasing calls to update
our tools for dealing with contemporary challenges,
responding to current threats and doing our job better.
We hope that our discussion today will provide valuable
insights on all these issues. I would like to focus on
two specific questions - peacekeeping as a shared
responsibility and strategic coherence in the pursuit of
political solutions.

Negotiations in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations this year were particularly
focused on performance, and rightly. How else can
we gauge success? However, performance cannot be
evaluated solely in terms of what our troops on the
ground do or do not accomplish. It also depends on
resources, capabilities, intelligence and many such
factors that troop-contributing countries (TCCs) do
not control. The TCCs have never shied away from
discussing performance, personnel, training and
equipment. Performance policies, however, should
be devised in consultation with the TCCs. The only
conversation that can yield results is one that deals with
performance in a holistic manner.

The Secretariat has the responsibility of providing
pragmatic and realistic analysis of the situation on
ground in terms of the political environment, resource
gaps and possible exit strategies. The Council then has
to reflect that information in its mandates. Rather than
focusing merely on cutting costs and troop numbers,
operations should dictate logistics, and not the other
way around. I would like to point to a particular example
relating to the vital task of the protection of civilians,
which requires specific enablers and capacities. The
recent pilot project on protection by projection in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo showed that it
is extremely challenging to carry out protection-of-
civilians tasks based only on a projected show of
power. It is thejob of the Secretariat and the Council to
clearly articulate specific tasks such as the protection
of civilians in terms of expectations and the requisite
resources and capabilities. If resources are shrinking,
expectations will have to be adjusted accordingly.

With regard to strategic coherence in the pursuit
of political solutions, let me make three points. First,
we have all talked about the primacy of politics and
the need for a greater focus on political solutions.
Peacekeeping missions, especially those with
multidimensional mandates, are on the ground to
facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding and help to make
progress towards sustainable peace. The peacekeepers
are not there to negotiate political solutions or enforce
peace. They are there more as tools to support political
processes. Secondly, the inclusion of regional partners
in political processes could be a force multiplier and
should be used as such. Thirdly, investing in mediation
is, of course, a sound investment. Without that, we risk
making the whole exercise self-defeating.

The Secretary-General's reform initiatives envisage
changes within the Secretariat's reporting lines. We
hope that these reforms will make the provision of
logistical support to missions better and quicker.
Reform should not just talk about the performance and
mindsets of troop- and police-contributing countries;
it should also include a rethink of the Secretariat"s
performance in bringing out the true picture on the
ground and, as the Secretary-General has said, of the
Council's mindset in putting together achievable and
realistic mandates.
Since the 1960s, Pakistan has contributed more
than 200,000 troops to 43 missions and has lost 156
of its bravest in the pursuit of peace. We are fully
committed to United Nations peacekeeping and are
ready to engage in any process or discussion, from
political strategy to operational issues, to help United
Nations peacekeeping match the changing conflicts
and threats.

