Mr. Maquieira (Chile): I do not know if I can
make my presentation more pithy, but I will try to
make it shorter.

(spoke in Spanish)

First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over our work and on
convening this very important meeting on Timor-Leste.
We are grateful for the comprehensive report
(S/2003/944) introduced by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, whom
we are very pleased to see in the Security Council. I
must also express our gratitude for the work done by
the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who died
tragically in the Baghdad attack of last August. We all
know that his dedication, hard work and unifying role
made him indispensable in the process of Timor-
Leste's independence.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment of
the progress made by an independent Timor-Leste,
especially as regards the progress that has made
possible the establishment of Timor-Leste's basic
structures, such as effective public administration and a
professional police force.

We believe that it is very important that the
security situation has improved in the first few months
of this year. We believe that the role of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
has been key in that regard. We also appreciate the
efforts made by the country's Government under
President Gusmao.

A key element in this process is the establishment
of public administration commensurate with the
significant challenges ahead for Timor-Leste. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the work done by the
Civilian Support Group, which has trained
administrators and provided ample support for the
administration of the new country. We appreciate the
training and advisory work being done by UNMISET
in the region. However, we note that there is a need for
continued cooperation in that process, in particular in
realizing financial commitments and providing the
necessary advisers.

With regard to human rights, we appreciate
UNMISET's assistance with regard to serious crimes
and clarifying the situation surrounding crimes
committed in 1999. Nevertheless, we know that trials
will not be completed by June 2004 and that external
assistance will be required to conclude that process.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize that
Indonesia's cooperation is essential in order to try
persons accused of committing those crimes. We
therefore urge the parties to continue to work closely
and in a true spirit of cooperation. We welcome the
regular meetings held between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which have increasingly strengthened their
bilateral relations.

There must be economic development to make
progress towards true stability. Such development
should enable Timor-Leste to overcome poverty, create
jobs, and improve the well-being of the population and
the country's socio-economic situation. We therefore
wish to emphasize the ongoing recovery, employment
and stability programmes on behalf of former
combatants and communities of Timor-Leste, as well as
the transitional support programme, all of which are
initiatives being carried out by the United Nations
system.

We also agree that it is essential for the
international community to remain committed in such
areas as public administration, justice and human rights
training. In that regard, we share the View that it is
necessary to take measures to support the various
requirements of Timor-Leste upon completion of the
Mission, at the end of May 2004.

In closing, I would like to wish Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma and UNMISET every success between now and
the conclusion of the Mission.

