Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address
the Council from Beirut.

(spoke in English)

I take this opportunity to update you, Sir, and the
members of the Security Council on developments
with regard to Syria that have taken place since my last
briefing (see S/PV.8373), which took place last week
in New York. Today, I will focus in particular on an
update on my consultations in Damascus two days ago.

Following the meeting between the Secretary-
General and the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian
Arab Republic, Mr. Al-Moualem, on the margins of
the General Assembly, I met Minister Al-Moualem in
Damascus on 24 October. We focused on the political
process and the efforts to convene a constitutional
committee. I appreciated the quite frank nature of
the exchanges that we had in Damascus. Minister
Al-Moualem expressed appreciation for his meeting
with the Secretary-General during the General
Assembly. He indicated that it paved the way for the
meeting in Damascus. I will now refer as accurately as
possible to what I heard from Minister Al-Moualem.

He strongly underlined the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference in the internal affairs of United
Nations Member States. He underlined that the Syrian
Constitution is a highly sensitive matter of national
sovereignty. On the Sochi final statement, Minister
Al-Moualem referred to another outcome, rather than
the one circulated by the Russian Federation to the
Council. He said that it was possible for the Government
of Syria to take some elements of the outcome circulated
by Russia and "reconcile" them with the Government's
preferred other outcome. The key differences in this
regard concerned mainly the role of the United Nations.

With regard to the understanding reached between
Russia and the United Nations before the Sochi event,
which I mentioned specifically when I briefed the
Council on 17 October, Minister Al-Moualem did not
view it as consistent with the principles of sovereignty
and non-interference. Basically, Minister Al-Moualem
did not accept a role for the United Nations in general
in identifying or selecting the middle third list; rather,
Minister Al-Moualem indicated that the Government
of Syria and Russia had agreed recently that the three
Astana guarantors and the Syrian Government would,
in consultations among them, prepare a proposal with
regard to the third middle list and present it to the United
Nations facilitation. I should add, just for the sake of
completeness, that Mr. AI-Moualem, did not on that
occasion or in that meeting, indicate the Government's
views on the mandate, chairmanship, decision-making
or any other aspects of the rules of procedure necessary
for a constitutional committee to function.

For my part, I welcomed the chance for the United
Nations to talk directly with the Government about the
constitutional committee. I also regretted that this had
not been possible since the Sochi meeting and that the
Government had declined the United Nations offers to
engage it directly on the constitutional committee and
its follow-up. I recalled that it was in this context of
non-engagement by the Government with the United
Nations that the United Nations began to work with
the Astana guarantors, at their own suggestion, on a
package and that Russia and Iran had informed the
United Nations that they had been constantly consulting
the Government as the consultations proceeded.

I indicated that it was also appropriate and logical
for the United Nations, as the mediator mandated by the
Security Council, to seek understandings with Russia
regarding a meeting that Russia had proposed in Sochi,
hosted and facilitated, in order to ensure a common
understanding of how the initiative would contribute
to the United Nations-mandated process. I reminded
Minister Al-Moualem of the convening role of the
United Nations, mandated by resolution 2254 (2015). I
also recalled the terms of the Sochi final statement, as
circulated by the Russian Federation to the Council. I
would also remind the members of the Security Council
today of what was agreed. The first task was

"to form a constitutional committee comprising
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
delegation along with wide-represented opposition
delegation for drafting of a constitutional reform
as a contribution to the political settlement under
the United Nations auspices in accordance with
Security Council Resolution 2254 (2015)".

Secondly, the

"constitutional committee would at the very least
comprise Government, opposition representatives in
the intra-Syrian talks, Syrian experts, civil society,
independents, tribal leaders and women; care
would be taken to ensure adequate representation
of Syria's ethnic and religious components; and...
final agreement is to be reached in the United
Nations-led Geneva process on the mandate and
terms of reference, powers, rules of procedure,
and selection criteria for the composition of a
constitutional committee."

I explained in detail during the last briefing the
criteria that guide us in approaching the questions on the
list, which I went through with Minister AI-Moualem.
Most importantly, I stressed that the United Nations
was in Damascus precisely to consult the Government
on the list. As the facilitator, I offered for the United
Nations to work there and then with the Government if
the Government objected to particular names, or even
on the development of a new, credible balanced and
inclusive list as long as it had those characteristics. I
observed that, to me, this seemed to fully respect the
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic. Indeed, it was
an invitation to exercise that sovereignty.

At a certain point, Minister Al-Moualem proposed
that I withdraw the proposed middle third list already
on the table. I indicated that the United Nations could
Withdraw its proposal only once and only if there
was an agreement on a new, credible, balanced and
inclusive list consistent with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Sochi final statement. I urged that we seize
the opportunity to ascertain if that was possible or not.
Minister Al-Moualem indicated that he would get back
to me ifnew instructions came from his own leadership.
However, he also said that he preferred, at that stage,
to await the outcome of my forthcoming consultations
with the Astana guarantors.

I should add that Minister Al-Moualem stated that
the Astana guarantors had rejected the initial United
Nations proposal on a third list. I, for my part, indicated
that this was not really the case and that while they
had suggested the need for some changes, they were
engaging on the proposal and that it had already been
revised more than once. I also indicated that all three
guarantors supported the role of the United Nations, as
per resolution 2254 (2015) and the Sochi declaration.

The Government has expressed its position clearly
and I can say that it has indicated that it wishes that
position to be made public, which I am currently doing.
However, I cannot at this stage report any evolution
on its position beyond what I have just said and what
I have heard myself, which I am reporting to faithfully
to the Council. The efforts of those who convened and
sponsored Sochi to ensure that the Government of
Syria would be fully on board with the outcomes of the
Sochi final declaration have not, as of today, produced
the outcome we were hoping for. Otherwise, we would
have heard something different.

Taking into account, first, the mandate ofthe Special
Envoy, embodied in resolution 2254 (2015); secondly,
Minister Al-Moualem's different understanding of
the role of the United Nations and of the Sochi final
declaration; and thirdly, the extent of the Government's
desire to reopen the work today, we have a serious
challenge ahead. Let me be frank. It is my intention
to spare no effort to address this challenge during the
coming weeks. Since Minister Al-Moualem indicated
that the Government's preferred methodology at this
stage was to work with the Astana guarantors on a
third list, a great deal of responsibility and expectation
rests now on them and on how to implement the Sochi
declaration in a manner that would carry forward the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and give
practical effect to the basic points that the United
Nations supported in Sochi.

As I have already indicated, the United Nations
proposal was made after careful consultations,
including with the guarantors, and has already been
revised in the light of those consultations. The sheer
difficulty of keeping everyone on board should be
a reminder to all to be careful in thinking that some
radically different approach has any prospect of success.
The United Nations is not opposed to constructive and
moderate suggestions so long as we maintain the same
spirit of credibility - I repeat, credibility - balance,
and the international legitimacy of the middle third
list on the table. There is a sense of urgency to find
common ground or to at least clarify where we stand,
because we should not miss the opportunity offered by
the IdIib window. That is why November is becoming
so important.

Let me also stress once more that the United Nations
believes it is important to ensure a minimum of 30 per
cent women representatives in the committee and that
this requires at least 24 of the 50 representatives in
the middle third to be women. Tomorrow, I will be
travelling to Istanbul to brief the Presidents of France,
Germany, Russia and Turkey when they meet to discuss
Syria. I am honoured by this invitation and will use
that occasion to remind those four important leaders
that, given the fact that a catastrophe in Idlib has so
far been avoided; that the international consensus to
see a credible and balanced constitutional committee
with United Nations facilitation as soon as possible;
and that the instructions given to me by the Secretary-
General - whom I am constantly consulting on
the matter more than ever before - require me to
exhaust every avenue in the time that remains to my
mandate, there is, in my opinion, still a clear window of
opportunity that needs to be urgently seized.

The influence that can be exercised by all world
leaders, including in particular the four world leaders
meeting tomorrow in Istanbul, can be crucial in
ensuring that this happens. Seeing as members of the
Small Group on Syria will meet on Monday in London,
I will also use that occasion to host a meeting with them
later on, within the context of the Geneva process. I
really look forward to hosting the Astana guarantors
very soon. They themselves met in recent days and,
according to their statement, discussed many aspects
of a constitutional committee. That meeting will be
vitally important to consultations.

I will spare no effort in the time that remains to
my mandate to verify whether it is indeed possible
to convene a United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-
owned, Syrian-led constitutional committee that is
credible, balanced and inclusive and that contributes,
in the context of the Geneva process, to implementing
resolution 2254 (2015). If it is feasible, the United
Nations will convene such a committee as soon as
possible. I will, in any case, share a full assessment
as Special Envoy when I brief the Council in person
on 19 November. Meanwhile, we shall keep our door
open, and we shall keep under review all options for a
constructive and credible outcome.

