Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union and wishes to add some additional remarks in its national capacity. Italy would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing this open debate on the linkages between international terrorism and organized crime. This debate is especially timely in the light of the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has exacerbated the vulnerability of individuals and groups to violent extremism while exposing economic and financial systems to major risks of unlawful behaviours. The deteriorated socioeconomic environment has increased the danger of speculation, fraud and corruption and created favourable conditions for organized crime and terrorism, as well as the malicious nexus between the two. To respond effectively to these risks and challenges, it is crucial for the international community to act in a coordinated manner and further promote the exchange of information and best practices. Italy has been steadfast in its commitment to the fight against terrorism and organized crime, within a framework of respect for fundamental guarantees and the protection of human rights. Our decades-long experience in the fight against these phenomena has led us to develop a series of legislative, institutional and operational tools that have proved to be quite effective. Our legislation builds on the experience and the legal framework developed in the 1970s to counter terrorism, and, in the 1980s and 1990s, to counter organized crime. The National Anti-Mafia Directorate - a centralized judicial authority to coordinate investigations into organized crime - was established in 2001. Its mandate was later extended to cover terrorism, so it was renamed the National Anti- Mafia and Counter-Terrorism Directorate. Today, the Directorate plays the essential role of coordinating the work of all of Italy's main stakeholders, and has access to all the files managed by the district prosecutors' offices. This mechanism has achieved great results in countering all forms of terrorism at both the domestic and the international levels. Innovative operational tools have been developed within this framework. These include non-conviction-based confiscation measures, which have neutralized or considerably reduced the economic power of the main criminal players. Electronic surveillance and the so-called collaborators of justice have also been successfully employed to collect evidence for trials on terrorism and organized crime. A Financial Security Committee was established in 2001 within the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance. It has a key role in the implementation of the Security Council's sanctions against terrorist networks. It also promotes fruitful synergies and information sharing between authorities engaged in the fight against money laundering and the financing of terrorism. Finally, the Committee on Anti-Terrorism Strategic Analysis, established within the Ministry of the Interior, coordinates the work of the various law enforcement agencies and intelligence services. The Committee draws on a network of security experts in different sectors, including drug trafficking; national and international databases; cultural heritage and natural resource protection; and trafficking in cultural property. To better fight trafficking in cultural property, Italy established, at the end of 2015, the Unite4Heritage Task Force of the Carabinieri Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage. The Task Force also works to counter interlinkages between illegal trafficking in cultural property and the financing of terrorism.
