The President (spoke in Arabic): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

I would first like to express our condolences to
the families of the victims of the plane accident that
occurred in Russia on Sunday.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Miroslav
Jenea, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Mr. Filippo Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for their briefings.

The world is following the proceedings of our
meeting in the Security Council today and expects
us to persist in our principled position supporting the
principles of international law and human values above
any political considerations, so as to deal with one of
the worst tragedies of our modern history: the tragedy
that the majority-Muslim Rohingya minority continue
to live.

This tragedy, which has resulted in the deaths
of many innocent people and the displacement of
hundreds of thousands more owing to their persecution
and forcible displacement, actions that can be described
as ethnic cleansing. The State of Kuwait condemns
and denounces these actions, which contravene
international norms and principles, carried out in
Rakhine state in Myanmar since August and which
has led to the displacement of approximately 650,000
people of the Rohingya minority. Here we emphasize
the need for the Government of Myanmar to assume
its primary responsibilities to protect its citizens and
ensure that excessive force is not used.

Moreover, I should like to express my country's
appreciation for the considerable efforts that the
Government of Bangladesh is making in hosting these
innocent people on its territory. Last October, the State
of Kuwait co-chaired the donors conference for the
Rohingya refugee crisis and pledged $15 million. That
amount, contributed by official and civil-society bodies,
is part of Kuwait's efforts to alleviate the severity of
the tragedy and of international efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the Rohingya refugees.

This tragedy has put an entire generation of children
at risk of losing everything and of not receiving an
education which determine their future, or any medical
services or health care - not to mention the destruction
of their homes and villages.

Since the Security Council issued its presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/22, on the situation in
Myanmar on 6 November 2017, we have been closely
following the ongoing developments in Myanmar. We
have taken note of the three agreements signed between
Bangladesh and Myanmar, which are aimed at ensuring
the voluntary return of refugees to their homes. Such
voluntary return cannot begin until additional, explicit
confidence-building measures have been taken in
order to ensure a safe return to and a dignified life in
Rakhine state. Here I would like to refer to some of
the measures that must be taken before there can be a
voluntary return of refugees.

The Government of Myanmar must take all
measures necessary to ensure the immediate cessation
of violence and prevent the excessive use of force
against civilians. Refrain from establishing new
refugee camps for displaced persons in the northern
part of Rakhine state. Adopt all measures to combat
any incitement to violence or hatred, and restore peace
and harmony among the various sects under the rule of
law. Allow access to United Nations agencies and its
partners and allow freedom of movement to all those in
Rakhine state in a safe and unhindered manner. Involve
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
the bilateral talks between Myanmar and Bangladesh.

These are some of the measures that we deem
important and that must be taken before the refugees can
return home. Moreover, we believe that these measures
must be accompanied by other arrangements, most
importantly a call upon the Government of Myanmar
to take all measures necessary to establish peace and
harmony among the various communities through
dialogue and within a comprehensive national process
for peace and reconciliation in which all segments
of society can take part. It must eliminate the root
causes of the plight of the Rohingya minority without
discrimination and regardless of ethnicity or religion.
Moreover, they must be granted their inherent right to
nationality, as confirmed by the General Assembly in
its resolution calling for the granting of full citizenship
rights to the Rohingya minority (resolution 72/248).

In conclusion, I would like to end my statement
today with a verse from the Holy Koran in which the
exalted and Almighty Allah The great and Almighty
decrees that:

"O mankind! We created you from a single
(pair) of a male and a female, and made you into
nations and tribes, that ye may know each other
Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of
Allah is the most righteous of you. And Allah has
full knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things)" (The Holy Koran, XLIX'JS)

This holy verse confirms that Islam is a religion
of love and peace, and opens the way to human
unity, without any intolerance based on race, colour
or language. We here may speak different languages
and have different customs and views, but once we
sit in this Chamber we all become responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council, when united, has taken historic and memorable
positions. I invite all present to once again show our
ability to overcome all political divisions and intensify
our efforts to take measures and decisions that would
grant those innocent people the chance to live and offer
them a safe, dignified and free life.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.

