Mr. Gatkuoth: The Government of Southern
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM) are committed to peace. We have yearned for
it for years. Wars are not good. We have fought enough
in the Sudan - from 1955 until 1972 and from 1983
until 2005. We yearn for peace and we will continue to
seek it. We have been calling for peace. The National
Congress Party (NCP), instead of resorting to violence,
should join us in seeking peaceful resolutions to all the
pending issues. That is why we are calling for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement to be implemented
fully.

On the issue of Abyei, the NCP and my brother
the representative of the Sudan know very well that the
land of the Ngok Dinka was transferred to the North in
1905 by the United Kingdom, because they were being
protected from the Arabs who were enslaving them.
They were put under the administration of the North so
that they would be protected from slavery. Now, if we
have peace in the Sudan, they should be asked either to
return to Southern Sudan or remain where they are
now. It is well known that the Misseriya are nomads
who come seasonally to graze their animals in the area,
not only in Abyei but beyond Abyei in Southern Sudan.

In Southern Kordofan there was an election with
very clear results, as my brother the representative of
the Sudan knows very well. Whereas he says that
Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu lost the election, it is the other way
around. Ahmed Harun knows very well that he lost the
election. But of course the election was rigged, which
angered many people in the Nuba area of Southern
Kordofan.

On these post-referendum issues we really need
to work together to reach an agreement, which is why
we have been calling for a peaceful resolution to all the
pending issues, including sharing resources between
the two countries. We are ready to negotiate a deal with
the National Congress Party, because we are interested
in peace. It is because we are actually interested in
peace that we want to make sure we have a deal that
can benefit the two countries, so that we can live in
peace, because wars are never good.

We also want to encourage the National Congress
Party in the North to accept a democratic
transformation, because the North of Sudan is also
diverse. President Al-Bashir declaring an Islamic State
in the North will continue to create problems there.
The National Congress Party must change its policies.
Instead of relying on the Islamization and Arabization
of the North they have to accept the country's diversity,
which will remain in the North. I say this because if the
North is unstable we in the South are also going to pay
the consequences.

