Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the briefers for the information they have provided.

For some time, the situation in eastern Ukraine
has generally been stable, and the ceasefire has been
maintained. The withdrawal of heavy weapons is under
way. Last February, leaders from four countrie -,
Russia, France, Germany and Ukraine - reached an
important consensus in Minsk on a political settlement
of the crisis in Ukraine. Subsequently, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015), thereby
demonstrating the firm support of the international
community for the diplomatic efforts of the leaders
of the four countries for a political settlement of the
Ukraine question. At present, all the parties should
fully implement the consensus reached by the leaders
of the four countries and the Council resolutions in an
effort to further promote the political settlement of the
crisis in Ukraine.

The question of Ukraine involves a complicated
history and reality. To find a fundamental and lasting
solution to the problem in that country, we must address
the legitimate rights, interests and concerns of all the
ethnicities and regions within Ukraine, as well as the
legitimate concerns of all the parties involved, in order
to balance their interests. The international community
should further strengthen diplomatic efforts to achieve
a political settlement. China is open to a discussion of
this question in the Council, and believes that the debate
here should play a constructive role in alleviating the
situation in Ukraine. China is opposed, as always, to
the Council's involvement in country-specific human
rights issues and to the use of unilateral sanctions, or
the threat of the use of sanctions freely in international
relations. That is detrimental to finding a lasting
solution. As always, China respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all countries, Ukraine
included, and has remained objective and impartial on
the question there.

China calls upon all of the parties to remain calm
and exercise restraint, to fully implement the Minsk
agreements and to consolidate the hard-won ceasefire,
so as to achieve peace, tranquillity, stability and
development in Ukraine. China will continue to play
a constructive role in finding a political settlement to
this question.

