Ms. Power (United States of America): Today is
about accountability for crimes so extensive and so
deadly that they have few equals in modern history.
Today is about accountability for Syria, but it is also
about accountability for the Security Council. It is the
Council's responsibility to stop atrocities if we can
and, at a minimum, to ensure that the perpetrators of
atrocities are held accountable. It was towards that
minimum that we sought to make progress today. My
Government applauds the vast majority of Council
members that voted to support and the 64 countries
that joined us in sponsoring the effort to refer those
atrocities to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Sadly, because of the decision of the Russian
Federation to back the Syrian regime no matter what it
does, the Syrian people will not see justice today. They
will see crime but not punishment. On 15 April, the
members of the Council were briefed on a report that
included 55,000 gruesome photos of the emaciated and
tortured bodies of dead Syrians whom world-renowned
international lawyers concluded had been methodically
eliminated by a Government killing machine.

The photos were reportedly provided by an
individual, alias Caesar, who worked for 13 years as
a member of the Syrian military police. When the
fighting began, he says that he was instructed to record
the images of people starved, beaten, tortured and
executed by Syria's security forces. Those photos shock
and horrify, even after some of us wondered if there
was anything that the regime could do that would still
shock. Syrian soldiers had already compelled doctors
not to care for the wounded, dragged patients out of
hospital beds, laid siege to whole neighbourhoods, cut
off access to desperately needed supplies, and carried
out chemical weapons attacks and barrel bomb attacks
with the full confidence that meaningful action by the
Council would be obstructed.

A judicial process does more than hold perpetrators
accountable. It also allows victims to speak. The vetoes
today have prevented the victims of atrocities from
testifying at The Hague for now. Nonetheless, it is
important for us in the Council today to hear the kind
of testimony we might have heard if Russia and China
had not raised their hands to oppose accountability for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Because of
the vetoes just cast, one of Al-Assad's victims, Qusai
Zakarya, will not soon be called to testify before the
International Criminal Court. But Qusai's story of life
in Moadamiyah during the siege, as hard as it is to hear,
must be heard. Qusai Zakarya is in the Council with us
today, and I would like to ask him to stand.

Today, I will tell Qusai's story as he told it to us.
Qusai's home, Moadamiyah, just outside Damascus,
was one ofthe Al-Assad regime's prime targets. During
the August 2013 chemical weapons attacks, Qusai
ran out to the street and tried to help his neighbours.
He quickly lost his ability to breathe. His eyes afire,
Qusai's heart stopped, and he was left for dead before a
friend stumbled upon him and realized that he had again
begun breathing. Qusai recounts his bewilderment as
he watched neighbours suffocate, friends panic and

families perish. He remembers the face ofa 13-year-old
boy just a few feet from his home. He describes the boy
as so innocent. He recalls that he had done nothing, yet
the expression on the 13-year-old's face was the most
terrifying thing that Qusai has ever seen as white foam
streamed from his mouth and death crept in.

If Qusai could testify, he might tell the story of his
neighbour, Abou Mohammed, a waiter in Damascus,
while his wife and daughter lived in Moadamiyah. Abou
Mohammed's daughter was seven years old. She had a
heart condition that required medication not available
in besieged Moadamiyah, so Abou Mohammed did
what any father would do and attempted to bring
her medicine from Damascus. He was captured by
Al-Assad's mercenaries, tortured with acid and
ultimately killed. His body was thrown on Highway
40. Without medicine to treat her heart condition, Abou
Mohammed's seven-year-old daughter died. Qusai
might also tell the story of Rana, an 18-month-old baby
girl. Rana's dad ran a grocery store before the siege.
After the siege, he watched as his daughter Rana died
from malnutrition because she could not get milk that
used to sit on his store's shelves.

Qusai has said that when he walks around the
United States, he notices people in restaurants getting
on with day-to-day life. He notices the small leftovers
that we leave on our plates, and he remembers watching
his neighbours' desperation to get a small piece of
rotten bread in Moadamiyah. Qusai's account of his
experience in Moadamiyah deserves to be heard. It
deserves to be examined by an independent court and,
if crimes are proven, those responsible deserve to be
held accountable.

The vetoes cast today prevent that from happening.
Strikingly, those vetoes also protect the monstrous
terrorist organizations operating in Syria. Those who
would behead civilians and attack religious minorities
will not be soon held accountable at the ICC either, for
today's vetoes by Russia and China protect not only
Al-Assad and his henchmen but also the radical Islamic
terrorists who continue a fundamentalist assault on
the Syrian people that knows no decency or humanity.
Such vetoes have aided impunity not just for Al-Assad
but for terrorist groups, as well.

In the past, when extraordinary crimes have been
carried out, the International Criminal Court has been
able to act. Why is it that the people of Uganda, Darfur,
Libya, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and Kenya
deserve international and impartial justice, but the
Syrian people do not? Why should the International
Criminal Court pursue accountabililty for the atrocities
in Africa but not those in Syria, where the worst horrors
of our time are being perpetrated? For those who
have asked the Security Council that very reasoanble
question, today they have their answer - the Russian
and Chinese vetoes.

Our grandchildren will ask us years from now how
we could have failed to bring justice to people living
in hell on Earth. The history books may well depict
photographs taken by Caesar of emaciated, acid-scarred
corpses juxtaposed with a photo of the two members of
the Council that prevented justice for the victims, such
as Qusai, who longed to see the end of such horrors.

Today is therefore about accountability not just
for the victims of Al-Assad's regime or Qusai and his
neighbours in Moadamiyah but for members of the
Security Council. Month after month, year after year,
we have each spoken about the importance of justice
and the need for accountability in Syria. Victims and
survivors have begged for action and cried out for
justice. The international community has supported the
ad hoc efforts to collect evidence to record testimony.
We have launched commissions of inquiry to find facts
and held meeting after meeting but before today, we
have not put forward a draft resolution to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court. We have
not done so because we were afraid that it would be
vetoed.

However, the victims of Al-Assad's industrial
killing machine and of terrorist attacks deserve more
than to have more dead counted. They deserve to have
each member of the Security Council counted and
held to account. They deserve to have history record
those who stood with them and were willing to raise
their hands to deny them the chance of justice. While
there may be no accountability before the ICC today
for the horrific crimes being carried out against the
Syrian people, there should be accountability for those
members of the Council that have prevented such
accountability.

The representative of Syria and perhaps of Russia
may suggest that the draft resolution voted on today
was biased, and I agree. It was biased in the direction of
establishing facts and tilted in the direction of a peace
that comes from holding accountable individuals, not
entire groups, such as the Alawites, Sunnis or Kurds.
The outcome oftoday's vote, disappointing as it is, will
not end our pursuit ofjustice.

My Government will continue to work with the many
other Governments and organizations to encourage and
facilitate the further gathering of evidence. There is
no limit to our determination to see that the victims
of the atrocities in Syria and their loved ones receive
answers in accordance with the majesty of law. In that
quest, we will be guided by the fundamental principle
of civilization, which has truly stood the test of time.
As Solon, the Athenian sage, said more than 2,500
years ago, "Those who are not wronged, no less than
those who are wronged, exert themselves to punish the
wrongdoers." The overwhelming majority of Council
members affirmed that today.

