Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of Rwanda,
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are
convinced that your wisdom and wide experience will
enable the Security Council to assume fully its
responsibilities to the satisfaction of the Member States of
the Organization.

I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Albright and her delegation for
the important work done under her presidency during the
month of February.

The delegation of Rwanda welcomes the initiative to
hold an open debate on Burundi. This initiative, which we
could regard as a sort of African palaver around a tree, is
necessary for us, the Africans within this Organization,
who constitute a majority but who, unfortunately,
represent the least privileged continent, some of whose
countries are a fixture on the Security Council's agenda.
This open debate allows us to express ourselves and to
hope that one day we will be adequately heard and
understood.

My delegation would like to approach the Burundi
question mainly within the subregional context of the
Great Lakes countries. The ills suffered by Burundi are a
contagious gangrene that affects the entire subregion. That
is why, while respecting the specific and particular nature
of each country of the subregion, there are points that
merit common consideration and that affect Burundi.

The first point is the institutionalization of impunity
within the subregion. This point reached its culmination
during and after the genocide in Rwanda. Not only were
the criminals not prevented from committing their
misdeeds, but neither were they pursued in the subregion.
On the contrary, in some cases they have even benefited
from special protection. The result of this culture of
impunity has been to encourage criminals of all stripes,
from Rwanda as well as from Burundi. They have
organized, trained and armed themselves, and they have
stirred the beginnings of a genocide in Burundi.

Through its inaction or the inadequacy of its
response, the international community has encouraged the
impunity that has been institutionalized in the subregion.
Consequently, the problem of Burundi cannot be solved
unless the subregion's culture of impunity is eradicated.
The second problem is laissez-faire: the typical
hands-off attitude which fosters the deterioration of the
situation in the subregion. Rwanda has lost one eighth of
its population as a result of hate propaganda spread
through radio broadcasts. Everyone recognizes the
powerful impact of radio broadcasts promoting hatred in
Rwanda. The same kind of radio floods the Burundian
countryside with messages of hatred and calls for
extermination. No adequate action has been taken to

 

prevent these perpetrators of crimes against humanity from
sowing hatred among the people.

There is similar laissez-faire with respect to arming
and training criminals and infiltrating them into Burundi.
The culture of impunity to which I have referred has
enabled the criminal perpetrators of genocide in Rwanda to
forge links with extremists in Burundi by helping them in
the extermination techniques for which they are notorious.
We hope that one day this South-South cooperation will
take a more positive turn. Meanwhile, no one gives a
thought to stopping these criminals. To the contrary,
Burundian army forces have been harshly criticized and
domestic movements attempting to organize in order to
avert the kind of extermination that has taken place in
Rwanda have been labeled extremist. We are duty-bound to
hail the various Burundian institutions whose composure
has enabled them to safeguard the country's sovereignty
and the stability of its population in the face of varied
provocations.

The subregion' s third problem is a lack of consultation
with the countries concerned. Many solutions and decisions
are devised, and the international community then confronts
the countries concerned with a fait accompli. A country's
problems as explained by its citizens are not being properly
addressed. Rather, initiatives are taken and are imposed on
the country. One example is the idea of military
intervention in Burundi. On whose behalf would such an
intervention be carried out, and against whom? How are
these foreign forces to tell good Burundians from bad
Burundians? They will not be wearing badges. In the
meantime, no one talks about dismantling the radio
transmitters that spread hatred. No one talks about putting
a stop to infiltration by criminals. These are what the
people of Burundi have told the international community
they need.

Yet if these two problems were solved, the people of
Burundi could enjoy a respite that would enable them to
come together in constructive dialogue. Such a respite is
vital for the peoples of the Great Lakes region; it cannot be
achieved through United Nations-style big conferences,
lifting with ideas and behind-the-scenes observers - and
gauged more by their cost than by their impact. Such
conferences will not get the people in the hills of Burundi
to lay down their weapons and come to an understanding;
they will not stop the criminal perpetrators of genocide.

The fourth element I think is important for the region
is the economic situation, which was fragile at the outset
and which is quickly deteriorating because of the political
situation. Hopeless poverty is not conducive to peace in
the subregion.

We must change our methods and our approach to
solving African problems in general and the problems of
the Great Lakes countries in particular. First of all, the
Great Lakes countries themselves must participate actively
in the search for solutions to their problems. Countries
like Burundi have created institutions that will enable
them to resolve their own problems, such as the
Convention of Government and the various commissions
that have been set up to resolve specific problems. The
international community has a duty to let these
institutions work in an atmosphere of calm by preventing
infiltration by criminals and by silencing hate-mongering
radio. If there is to be outside military intervention, that
should be its sole purpose.

We hail two great sons of Africa, President Julius
Nyerere and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, for their
initiative to bring peace to the subregion. This is the kind
of initiative to support. Similarly, the Carter Center and
President Carter himself deserve commendation.

To help the people of Burundi take their own
problems in hand, the culture of impunity in the subregion
must be eradicated, which is all the more possible given
that the nature of this crime affects all of mankind. Once
again, the international community has a role to play and
responsibilities to shoulder. It knows perfectly well where
the criminals are. It has the means to destroy or jam hate-
mongering radio transmitters. It must shoulder its
responsibilities before the region flares up and new
genocide is committed.

Economic support for the countries of the subregion
would contribute to easing tensions.

We want to draw the attention of the international
community to organizations that take advantage of the
poverty of the subregion to create programmes and
projects that only benefit their organizers without much
impact on the recipients. Other projects, so-called
development projects, are political and divisive in nature;
these include "environmental" projects now being
planned. They should be redesigned to become holistic,
not only in their conception, but also in the sense that
they should cover areas affected by the presence of
refugees. They must avoid promoting the "industry of
poverty" in the subregion.

 

I wish to conclude by calling once more for greater
participation by the Great Lakes countries in decisions
affecting their fate, and for far greater involvement by
national institutions and subregional and regional
organizations in finding solutions for this part of Africa.

