Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like, at the outset, to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. I would like to
warmly welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General for the period from 16 January to 15 April
2015 (S/2015/303), which highlights the priorities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and key developments since the previous report
(S/2015/74).

With respect to political developments, we
commend the establishment of a new Government and
the renewal of the high-level dialogue on 9 February
in Brussels between Belgrade and Pristina, represented
by the two Prime Ministers, under the aegis of the
European Union. Those discussions led to concrete
results, the most important of which was the agreement
on integrating minorities' representatives into the
judicial system.

As to the security situation, despite the general calm
observed, there have been scattered demonstrations
of discontent, denouncing the social problems faced
by and acts of ethnically based violence committed
against religious minorities places of worship. That
has exacerbated ethnic and religious tensions between
Muslims and Serbs. Such incidents will not help
national reconciliation. It is regrettable that they led to
the withdrawal from the Government of the Minister
for Communities and Returns, Mr. Aleksandar
Jablanovie, who is himself Serb, and the suspension of
any participation by him in the consensus Government.

Chad nonetheless welcomes the decision taken
by Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucie on 26 March to
establish telephone contact with Mr. Isa Mustapha, his
counterpart in Pristina. We commend that initiative,
which is the first of its kind, will help strengthen
cooperation between the two leaders and is a good step
towards appeasing tensions and reducing incidents
between the two communities.

We welcome the commitment of the Government
to combating violent extremism, radicalism and
terrorism through the vote by the Assembly of Kosovo
on 12 March on the law banning involvement in armed
conflict outside of Kosovo, in particular in Syria and
Iraq.

Regarding illegal immigration towards Europe,
we commend the praiseworthy efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to combat that trend, but urge them to do
more to dismantle the criminal networks that underpin
it.

Regarding disappeared persons, Chad welcomes
the publication on 4 February of the Kosovo Memory
Book. The Book - which lists the names of some
13,535 people, civilians and military personnel, who
were killed in the conflict between 1998 and 2000 - is
an important step, even if 1,655 victims have not been
identified to date. We therefore welcome the ongoing
support of UNMIK to shed more light on that issue.
We also commend the voluntary return, in January,
February and March of 36 people. Over 25,896 people
from minority groups have thus returned since 2000.
We believe that the normalization of that situation
necessarily involves providing assurances to and
guaranteeing security for ethnic minorities.

However, despite those signs of improvement, there

are ongoing issues that hamper good will between the
communities, in particular with respect to property
and the illegal occupation of homes and other areas
belonging to Serbs. We commend in that respect the
technical support by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) aimed at resolving
such disputes through the provision of property titles.
We congratulate and encourage the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and its
monitoring, mentoring and advising team for the
16 January resumption of its work for the first time
since April 2014, when it had to stop owing to security
concerns. Chad also commends the appointment of an
independent and experienced lawyer who is to carry
out an inquiry into allegations of negligence and cover-
up by EULEX personnel. We reiterate our trust in
that institution, which should continue to monitor the
situation and carry out its responsibilities in terms of
the rule of law.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
support and encouragement to Pristina regarding the
significant progress made on national reconciliation
and the normalization of its relations with Belgrade. We
would also reiterate our support and congratulations to
UNMIK for promoting security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region, in line
with resolution 1244 (1999), and to the Kosovo Force
and OSCE for their ongoing commitment and unfailing
efforts.

