Liechtenstein associates itself with the statement read out by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians. The situation with regard to the protection of civilians must be seen in the context of the severe impact of the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The virus is exacerbating pre-existing inequalities and vulnerabilities while also exemplifying global interdependence and demonstrating the need for solidarity. Measures to support vulnerable populations are urgently needed, including through the provision of water and sanitation, and by ensuring access to health care and health services and enhancing protections from gender-based violence. Refugees and displaced people as well as those who are detained face a particularly difficult task in finding safe ways to self-isolate and avoid infection. Liechtenstein places on record our support for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire in order to help create conditions conducive to the delivery of aid and prise open a space for diplomacy in intractable armed conflicts. We hope to see its implementation by all relevant parties without distinction on the basis of actors or situations. A virus that spreads without discrimination must be met by a global ceasefire that does not discriminate. The consideration of the impact of COVID-19 on the protection of civilians should make us reflect on our understanding of the notion of security. Never have more people felt more insecure than in the last three months, and never have we been less prepared to offer an effective response. Our definition of security must be human-centred and go far beyond measures to address the immediate threat of armed violence. Food security, climate action, economic security and universal access to health care should be key ingredients of our understanding of human security. Conflict-related sexual violence continues to be a blight on many of the world's most severe conflicts. We appreciate that the Secretary-General has brought awareness to its prevalence for men and boys, given the distinct stigmas that they may suffer as a result; we will continue work with the Liechtenstein-based non- governmental organization All Survivors Project to highlight this understudied issue. Liechtenstein is also proud to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration as it marks its fifth anniversary. We underline the need for all parties to conflict to fully comply with international humanitarian law and for the Council to ensure accountability in cases of non-compliance. The ongoing imperatives of prevention and accountability must not be obscured by the need for immediate protection measures. The Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct regarding Security Council action against mass atrocity crimes, which is supported by 121 States, including two thirds of the current Security Council members, remains highly relevant in this respect. Liechtenstein continues to call on non-signatories to sign the code. Liechtenstein is pleased that the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366) emphasizes once again the need to enhance accountability and that it references the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. It is worth remembering that the Mechanism was created by the General Assembly in the light of a deadlocked Security Council unable to pull the levers of accountability available to it, in particular a referral to the International Criminal Court (ICC). The fact that this section of the Secretary-General's report does not highlight any Council actions in many years should serve as a wakeup call to a body that increasingly seems asleep at the wheel on questions of accountability. Liechtenstein emphasizes the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General with respect to Council referrals to the ICC - a meaningful tool when supported by follow- up action in the Council. The principle of complementarity - that is, the primary responsibility of national judiciaries to investigate and prosecute - offers the Council many more opportunities in its engagement with States, both during and after armed conflict.
