Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
begin by joining you in commending the outstanding
work of Michael Williams. He has exemplified the
finest traditions of an international civil servant,
working on behalf of the Secretariat and through it on
behalf of the international community, demonstrating
again, as he did today, thoroughness and
professionalism in the way he has dealt with this very
complex issue in offering us balanced and constructive
advice that actually helps facilitate our responsibility in
ensuring the promotion of peace and security. We will
miss him and we wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.

On 16 July, President Bush called for an
international meeting this autumn of nations that
support a two-State solution, reject violence, recognize
Israel's right to exist and commit to all previous
agreements among the parties. This meeting on a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will
aim to support discussions and negotiations between
the parties and achieve meaningful progress on the
path to peace, Palestinian statehood and an end to the
conflict. We believe the Government of President
Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad can be a partner for
peace. The international community has recognized
that and is responding by re-establishing diplomatic
and economic ties with the Palestinian Authority
Government. As President Bush has said, the
international community must work with the
Palestinian Authority to develop a solid institutional
and economic foundation for a future Palestinian State.

In that vein, Secretary Rice and Palestinian Prime
Minister Salaam Fayyad signed an $80 million
assistance package aimed at supporting efforts to
reform and professionalize the Palestinian security
forces. The framework agreement formalizes the
intention of the United States to provide assistance to
the Palestinian Authority to promote law and order by
strengthening and reforming the Palestinian security
sector. We believe the ability to provide security for the
population is a core responsibility of any functioning
government. The rule of law and security must be the
foundation of any successful Palestinian Government.

We believe that the assistance package will help
improve the Palestinian Authority's capacity to deliver
security for the Palestinian people and to fight
terrorism, to build confidence between the parties and
will ultimately help to meet the security needs of
Palestinians and Israelis alike.

The United States and the Palestinian Authority
have worked together closely to design the programme
and will continue to cooperate in its implementation.
The security assistance package is in addition to more
than $190 million in United States assistance to the
Abbas-Fayyad Government this year. We encourage
others, particularly regional parties to step forward
with additional support at this critical time.

We continue to call on all Palestinians to reject
terror and on the Palestinian Authority Government to
arrest terrorists, confiscate illegal weapons and
confront corruption. We remain deeply concerned by
the continued intransigence and illegal occupation of
Gaza by Hamas, including recent moves to crack down
on freedom of speech there.

We are very concerned about Hamas' provision of
safe haven to fellow terrorist organizations operating in
Gaza and strongly condemn the continuing acts of
terror, such as recurring indiscriminate rocket attacks
being conducted from Gaza against civilians in Israel.

We welcome the 6 August and 28 August
meetings between Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas, the second and third such meetings since late
June. We strongly support direct dialogue between the
parties. The United States remains committed to
working with Israel and the Palestinians on day-to-day
issues that affect the lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
as well as a political horizon for Palestinian statehood.
We have always said that bilateral dialogue between
the parties is the key to realizing the two-State vision.
We will continue to work with the parties and the
international community to that end.
The development of a viable Palestinian economy
and institutions remains crucial to the success and
prosperity of a future Palestinian State. The United
States looks forward to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting in New York next month and to the Quartet
meeting, where we expect to hear about Quartet
Representative Tony Blair's travel to the region and his
recommendations on the economic and institutional
agenda. We look forward to continued coordination and
cooperation with the Palestinians, the international
community and Quartet Representative Tony Blair to
lay the foundation for President Bush's vision of two
States, Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.

On the situation in Lebanon, let me briefly note
that we welcome the unanimous decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one
year. We remain committed to a sovereign, democratic
and prosperous Lebanon and continue to call for the
full implementation of all Council resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon, including resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). While we
commend the work of UNIFIL in South Lebanon, we
remain deeply concerned by persistent reports of
breaches of the arms embargo along the Syria-Lebanon
border and call on all States, particularly Syria and
Iran, to abide by their commitments under resolution
1701 (2006).

We also decry the continuing failure of militias to
disarm. Those issues, along with the fate of the two
abducted Israeli soldiers, must be addressed if efforts
to achieve peace are to succeed.

We applaud the peaceful and transparent
parliamentary by-elections in Lebanon this month and
congratulate the winners and the Lebanese people on
the process. We look forward to similarly free and fair
and peaceful presidential elections this fall that are
held in accordance with Lebanon's constitution and are
free of foreign intervention.

