Mr. Searle (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): A
year has elapsed since the signature in Paris in December
1995 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The various bodies involved in
the peace process have had a chance to take stock of what
has been achieved and to draw some basic conclusions to
help guide the action of the international community in the
months to come.

On this occasion, my delegation would first like to pay
tribute to the High Representative, Mr. Carl Bildt; to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of the United Nations operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Iqbal Riza; to the Commissioner of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), Mr. Peter
FitzGerald; to the Commander of the Implementation Force
(IFOR); and to the many men and women from various
international organizations, within or outside the United
Nations system, who this year have been devoting their
utmost efforts to the cause of peace.

We are satisfied and encouraged by the great strides
made in the implementation of the peace process and by the
resulting substantial improvement in the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The fact that in 1996 no human lives
were lost as a result of direct military action is a relevant
indicator that contrasts with those of previous years. It
alone justifies the extensive resources that have been
deployed.

The holding of elections last September, with broad
participation by the citizenry; the gradual establishment of
new, joint multiethnic institutions; economic
reconstruction; the restoration of essential public services;
and internationally, mutual recognition between
neighbouring States: these are all obvious steps forward.
They have contributed to an improvement in the living
conditions of the entire population, and they encourage
the international community to persist in its efforts for
peace.

However, at the same time we cannot conceal our
concern at the fact that certain essential commitments
made in Dayton have not been implemented and continue
to be delayed or to make very slow progress. These
commitments include freedom of movement, the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their places of origin,
an end to the harassment of minorities and respect for
human rights. Generally speaking, the predominance of
the forces of separation over those of integration is,
unfortunately, gravely undermining the very spirit of the
Dayton Agreement and seriously threatening the medium-
or long-term success of the Peace Agreement.

We believe that the international community is fully
aware that, after four years of bitter war, complete
normalization cannot be achieved in the short space of
one year. However, we also believe that we should not
resign ourselves to the fact that, in this initial stage,
progress is not being made on many of the basic aspects
of the Dayton Agreement mentioned earlier -
particularly since, as time goes by, it is going to become
even more difficult to make headway.

We find it appropriate that the draft before says that
the primary responsibility for further implementation of
the peace process falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves, and unless they fulfil their
obligations and participate actively in the reconstruction
of a civil society, they cannot expect the international
community to continue to bear the political, military and
economic burden of the activities of implementation and
reconstruction.
Similarly, the availability of international financial
assistance has been very reasonably linked, in our
judgement, to the extent of fulfilment of the Peace
Agreement by all authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We note that fulfilment includes cooperation with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which
is of particular importance to my delegation. We recall
that no Member State can be exempted from the
obligation to cooperate fully with the activities of the
Tribunal.

 

We believe that lasting peace and reconciliation will
become possible in the Balkans only to the extent that
justice can be administered, and we feel that the terrible
crimes that have been repudiated by international
conscience in recent years must not go unpunished.

While it is true that a period of consolidation is now
beginning, in which the emphasis will be mainly on
fulfilment of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreements,
we cannot overlook the continuing importance of the
military provisions of the Agreement. We therefore
welcome the creation of the Stabilization Force as the legal
successor of the Implementation Force (IFOR) to fulfil the
tasks stipulated in annex l-A and annex 2 of the Peace
Agreement, and we express our recognition of the Member
States that have committed themselves to participate in it.
We are convinced that their essential involvement will be
a decisive contribution to the cause of peace, as was the
case in 1996 with the Implementation Force.

In the same vein, my delegation firmly supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF), which will be
entrusted with the tasks set forth in annex ll of the Peace
Agreement. Its primary role in assisting in the restructuring
the local police forces and the establishment of law-
enforcement institutions deserve our full support.

Finally, we appeal to the authorities of the two Entities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to give their resolute and
unreserved support, commitment and total dedication to the
comprehensive implementation of the Peace Agreement in
this new stage so as to make the peace, progress and well-
being so long awaited by their peoples a reality.

