Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
Special Representative Augustine Mahiga for his very
helpful briefing and analysis. Allow me also to thank
His Excellency President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
for his presence and for his statement.

Portugal welcomes the progress made to date in
the implementation of the Kampala road map. However,
we are concerned about delays in implementing some
of its key tasks, as well as the negative impact of the
long-lasting impasse in the Transitional Federal
Parliament. With only three months to go until the end
of the political transition in Somalia, we must reiterate
that it is up to the Somali leadership to seize this
opportunity and to implement its commitments to
ensure that the 20 August deadline is met.

It is crucial that the Somali authorities implement
the Garoowe principles, which provide a solid basis for
the way forward with the establishment of new
institutions and the adoption of a new constitution by a
representative Constituent Assembly in full transparency.
The constitution, subject to a national referendum in
due course, must be underpinned by respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rights
of women and of persons belonging to minorities, and
must create a framework for all Somalis to take part in
public life. At the same time, it is essential to guarantee
the accessibility and deliverance of basic services to
the population, to support sustainable peace and
development, to build an effective Government, and to
re-establish an independent judiciary.

While the international community's will and
determination in continuing to support the Somali
people are clear, as demonstrated by the continuous
hard work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Augustine Mahiga, whose efforts I wish to
commend, and by the upcoming Istanbul Conference
on 31 May and 1 June, as well as the International
Somalia Contact Group meeting in Rome on 2 and
3 July, responsibility for the delivery of a political
solution lies with the Somalis themselves. Portugal
echoes the Secretary-General's view that appropriate
action should be taken against those who are judged to
be blocking or undermining progress.

Portugal recognizes and commends the crucial
role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in bringing security to the country. The
adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and the significant
strengthening of AMISOM. that it authorized are a clear
expression of the political importance and
appropriateness of the continued and significant
support to allow the Mission to fulfil its mandate.
Through the United Nations and the European Union,
Portugal will continue its support to AMISOM.

In that regard, allow me to call on the new troop-
contributing countries to fully integrate their forces
into the AMISOM. command and control structure, in
line with the aforementioned resolution. Allow me also
to call on other donors to contribute to sustainable
funding for AMISOM. and to provide force enablers to
allow the Mission to operate effectively.
Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge the
efforts made to date by all partners involved in military
action in Somalia to minimize the negative impact of
military intervention on Somali civilians and to protect
their human rights. I encourage them to continue to do
so.

The unbroken commitment of the Somali
authorities to effective governance and security is
central to consolidating AMISOM's military gains on
the ground and to ensuring the governance of
territories previously under Al-Shabaab rule. We take
this opportunity to call on the Transitional Federal
Institutions to fully embrace the leadership of that
process. Through the European Union Training Mission,
to which Portugal will provide 16 military troops in
2012, we will continue to support the development of
the Somali national security forces. We encourage
other donors to join that process.

Likewise, we recall the importance of continued
support and humanitarian assistance to Somalia. We are
concerned about the impoverishment of the population
owing to the prevailing conflict and the persistent
drought, as well as the implications of such a situation
with the growing number of refugees in the region. As
the Secretary-General underlines in his report
(S/2012/283), the humanitarian situation continues to
be fragile and the progress made remains reversible.
Portugal urges all parties to ensure full and unhindered
access for humanitarian aid across the country so that
vulnerable people can be reached.

As the security and political situation registers
progress, the achievements made to date in Somalia
will only be sustainable if all stakeholders continue to
pursue a multifaceted response to the country's
underlying causes of instability, including by building
stability at the local level and by stepping up the action
to tackle the threats posed by piracy and terrorism.

Portugal has always argued that piracy is a
problem of organized crime, with onshore roots in
Somalia. Its causes are related to the conflict that has
ravaged Somalia for over two decades and the severe
impoverishment of the population, particularly the
coastal communities. We are especially worried about
the expansion of piracy attacks throughout the Indian
Ocean, reaching as far south as the coast of
Mozambique and eastwards towards the shores of India.

In concluding, allow me to underline that time is
of the essence. As the Secretary-General clearly said,
despite the challenges, there is a real opportunity to
move the country to a new phase in the political
process. For that to happen, Somali leaders must unite
in the commitment to ending the transition in August.

