Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this important meeting on the
working methods of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, in particular the sanctions committees.

Sanctions regimes are among the means established
in the Charter of the United Nations to safeguard
international peace and security. Undoubtedly, sanctions
can contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security, if used appropriately and focused
solely on the objectives for which they are imposed and
if the do not lead to collateral damage to the population
of the country concerned or to other countries.

Today I will not talk about the general framework
of sanctions or the working methods of the various
sanctions committees. Much has been, and will be said,
by my colleagues and by the members ofthe Council. The
concept note circulated by the presidency (S/2015/102, annex) addresses all of our concerns, and we support
the recommendations contained therein. Instead, I will
focus on Libya's experience with sanctions and with
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya.

The objective of the sanctions imposed on Libya
differs from that of the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council on other States. The Libya sanctions
are not imposed against the legitimate Government.
They were imposed under circumstances that differ
from those of the country's current situation. They are
still in effect and are aimed at helping the Government
avoid a de-stabilization of the situation and a worsening
of the problems, as well as to safeguard the wealth of
the Libyan people and restore their plundered assets.

Sanctions on Libya are imposed under numerous
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolutions 1970
(2011), 1973 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2095 (2013), 2146
(2014), 2147 (2014) and 2213 (2015). The sanctions are
limited to four areas, namely, an arms embargo, travel
bans, the freezing of assets and proscribing illegitimate
trafficking in oil and fuel. All those sanctions were
needed to control specific situations inside the country
in the absence of a strong central Government. Libya
has no objection to them. Regretfully, however, many
problems have occurred in their implementation.

We cannot accept sanctions being used to prevent
the legitimate Government from extending its full
authority over the entire Libyan territory, even if that
is an unintended consequence. Nor can we accept their
being imposed in a manner that serves to promote
radicalism and terrorism. Sanctions should also not lead
to the Libyan people's loss of billions of dollars. We
indeed need an arms embargo against the armed factions,
but we cannot prevent the army and the police from
obtaining weapons. The Sanctions Committee should
therefore have engaged seriously and transparently in
consultations with the legitimate Government of Libya
to agree to a mechanism for facilitating the acquisition
of weapons by the Libyan army while also prevening
access to them by the radical militias that are fighting
the Government and destroying public and private

property.

Unfortunately,thatdidnothappen.Theflowofweapons

from well-known States to militias - including Da'esh,
Ansar Al-Sharia and Al-Qaida elements - continued.
Those weapons helped those groups to occupy a
number of Libyan cities, which our Government has
been unable to fully retake. We hope that the Security
Council has learned the lesson and that the Sanctions
Committee will facilitate the acquisition of weapons by
the anticipated Governmnet of national reconciliation
upon taking office, without putting forward pretexts
to prevent the army from acquiring weapons to fight
terrorism and radicalism.

The freezing of assets is another form of sanctions
imposed on Libya. There are two kinds: first, an assets
freeze against the Al-Qadhafi family and officials ofhis
regime and, secondly, an assets freeze against Libyan
financial institutions and their African portfolios.
Despite the clear provisions in Security Council
resolutions concering freezing the assets of certain
individuals and supporting the Libyan Government's
recovery of plundered funds, we have not received
a single notification from any State concerning
compliance with the resolutions or the freezing of the
assets of the persons referred to in those resolutions.

We have also not received any information from
the Panel of Experts that could be useful in helping our
authorities to track and recover funds. It is noteworthy
that the Panel's reports lack certain important names
and information. Those reports have therefore become
dead letters and of no use to us. Simply put, States
are not implementing the Council's resolutions on the
freezing of assets, while the Panel of Experts is also not
providing us any information in that regard. In addition,
the Security Council is not taking sufficient steps to
follow up on its resolutions. Of what use is the Panel of
Experts if it does not give Libya any information, and if
most of the information it does have is available to the
public through the media?

With regard to the assets freeze against the Libyan
Investment Authority, despite its importance, the lack
of adjustment to the freeze to enable the Authority's
governing body to manage its funds profitably has led
to losses for the Libyan State amounting to billions of
dollars in interest and service charges that we have been
unable to collect. We hope that the Security Council
will rectify the situation as soon as possible so that
Libya does not sustain further unintended losses.

Libya's experience with the Sanctions Committee
indicates that there is a need to differentiate between
the sanctions imposed on Governments as a punishment
aimed at changing their behaviour and those used
to spare States worse consequences. My country's
relationship with its Sanctions Committee should be
one of cooperation, coordination and constant exchange
of information within a framework of full transparency.

In that context, we find it strange that Libya's
delegation is treated like any other Mission to the
United Nations, with the information collected by the
Panel of Experts withheld from it. It is ludicrous that
the Panel's report to be issued as a final document
by the Security Council and made available to all
Member States and the media is not transmitted to the
Libyan delegation in advance. The Committee makes it
available to us only in its offices and only a few days
before official publication, and after discussing it in the
Committee with no annexes, as if it were a dangerous
classified document. As a matter of fact, it contains
no confidential information at all, and classified
information that would actually be useful to the Libyan
Government is not included - and not just confidential
information, but even data available through other
documents and on social media are not referred to at
all in case they might be intended to serve illegitimate
interests. Tha all leads us to question the usefulness
and benefit of the Panel of Experts.

Regrettably, this is not a moment to cite examples,
because this issue has been overtaken by events. In
Libya we are awaiting the formation of a Government of
national reconciliation. We hope the Security Council
will treat it differently once it is in office and that it will
be able to lead the country to a stage where there will
be no need for sanctions.

In the case of Libya, assets freezes and arms
embargoes cannot be effective if our delegation and
the Sanctions Committee are not sharing information,
and right now that is not happening. My delegation
was surprised that a number of exemptions were made
without informing us, which could lead to undesired
exemptions or circumventions of correct procedure. We
hope that in the future the Sanctions Committee will
share with our delegation all the exemption requests
that reach it, as well as any steps that are taken as a
result.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
that transparency, cooperation, coordination and
information-sharing between sanctions committees
and the States concerned are the pillars that make the
sanctions machinery positive and effective.

