Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Representative de
Mistura for his presentation, which was very clear,
comprehensive and, I would add, very convincing. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
briefing on the Multinational Force. In addition, I
welcome the participation of Ambassador Al Bayati in
our debate and would like to associate my delegation
with the statement made by Ambassador Ripert of
France on behalf of the European Union.

The past two years have been marked by
considerable progress in the situation in Iraq. There has
been progress in the security, political and
humanitarian situations, from which the population is
beginning to benefit and which, in particular, has led to
a welcome normalization of the relations of Iraq with
its neighbours. That progress has required the support
of the international community and regional actors, but
it has been brought about above all by the Iraqis
themselves and their elected Government, led by Prime
Minister al-Maliki.

However, that progress should not blind us to the
problems that remain or lead us to forget our
responsibility towards the outstanding challenges. In
that regard, I would like to mention three points.

First, with regard to the security situation,
Belgium welcomes the improvement in security and
the increasing role played by the Iraqi Security Forces
in ensuring public order. First and foremost, that is
reflected in the direct control that they now exercise
over security in 13 of the country's 18 provinces, as
well as by their resolute action against militia activity
and the move to integrate the Sons of Iraq into the Iraqi
security forces - two changes that should strengthen
the prerogative of the rule of law to exercise the
monopoly of the security forces over the use of force.

However, the bloody attacks of recent days in
Mosul, Baghdad and elsewhere remind us that, for
Iraqis, daily security is still often very relative and
remains an obstacle to the return of thousands of
people who have been forced to flee their homes.
Moreover, there is a real fear that the upcoming
provincial elections could be an additional motive for
violent attacks by criminal gangs who are still rampant.

We encourage the Iraqi authorities to continue
their efforts and to complement their achievements
with robust action in protecting fundamental human
rights, including in detention. Just as important as re-
establishing order is guaranteeing the rights of each
citizen, which will earn the authorities the essential
confidence and support of the population.

Secondly, with regard to political reconciliation,
Belgium welcomes the political agreement that made
possible the adoption of the law on the upcoming
provincial elections. Following the constitutional
referendum and the 2005 elections, those elections will
represent a new step in the consolidation of a
democracy open to all Iraqis. In that spirit, we
welcome in particular the inclusion of provisions for
the representation of women and minorities. Of greater
concern is the discussion on the distribution of power
and the sharing of assets, which have been slow in
coming about. An agreement on those issues is,
however, an essential foundation for the stable
coexistence of all of the different Iraqi communities
and for a prosperity that is as genuine as it is equitably
distributed. We thus call upon all parties to show the
will necessary to achieve a compromise.

In that context and given the tension and
increased violence in the areas of the disputed internal
boundaries, we welcome the technical assistance
provided by UNAMI that was mentioned by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in his
briefing. We encourage all sides to make use of that
assistance.

Thirdly, on the issue of human rights, Belgium
encourages the Iraqi authorities to increase their efforts
to take advantage of the improved security situation to
combat the serious violations of human rights that
continue to affect the most vulnerable populations. In
response to the events of the past summer, we reiterate
our unequivocal condemnation of the campaign of
violence against the Christian community of Mosul,
while we also note with satisfaction measures taken by
Prime Minister al-Maliki.

In the few weeks remaining until the end of the
mandate of the multinational force in Iraq, Belgium
reminds the Council that it is the Council's task to
ensure that the mandate of the United Nations be
carried out under secure conditions. We also welcome
the decision by the Government of Iraq to facilitate the
construction of a new United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad by providing land, and the announcement of a
substantial financial contribution.

Finally, Belgium must reaffirm its appreciation
for the excellent work 4 courageous and professional
and carried out under difficult circumstances - by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and by
Mr. de Mistura personally. Mr. de Mistura will
continue to benefit from the full and unequivocal
support of Belgium in completing his mandate.

