Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso, for taking
time to brief the Security Council on behalf of the
presidency of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita; the African Union (AU)
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre
Buyoya; Mr. Angel Losada Fernandez, European Union
(EU) Special Representative for the Sahel; and Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director for United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for their comprehensive briefings.

South Africa takes note of the recent report of the
Secretary-General (see S/2019/371) on the activities of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and is deeply concerned about
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel region, particularly the continued terrorist
attacks in northern and central Mali and Burkina
Faso, as well as in the border regions of Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger, and the increasing intercommunal
violence, which has resulted in many fatalities. Of equal
concern is the spill-over effect into wider West Africa.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to convey our condolences to the families and victims
of the violent attacks in the Sahel, in particular those
that took place in Ouagassou in Mali, Arbinda and,
recently, in Dablo in Burkina Faso. We also convey
our condolences for the two soldiers who sacrificed
their lives so that their countrymen could go back and
live in peace in their homeland. We are hopeful that
the perpetrators of those heinous crimes will be held
accountable. We commend the commitment expressed
by the G-5 Sahel countries to establishing the human
rights compliance framework. That is an important
development that will go a long way towards bringing
the perpetrators to justice and building the trust and
confidence of the population in the justice systems of
the respective countries.

We are encouraged by the concerted efforts and
commitment of the countries of the Sahel to forge
forward with the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force to combat terrorism, cross-border organized
crime and trafficking, in order to create conditions that
are conducive to peace and development. Likewise, we
welcome the resumption of the operations of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force at the beginning of this year to deal
with the security challenges that have engulfed that
region. South Africa recognizes the fundamental role
and sacrifices ofthe AU-endorsed G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and its member States. In that regard, we call upon the
Security Council to spare no efforts in the support of
the initiatives undertaken by the countries of the Sahel.

We welcome the unique partnership between
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to restore peace and stability in Mali
and the wider Sahel region. As has been recognized by
the Council, the partnership provides a positive model
of cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and a regional peace operation in Africa.
Therefore, every effort should be made by the Council
and the international community to ensure that the
challenges of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are addressed
and that it is fully capacitated and able to effectively
implement its mandate.

We therefore reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General's repeated recommendation to the
Council concerning the establishment of a United
Nations support office for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
funded through assessed contributions and independent
of MINUSMA, which we believe will allow for the
predictable and sustainable financing of support for the
Joint Force, longer-term planning and the consolidation
of this important initiative. That will enable the Force
to have the necessary capacity and the critically
needed logistical and operational base, which will
contribute positively towards the full and effective
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

We are also of the view that if the Joint Force is to
operate optimally, the necessary logistical requirements
have to be provided. In that regard, South Africa
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Council consider authorizing MINUSMA
to provide life-support consumables to battalions
operating in the framework of the Joint Force, under
the condition that the Joint Force or other partners
undertake the responsibility of ensuring the delivery of
support to their respective areas of operations.

In solidarity with Foreign Minister Barry and the
people of Burkina Faso, South Africa also welcomes
the plans to strengthen the office of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and bolster humanitarian
assistance, funding and programmes across Burkina
Faso. In addition, the Security Council should consider
further opportunities to reinforce partnerships
and strengthen the role of the African Union when
discussing African-led peace operations. That process
should be carried out in a well-coordinated manner in
order for the partnerships to complement one another in
support of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel.

South Africa recognizes the nexus between
security, peace and development. We believe that there
is a need to also address the root causes of conflicts
in the region, particularly poverty, climate change,
unemployment and other related issues. Therefore, a
holistic development approach to the challenges in the
Sahel is urgently needed for the current efforts and
initiatives to have a valuable lasting impact and bring
about stability and durable peace in the region.

To our development partners, South Africa
welcomes with appreciation the bilateral and
multilateral financial contributions towards the G-5
Sahel's Priority Investment Programme, which focuses
on socioeconomic development initiatives in the
Sahel. At the same time, we urge all Member States
in a position to do so to continue to provide financial
support to ensure the successful implementation of the
G-5 Sahel's Priority Investment Programme.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force alone cannot secure the
Sahel and that the Council should be mindful of the
catastrophic ramifications of the security situation for
the rest of the West African region now and Africa
as a whole later on if the situation is not adequately
and urgently addressed. That implies that no effort
should be spared by the Council, the region and the
international community to provide the necessary
support the Joint Force urgently needs to succeed in its
fundamental initiative.

South Africa will support the draft French press
statement in that regard.

