Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in welcoming home to New York our
old friend the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru,
His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra. I must
say that I am among those who feel proud to see one
of the finest representatives of the United Nations
attain higher offices. It is an honour for us, and I
once again congratulate him on assuming his new
high responsibility.

I should also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ambassador Mona
Juul, President of the Economic and Social Council,
and I welcome them to the Chamber.

It has been 15 years since the United Nations
started its peacekeeping mission in Haiti - 15 years
of struggle, tension, experience, laughter and tears.
Hundreds of Indonesia's finest peacekeepers shared
many moments in that period, through their participation
in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and in the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). Several other countries have
also contributed their troops, for which we are deeply
grateful. We wish to join Mr. Lacroix in paying tribute
to the 188 peacekeepers who sacrificed their lives in
the fight to achieve peace and security in Haiti over the
past 15 years.

A lot of work has been done, but of course there are
still challenges that need to be addressed. I would also
like to express our appreciation to Mr. Lacroix and his
team for producing the excellent chart in the handout
he distributed to Council members - he knows I like
numbers. I think that it shows clearly, and in one page,
what has been achieved by United Nations peacekeeping
in Haiti, not only in trying to develop the Haitian
National Police (HNP) but also in strengthening the rule
of law, and most importantly, for Indonesia and all of
us in the Chamber, in promoting and protecting human
rights, which is much needed by our Haitian colleagues.
I would therefore like to reiterate my gratitude, and I
hope that this approach will be replicated across other
issues on the Council's agenda.

I would like to bring the following three points
to the attention of the Council. First, I should like to
talk about stability in Haiti. Indonesia commends the
Haitian National Police for its efforts and achievements
in maintaining peace and stability in Haiti. Despite all
ofits limitations, there have been successful operations
leading to the arrests of gang leaders, as well as a
reduction in the levels of community violence. They
have dealt with protests and unrest nationwide and
achieved sustained progress in the second, evaluation
stage of its strategic development plan, with support
from MINUJUSTH. In future, it will be important to
address the logistical challenges facing the Haitian
National Police. The lack of equipment should be
addressed promptly. The HNP's role in maintaining
law and order is the bedrock for Haiti's recovery.
We share the Secretary-General's concern about the
urgent need for the Haitian National Police to be well
resourced and better equipped to fulfil its mandate. The
acute equipment needs of the police are urgent. There
is therefore a need for the international community to
work together.

Secondly, a comprehensive national dialogue is
needed. We have already had many meetings on the issue
of development in Haiti, yet the reality on the ground is
still far from what is expected. Comprehensive dialogue
is the most feasible way to transform that setback into
the advancement of political stability in the country.
Haiti currently finds itself at a delicate point in time;
it needs an inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive
national dialogue. The challenges are real. The
development and implementation of the rule of law
in Haiti is quite important. Haiti must take bold steps
to start addressing these challenges by immediately
holding a comprehensive national dialogue.

Thirdly, I would like to focus on the presence of the
United Nations in the country. The mission of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) - which
is not the same as that of MINUJUSTH - is to continue
the important work carried out by MINUJUSTH,
albeit in a different form, but with the same essence.
BINUH's role as a special political mission will not
have a peacekeeping element. The Government of
Haiti therefore needs to take the lead and exercise
ownership in promoting peace and stability in the
country. We also believe that the Government of
Haiti would benefit tremendously from help from the
Peacebuilding Fund as it collaborates with the United
Nations country team to support and accelerate the
transition to a non-peacekeeping presence. It is clear
that Haiti is a litmus test for the success of the United
Nations in making the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding to sustainable development.

We would also like to draw the Council's attention
to the new benchmarks set for BINUH. We believe that
the fulfilment of those benchmarks is not BINUH's
responsibility alone: both BINUH and the UnitedNations
country team serve as catalysts for improvements in
Haiti. The Government and people of Haiti should have
full ownership in and take responsibility for fulfilling
these benchmarks.

Before I close my statement, I would like to quote a
Haitian proverb: Men anpil, chay pa Ion, which loosely
translates as "many hands make light work". It is up
to all of us in the international community to lend
many hands and help lighten Haiti's load so that it may
achieve stability and prosperity.

