Mr. Manalo (Philippines): We join others in
congratulating you, Mr. Minister, on your country's
presidency of the Security Council for this month. The
presidency of the Council under the Irish delegation
has provided strong and enlightened leadership during
these critical times.

We also thank the Secretary-General, for his
latest report on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief
Minister and head of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor, for their very important
statements this morning. We also wish to thank the
representatives of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for their
briefings.

There is great excitement and anticipation
concerning the future of East Timor. Much has been
accomplished since we embarked over two years ago to
support East Timor's independence and the formation
of a viable and self-sustaining sovereign country.
Indeed, the Philippine delegation associates itself with
those who believe that the first real attempt by the
United Nations at nation-building is on the verge of
becoming a true success story.

The previous two months have demonstrated
definitive and concrete steps towards the goal of
independence for East Timor at the earliest possible
time. These include the election of a Constituent
Assembly, held on 30 August; the 90-day process to
draft the country's Constitution, which began in earnest
after the election; the formation of an all-East Timorese
Council of Ministers; and, lastly, just a few days ago,
the inauguration of an East Timor Defence Force.

The contribution of those involved in this process
deserves our thanks and recognition. But no one
deserves more credit than the East Timorese
themselves for their courage and determination in the
face of tremendous challenges.

It is in this spirit that my delegation urges the
Security Council to ensure that the gains we have
achieved thus far, and intend to achieve in the future,
shall be preserved and promoted by a well-conceived,
credible and adequate post-independence United
Nations presence in East Timor. While attaining
independence is no mean feat, it cannot be the final
chapter of the United Nations exit strategy for East
Timor. The commitment of the United Nations to East
Timor over the past two years or so set the stage for
East Timorese independence. However, the East
Timorese deserve our continued support.

The challenges ahead for East Timor remain
daunting, as the country strives to achieve stability and
development through the establishment of sustainable
democratic institutions and economic structures.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
the security situation in East Timor is also of deep
concern. Therefore, until the envisaged East Timor
Defence Force becomes fully functional, the United
Nations should ensure that a robust United Nations
military presence remains in the country.

The Philippine delegation believes that the gains
the East Timorese people have achieved so far should
not be imperilled by a precipitate withdrawal of
adequate international support and of an adequate
international presence in the country.

The Philippines supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the establishment of the
United Nations successor mission. We agree with his
assessment that the primary focus of the successor
mission will be to ensure the security of East Timor
and the viability, stability and sustainability of its
government structures, allowing for the completion of
the mandate entrusted to UNTAET. Bearing this in
mind, we believe the recommendations of the
Secretary-General present a credible and balanced
approach for helping East Timor establish effective
institutions and an effective administrative capacity.
We urge the Security Council to adopt these
recommendations and establish the successor mission
in East Timor with the appropriate number of military,
police and civilian personnel until such time as the
situation there has become stable and self-sustaining.
At the same time, we look forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's recommendations on the financial
implications and the necessary financial requirements
for the successor mission to UNTAET. In this regard, it
is important that the successor mission receives assured
and assessed funding to ensure that its activities can be
sustained.

Finally, the Philippines will continue to support
United Nations efforts during the critical post-
independence period of East Timor.

