Ms. Anguiano Rodriguez (Mexico)(sp0ke in Spanish): Mr. President, allow me first of all, to thank
you for having convened this meeting, which is taking
place at a time of great opportunity for Haiti. For the
delegation of Mexico, it is an honour to have here with
us President-elect Rene' Preval, whom we warmly
welcome. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Valdes for his presence and for the work that he has
done.

Mexico fully endorses the statement made by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana on behalf of the
Rio Group and, as a result, we will simply add a few
comments in our national capacity.

The latest elections on 7 February showed the
commitment of the people and the Government of Haiti
to democracy, as well as their willingness to move
forward along the path towards a solid and lasting
peace. I would like to acknowledge in particular the
Interim President, Mr. Latortue, who played a key role
in this transitional period, especially after the elections.
I would like also to take advantage of this opportunity
to congratulate President-elect Preval and to reiterate
the willingness of the Government of Mexico to
support the new Government and to continue
cooperating with it.

It is crucial that the upcoming second round of
legislative elections, as well as the municipal and local
elections, take place in a climate of peace, democracy
and transparency, the necessary conditions to foster
civic trust. Elections are part of a long and complex
process of consolidating democratic institutions. We
hope that in the post-electoral period all the political
forces in Haiti, as well as civil society, will maintain a
constructive dialogue for the sake of national
reconciliation. Women's organizations, which are
strong in Haiti, can also play a very constructive role in
this process.

As previous speakers have said, democracy and
peace cannot be consolidated in Haiti if they do not go
hand in hand with policies that truly promote social
justice and economic development in the short,
medium and long term. Although the definition and
implementation of such policies is primarily a national
responsibility, it is clear that Haiti will require the
sustained support of the international community over
the long term in order to overcome the challenges that
it now faces.
We trust that the recently created Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as other mechanisms such as the
Interim Cooperation Framework, will be used to focus
the attention of the international community on the
situation in Haiti and maintain it for as long as
necessary.

Through the Federal Electoral Institute, Mexico
provided technical assistance during the preparatory
stage of the elections and is prepared to continue
cooperating with Haiti in the area of consolidating
electoral and democratic institutions. Likewise, my
country is currently coordinating other cooperation
projects, and we are considering expanding our
activities in that area.

In multilateral and regional forums, Mexico will
continue to call for Haiti to receive the attention and
support of the international community which it
requires and which will be very useful to it. We believe
that it is crucial for the United Nations to maintain its
presence in Haiti through the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and we
believe that the Organization of American States has an
important role to play in the post-electoral period.
Likewise, we welcome the recent decision of the Heads
of Government of the Caribbean Community with
respect to Haiti's reintegration in the Community's
Councils.

Lastly, I would like to express our particular
gratitude to Ambassador Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
commitment to Haiti, as well as the civilian, military
and police personnel that make up MINUSTAH, for the
work that they have been doing.

