Mr. Schumacher (Germany): Germany fully
supports the position of the European Union as
presented by the Danish Presidency. We will therefore
restrict ourselves to some additional elements we deem
particularly important.

Germany has considered itself a major driving
force in the creation of an International Criminal Court
(ICC) from the very beginning. One of the major
lessons we have learned from the past is that impunity
for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
must not be allowed to stand.

The Security Council has been asked to invoke
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, beyond the
extension of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) mandate, to obtain immunity
for peace mission personnel. Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter requires the existence of a threat to the
peace, a breach of the peace or an act of aggression -
none of which, in our view, is present in this case. The
Security Council would thus be running the risk of
undermining its own authority and credibility.

It is the strong belief of Germany that - beyond
the case-by-case possibilities clearly provided for in
article 16 of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
Statute - the Security Council would do itself and the
world community a disservice if it adopted a resolution
under Chapter VII of the Charter to, in effect, amend
an important treaty ratified by 76 States.

We commend peace mission personnel, both
collectively and individually, for their admirable
performance under conditions which more often than
not are difficult and dangerous. It is no more than a
theoretical possibility that they would commit crimes
falling under the jurisdiction of the ICC. To assert the
necessity of excluding this merely theoretical
possibility would, in our view, be tantamount to
compromising both the Rome Statute and the integrity
of mission personnel.

We urge the members of the Security Council to
find a solution, on a case-by-case basis, which
safeguards the integrity of the Security Council, with
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as of
international peace missions and the international
treaty regimes.

