Mr. Quinlan (Australia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Amos, Mr. Simonovie
and Mr. Spoerri for their statements. Of course, we
also thank Minister for Foreign Affairs Caballero for
Guatemala's leadership on the protection of civilians.

I would also like to associate Australia with
the statement just delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians.

The situation in the Syria has rightly and inevitably
been an important focus this morning. The deliberate
targeting of civilians in the conflict is unacceptable and
violates international norms and law. Those responsible
must be held to account. My own country supports
calls for strong action in Syria under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

We also share the strong concern of others about
the other situations that have been mentioned this
morning, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, the Sudan and South Sudan.

I would like to focus my remarks, however briefly,
on the distinct body ofwork on the protection ofcivilians
that has evolved in the United Nations in recent years.
As has been said, we must rebuild consensus about that
work on the protection of civilians. The protection of
civilians is intrinsic to the purpose and the identity of
the United Nations. We must recall that it is also a legal
concept, rooted firmly in international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law.

I would like to highlight three protection of
civilians issues that require sustained attention. The
first is the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. There has been much progress recently
in ensuring that peacekeepers know how to fulfil
their mandates to protect civilians - that they have
the necessary training and guidance, in addition to
resources and capabilities.We would like to echo the
Secretary-General's recommendation that Member
States utilize the new Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support protection of
civilians modules fully. We encourage the Secretariat
to continue to refine them based on feedback from the
field. We are encouraged to hear about and we strongly
support the development of protection of civilians
operational guidance. My own country is continuing to
support the African Union in that area to develop its
own protection of civilians guidance.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host Government, and a
peacekeeping mission should not be there forever. The
protection of civilians will therefore only be sustainable
in the long term through strengthening national
capacities and institutions.

That was the subject of the fifth workshop on the
protection ofcivilians Australia co-hosted with Uruguay
two weeks ago. The results are being circulated, and the
key outcomes included agreement on the importance of
missions devoting sufficient attention and resources
to building host Government capacities; a recognition
of the importance of building rule of law and security
sector institutions that are trusted and responsive; and
a recognition of the need, which has been mentioned by
other speakers this morning, in relation to transitions
to begin planning for full handover of protection
of civilians responsibilities very early. Transition
processes need broad national ownership, should
emphasize capacity development, and need to involve
strong coordination with other partners.

My second issue is the forthcoming United Nations
Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty, which begins
next week. Small arms are the worst weapons of mass
destruction in terms of the numbers of civilians killed
and injured every day, and the life of an illicit firearm
can span generations. We can only really curb armed
violence through a treaty that includes small arms and
light weapons and ammunition. We recognize that the
treaty will present implementation challenges for many,
but that should not be an argument against a strong
and legally binding outcome. Australia is supporting
approximately 50 delegates from developing countries
to attend the Conference so that the outcome takes
their interests into account. We stand ready to provide
assistance for treaty implementation.

My third, and final, issue concerns the use of
powerful explosive weapons in populated areas
without proper regard for international humanitarian
law restrictions, which is a clear violation of the
limits of conflict. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendations on this. We encourage greater
collection ofdata on the issue. We welcome the Council's
attention to this threat in Syria, and we encourage the
Council to be systematic in its approach in this area.

In conclusion, we hope that today's discussions
will serve to strengthen consensus on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and to enhance the Council's
work in support of the protection of civilians. Such
protection, as we know, is fundamental to the Council's
purpose.

