Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to extend France's condolences to the Afghan
people and the families of the victims of the attacks
perpetrated on 2 and 5 September in Kabul. France
stands in solidarity with the Afghan Government in the
fight against terrorism. That is a joint commitment of
which we are all particularly aware on the eve of the
eighteenth anniversary of the attacks of 11 September
2001. I, too, thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing, in particular
with regard to the need to protect civilians and to
work for a political settlement to the conflict through
an intra-Afghan negotiation process. I also thank
Ambassador Djani and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, for their interventions. I especially welcome
the statement made by Ambassador Adela Raz, in
particular her support for the rights of Afghan women.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
shortly by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to focus on three main points.

First, France shares the deep concern over the
continuing high level of violence in Afghanistan.
Civilians continue to be targeted in deadly attacks in
violation of international humanitarian law. Women
and children continue to pay the highest price. That
is unacceptable. Violations of international law,
particularly regarding children's rights, must stop.
France welcomes all steps by the Afghan Government
to work to that end and to strengthen measures to ensure
the rights of Afghan women in all areas.

I also wish to express France's support for the
Secretary-General's call for secure and unhindered
humanitarian access to all Afghan territory.
Humanitarian and health-care personnel, as well as
civilian and humanitarian infrastructure, must be
protected in order to ensure that the needs of the Afghan
population are met.

I would also like to take advantage of Mr. Fedotov's
presence today to highlight the importance of the fight
against drug trafficking, which continues to fuel the
illicit economy, finance terrorist groups and threaten
the health of many Afghans. Efforts to combat drug
trafficking must continue, and France remains fully
committed to working with the Afghan authorities in
that regard.

My second point concerns the need to make every
effort to ensure that the presidential elections slated
for 28 September are held without incident in a free,
credible, transparent and inclusive manner. As the
Special Representative stressed clearly, it is critical to
avoid a new surge of violence as elections approach.

The registration of more than 500,000 new voters,
36 per cent of whom are women, is an encouraging
sign. However, all necessary measures must be taken
to ensure their effective and safe participation in
political life.

Further efforts must be made by the Afghan
authorities to restore public confidence in the security
and transparency of the elections. In that regard, France
welcomes the important work of the Afghan Government
to secure polling stations with the assistance of the
NATO mission, which must be completed. The future
president of Afghanistan will be responsible for
meeting the Afghan people's aspirations for peace. It is
particularly important that the upcoming elections be
held successfully in order to strengthen their legitimacy
with a view to future intra-Afghan negotiations.

Finally, I would like to stress the need to work
towards a negotiated and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
The concept of an Afghan-led peace process is more
relevant than ever. Such a process must be inclusive and
not exclude any segment of the population. The gains
made in the field ofjustice, the rule of law and respect
for fundamental freedoms must also be consolidated
in order to guarantee lasting peace. That will require
condemning and abandoning violence.

To that end, the resolute commitment of
Afghanistan's partners is essential. France, with
long-standing ties to Afghanistan, will do its part
and urges all countries of the region to actively and
unambiguously support the stabilization of Afghanistan
and to contribute to the establishment of lasting peace
in that country.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my country's
full support for the Afghan Government and for the
Organization's efforts to achieve lasting peace for
all Afghans. As we are now discussing the renewal
of UNAMA's mandate, I would like to acknowledge
the remarkable work that the Mission does on a daily
basis. In order to continue playing a vital role and to
support Afghanistan on the path to peace, UNAMA
must be able to rely on a robust and clear mandate and
the support of the Security Council. In that regard,
France welcomes the efforts made by Germany and
Indonesia and expresses to them its full support in the
achievement of a balanced text.

