Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Security Council for this opportunity to participate in
today's open debate on a subject that is very important
to the international community and which Spain
considers to be an undeniable priority. I thank Pakistan
for organizing this debate and I wish it luck and success
in its presidency of the Council during this difficult
month of January.

Terrorism is a crime that must be prosecuted solely
with the instruments that are granted by the rule of law.
Criminal justice must act in its fullest capacity, always
guaranteeing due process. Spain is fully convinced that
the fight against terrorism and the strict respect for
human rights not only are compatible but also reinforce
and complement each other. Terrorism is a threat to all
that must be combated with efficacy. To that end, we
need a strategy that guides the actions necessary at the
international, regional and national levels.

In 2006, the General Assembly adopted the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by consensus in
resolution 60/288. National and regional strategies
are also necessary to help avoid duplicating efforts
and eliminate existing dangerous gaps. In that regard,
I believe that the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force must intensify its work in order to facilitate
a better integration and coordination of national and
international actions.

Terrorism must be condemned firmly and
emphatically, and we must accept no justification
for it. That is compatible with undertaking a serious
analysis of the origins of violent radicalization and the
best way to combat it. Combating terrorism requires
the indispensable cooperation of the police and the
courts. However, we must keep in mind that the current
economic and social situation in different parts of the
world creates very fertile ground for the development of
violent radicalization. We must therefore develop new
strategies that conform to a concept in which security
and development are closely connected.

The events in Mali are a good example of what
happens when citizens do not have recourse to a
reliable security and development framework, because
terrorist groups can then take power, posing a serious
threat to the country in question and the international
community with their mafioso behaviour. For that
reason, and in the light of that preventive concept, it is
very important that the greatest possible effort be made
at the international level to use instruments, such as
the United Nations Development Programme, that can
provide better technical assistance on the ground.

Prevention is a very broad-based concept that
includes the development of intercultural dialogue
and brings civilizations closer together as a means of
combating fanaticism. It is important, therefore, to
highlight the value of the Alliance of Civilizations,
which in a short time has become a multidimensional
instrument of preventive diplomacy, encompassing the
political, social, economic, religious and legal spheres,
and, in addition, attaches great importance to the media
and other forms of communication.

The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy must
also develop a responsible interaction between local
communities and police forces. It must also give special
attention to social integration at the local level, to
dialogue with representatives of religious minorities,
and to the responsible education of religious leaders.
In the light of the foregoing, Spain is participating in
efforts to distribute educational material in schools that
will help develop pluralism, coexistence, tolerance and
respect towards others. In that area, organizations such
as UNESCO can make a major contribution.

One essential area is the Internet. Messages
must be spread throughout the Internet that discredit
terrorism, stripping it of the supposedly glorious
and generous image presented in many forums and
highlighting its religious doctrinal contradictions. With
that in mind, it is important to give a special role to
prestigious personalities, the victims of terrorism and
certain religious leaders. To that end, it is necessary
to work with the private sector in research to develop
databases, encourage the exchange of information,
and appropriately manage borders and procedures
in airports and train stations. The relationship with
the private sector is also of utmost importance in
guaranteeing the protection of tourism, of certain
infrastructure and mass events.

The victims of terrorism must play a central role
in national, regional and international strategies
because their stories carry moral weight and they
can be an effective instrument against terrorism
through their testimony and experience. A policy of
acknowledgement, support and assistance to victims
will be a strong factor in discrediting terrorism even
further.

Spain thanks the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force for its work in collecting and issuing
recommendations and best practices of States in
connection with victims. That work goes hand in
hand with that of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime with regard to victims and the response of
criminal justice to their needs. Despite the suffering
caused by terrorism in the past few years, it is regrettable
that there is still no binding international standard of
a universal nature aimed at protecting the rights of
victims. Spain considers it to be of utmost importance
that we promote the drafting of an international statute
for the victims of terrorism that would embody their
rights.

I wish to restate Spain's firm and active support
for the Working Group on Supporting and Highlighting
Victims of Terrorism, which is a part of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, with a view
to carrying out the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The Plan of Action on Victims of
Terrorism that was approved by the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum (GCTF) at the High-level Conference
on Victims of Terrorism held in Madrid in July 2012
is a good reference point because it collects proposals
addressed to the members of the GCTF and to any State
that wishes to participate.

In conclusion, Spain takes this opportunity to appeal
for consensus in the negotiation of an international
convention against terrorism, which would be an
essential building block in fighting the scourge.

