Mr. Eler (Turkey): We thank you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate. The Middle East is going
through a significant period of transition and change.
At the heart of the challenges we face in the region still
lies the Palestinian question. This issue continues to
undermine the prospects for regional peace, cooperation
and welfare.

Turkey has always supported a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel, and with us on an equal
footing under this roof. The revival of the Middle East
peace process and the resumption of comprehensive
peace negotiations between the parties for a just and
lasting solution have become increasingly crucial.

In this regard, we appreciate and support the
recent efforts of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry towards a breakthrough in revitalizing talks
between the parties. Another chance for a viable two-
State solution should not be missed. We encourage the
parties to commit to preparing a solid ground for talks
on the basis of 1967 borders, with agreed land swaps.
Parties must build confidence, including settlement
freeze, prisoner release and security arrangements for
both sides. We also believe that any provocative step
against holy sites, especially the Al-Aqsa mosque, must
be avoided.

I would like to reiterate once again that Turkey
is, as always, ready to contribute to all international
efforts towards ajust and lasting settlement.

Unfortunately, Israel's illegal settlement activities
in occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, remain a major obstacle to meaningful
negotiations. It is time to seriously commit to and
respect the established parameters ofthe peace process.
The worrying situation of the Palestinian prisoners
under Israeli custody continues to be yet another source
of great concern.

We are following closely the developments
regarding the recent European Union guidelines
banning funding and other provisions in relation to the
occupied territories.

It goes without saying that the blockade on Gaza
is inhumane, illegal and unsustainable. We repeat our
call on the Israeli Government to lift the blockade,
in accordance with its bilateral and multilateral
commitments. In the meantime, Turkey will continue
to fully support Palestinian reconciliation, which we
believe constitutes one of the bases ofa lasting solution
and peace in the Middle East. We strongly support the
goal of establishing a unity Government, embracing
the Palestinian people as a whole, within the timeframe
determined in Cairo on 14 May.

The achievement of Palestinian reconciliation
and unity must enjoy importance and priority in the
search for a fair, comprehensive and viable solution
to save Palestine from the yoke of occupation. Turkey
will continue to support the Peace Process, as well as
the rightful aspirations of the Palestinian people to
internationally recognized statehood in accordance
with United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the road map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

This is the third Ramadan that the Syrian people
are living the inhumane and indiscriminate attacks by
the Syrian regime. The situation in Syria is already
the biggest humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first
century. The crisis is increasingly threatening regional
peace and security, as well as posing a grave burden on
Syria's neighbours.

There is an immediate need for a political
solution paving the way for a democratic transition in
accordance with the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people. However, the prospect for a peaceful settlement
will remain elusive so long as the attacks of the regime
continue unabated with heavy weapons, including
ballistic missiles and chemical weapons. This is totally
unacceptable.

We must act urgently to stop the attacks of
the regime, protect the people of Syria, ensure the
withdrawal of foreign militia forces from Syria, and
start the democratic transition process. In this vein,
we once again call on the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and act urgently, resolutely and
collectively.

Let me conclude by reiterating that 2013 is vital for
peace in the Middle East, and it is now time for sincere
and concrete action. We need to seize any momentum
that will help to revitalize the talks between the parties
and take concerted action towards a two-State solution.

