Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for hosting this meeting
today on the pressing problem of Afghan narcotics. I,
too, would like to join other colleagues in expressing
my appreciation, and the appreciation of our
delegation, for the fine work that Ambassador Wang
Yingfan of China has carried out here during his tenure
as Permanent Representative of his country to the
United Nations. We will miss his wise counsel. We
have very fond memories of the work that we have
done together here. I would also like to join our
colleagues in welcoming Mr. Heraldo Mufioz of Chile
as he takes up his responsibilities as representative of
his country to the United Nations.

The 2003 Afghan opium poppy harvest may be as
large as that of 2002, which was a record year. The
resurgence of opium cultivation further erodes the
security environment in Afghanistan and threatens
reconstruction efforts. The message here is that we
should do more and should do it better. Trade in
Afghan opiates generates funds that corrupt
institutions, finance terrorism and insurgency and
destabilize the region. These funds also support the
organized crime syndicates involved in the grey arms
market. Moreover, the opium trade spreads drug abuse
and HIV/AIDS across the region, including to Russia
and Europe. A shift in opium poppy cultivation from
prime agricultural land to more remote areas, as
reported in the April 2003 Opium Rapid Assessment,
of the United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime, is an
alarming trend. It shows that poppy production is being
pushed into more marginal areas. It also demonstrates
the need to mainstream counter-narcotics programmes
into overall development assistance and the urgent
need to establish law and order in rural areas.

The opium economy cannot be addressed in
isolation. Enforcement of the poppy ban needs to be
increased. Farmers require viable alternatives to illicit
crops and credit is needed throughout rural
Afghanistan. As we fight production in Afghanistan,
we also need to deal with trafficking in neighbouring
States.

Counter-narcotic efforts will be most successful
in the larger context of economic and democratic
reform, but they cannot succeed until basic security
and the rule of law are established in areas outside of
Kabul. The United States is committed to helping build
the Afghan Transitional Authority's capacity to run
effective counter-narcotics programmes and reduce
poppy cultivation and trade through alternative
livelihood programmes. We are working with the
Transitional Authority to build a national police force.

My Government supports the United Kingdom's
lead on counter-narcotics and the German lead on
police training. We are showing this support with more
than $60 million in funding in these areas. My
Government also supports many projects developed by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We are
contributing to alternative development, drug treatment
and reduction programmes, and we are helping to build
Afghan national capacities for drug policy-making and
drug enforcement. In coordination with the German
Government, we are implementing a $26 million police
and justice programme that includes equipment and
training for the Afghan police and the establishment of
an identification card system and a communications
network for the police. We are in the process of
planning, with our German colleagues, an expansion of
police training in the provinces. Outside of Kabul,
including in Afghanistan's neighbouring States, we
need to seek new ways and methods of joining forces
through coordination, better information sharing,
regional approaches and, when the circumstances are
right, through combined or joint operations, as we have
done on certain occasions.

The United States strongly supports the efforts in
Afghanistan of the United Nations Office of Drugs and
Crime, as well as the proposals of the Paris Pact put
forward by Executive Director Costa in Paris last
month. My Government is also committed to helping
establish the border police, and we are working closely
with Germany and the rest of the international
community to coordinate assistance for this important
function. We are providing communications equipment
for the launch of the border police takeover of Kabul
International Airport as of 1 June. We remain
committed to working with Pakistan and Afghanistan's
Central Asian neighbours to strengthen legal and
institutional capacities to confront the drug trafficking
that poses as much a threat to their own integrity as it
does to that of Afghanistan. We urge Council members
and other Member States, especially those most
threatened by the trade in heroine originating in
Afghanistan to join in combating this evil trade before
its influence becomes even more pervasive.

The United States remains concerned at the
upswing in violence in both Kabul and the provinces,
most recently with the suicide attack that killed four
German personnel of the International Security
Assistance Force on 7 June. Taliban and Al Qaeda
elements now appear to be targeting foreigners,
military and civilian, rather than engaging coalition
forces. Coalition forces continue to root out these
elements in the field, while the Afghan national army
and Afghan police are trained. The Afghan national
army has deployed some of its first trained units to
work with United States special forces, most notably in
Bamian, and has received high marks. The Afghan
national army has also suffered its first casualties from
hostile fire.

We have helped to put up three provincial
reconstruction teams, or PRTs, in Gardez, Bamian and
Konduz, and a total of eight such teams are currently
planned with an option for creating more of them. We
are looking at ways to improve those teams and
enhance their capability. We believe provincial
reconstruction teams have made significant
contributions to stability within their area of
operations, and we are working with other countries to
lead additional such teams.

With regard to the national elections to be held in
June 2004, as called for by the Bonn Agreement, we
are told that UNAMA has begun preparatory work,
including voter education and registration programmes.
However, we have as yet to see a formal plan and the
associated budget for this effort, and time is growing
short. We understand that the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division proposes to fund the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in this area out of voluntary contributions at
a cost that is estimated at more than $100 million. The
United States urges all countries to provide the
maximum financial support possible for the electoral
process in Afghanistan.

We note with concern that the Afghan
Transitional Authority is facing a shortfall of $181
million in their recurring budget. It is critically
important that donors accelerate pledges to the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, and identify
additional funds to cover that gap. The United States
will soon disperse $20 million to the Trust Fund and
will review possible additional contributions. We
would urge other member countries in a position to do
so to contribute to the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund as soon as possible.

Finally, while our policy discussions here in the
Council today are important, ultimately the resources
that we devote to dealing with Afghanistan's serious
problems can make a decisive difference. In addition to
the considerable outlay for Operation Enduring
Freedom, the United States will expend almost $1
billion this year on reconstruction and humanitarian
relief and for budget support in Afghanistan. We invite
Council members and other Member States to provide
timely and significant financial support, as well.

