Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I am pleased to
see Pakistan, one of the founding members of our
Committee, holding the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Having been elected on many
occasions to the Security Council, your country,
Mr. President, inspires considerable respect because of
its contributions to the work of that body and to the
maintenance of peace in general. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Robert Serry for his very useful briefing on
the situation in the Middle East.

Recently, in October, our Committee and member
States warned the Security Council of the dangers of not
taking action in the light of the deteriorating situation in
Gaza. The conflict in November cost the lives of many
people, mostly Palestinians, and caused considerable
material damage to that enclave, which is still suffering
the impact of the last war. While welcoming the
diplomatic efforts of Egypt, the Secretary-General and
other global actors, we were concerned about the time
the Council took to respond. Pursuant to resolution
1860 (2009), the Council should now take immediate
measures to bolster the ceasefire, ensure the protection
of civilians and fully lift the blockade that has been
imposed by Israel.

The Committee welcomes the historic adoption
of resolution 67/19 by the General Assembly, which
is the first step towards full recognition of the State
of Palestine as a State Member of the United Nations,
a matter which is currently before the Council. The

resolution has created a new reality that can give new
impetus to the peace process and promote respect for
international law. During its conferences and meetings
in 2013, our Committee will deploy considerable efforts
to analyse the resolution's specific impact in legal,
political and socioeconomic terms.

The changing situation on the ground is a cause
of major concern. We condemn the confiscation of
Palestinian revenues and the destabilization of its
institutions by Israel, and we call for them to cease
immediately. All financial disputes must be settled
through negotiation. We thank the donors who have
increased their emergency aid and call on others to
fulfil their unpaid pledges as soon as possible. Our
roundtable on assistance to be held in Rome on 27 and
28 February, and to which Council delegations are
invited, will focus on the new opportunities and the
new challenges that result from resolution 67/ 19.

Our committee is encouraged by the diplomatic
community's strong condemnation of the new settlement
programmes decided upon by Israel, particularly in
E-1. Those programmes must be stopped immediately.
We would like to thank all members of the Council
who have spoken out in framework of the "15 minus 1"
configuration. Nevertheless, we note that the Security
Council remains paralysed on that issue.

Our Committee will continue to remind States
that they have the responsibility not to contribute to
violations committed by Israel and to ensure that Israel
respects the Fourth Geneva Convention, as reaffirmed
by the International Court of Justice. We will continue
to advocate for Palestinian unity and a resumption of
the peace process on the internationally accepted bases.

The time has now come for all partners, especially
the European Union, the League of Arab States, a
revitalized Quartet and the Security Council to work
hand in hand on bold initiatives to turn 2013 into a
year of peace. They can count on our Committee's full
support in this endeavour.

