Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the High
Representative for his briefing today and for the work
of his Office in maintaining peace and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has long been a very
important and almost totemic issue for the Council, if
one goes back to the start of the conflict in the early
19905. The United Kingdom remains committed to
the continuing role of the High Representative and his
Office. The Office of the High Representative remains
the final authority and theatre regarding the civilian
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and that includes our support for the use of
Bonn powers if the situation requires.

We welcome today's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2443 (2018), which authorizes the European
Union (EU)-led Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea) for
a further 12 months. The consensus on the resolution
demonstrates the commitment of the United Kingdom
and the international community to security in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Office ofthe High Representative
and EUFOR Althea are crucial vehicles for enabling the
international community to support the maintenance
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's security, stability and
territorial integrity, which are vital to the country's
future as a modern democratic European State.

As I said, there was once a time when the Council
dealt with Bosnia every day of its existence. I have had
the privilege of working on the Balkans file for more
than 20 years, on and off. I am somewhat saddened
by what the High Representative tells us of how
some issues are still unresolved and how they repeat
themselves. But I also want to point out that the hard-
won peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
are fragile and should not be taken for granted. While
the current situation remains calm, threats to security
remain, alongside new challenges such as increases in
migration, as the High Representative mentioned. That
is a very important issue for the EU and for Europe. It is
our regional crisis, as it were, and something in which
the EU has invested a huge amount of time, effort,
money, coaching and patience. We will be hearing later
from the EU Ambassador, who will be able to outline
the EU's position more clearly.
I wanted to briefly address what the Russian
Ambassador said in his statement before the vote. Russia
is a member of the Contact Group and of the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We would much rather see Russia
trying to do everything it can to consolidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State and to help it modernize and
make progress towards the Euro-Atlantic institutions
that since the Dayton Peace Agreement was signed
have been the foundation of its existence as a modern
State in its region, Europe. I think that would be the
best service that we could all do for Bosnia.

Turning to the subject of the elections, the United
Kingdom welcomed the calm and orderly conduct of
the elections, which were generally competitive, but we
continue to be concerned about the level of the ethnic
divisions in politics and the reports ofirregularities. The
inability to resolve key issues of election reform prior
to the elections was disappointing and is a clear and
ongoing concern. The divisive and nationalist political
rhetoric, which was especially loud in the run-up to
the elections, is dangerous and creates an environment
where real long-term security and stability will be
difficult to achieve.

It is also backwards-looking, and what Bosnia
needs most of all is to move forward. Other countries
in the Balkan regions are moving forward and making
progress on their EU accession arrangements. Where
they wish to, they are making progress with getting
closer to NATO. That benefits regional security and
stability, and Bosnia and Herzegovina once again
risks being left behind in that regional modernization
and progress. In particular, those in positions of
responsibility should act in the interests of all citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina rather than spreading
divisive sentiment.

I want to echo what the High Representative said
about waiting until those leaders have taken office
before we properly hold them to account. I also want
to make it clear that we will hold them to account.
Political leaders need to show leadership and tolerance
and they need to help modernize their country. At a
crucial time following the elections, political leaders
must work together in a cooperative manner to form
Governments quickly so that progress can be made
on key reforms, Euro-Atlantic integration and the 5+2
agenda. Those reforms are important because they
will bring improvements to the day-to-day lives of all
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's citizens. They are also
important because they help to embed national and
regional security and stability - an issue that, as I said
at the beginning of my statement, has long occupied
the Council.

Those in positions of responsibility should act in
the interests of all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and it is especially concerning that the rhetoric
and reluctance to compromise are indicative of the
wider political environment. We will be watching
developments closely. It is also important that the
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently
address all judgments regarding elections in order to
ensure that all citizens have the ability to participate
fully in the democratic process, as they all deserve. It
is regrettable that many of those issues have remained
unresolved over several election cycles, which is a
significant amount of time. Any resolution to those
issues needs to meet international standards and uphold
the principle of equality for all citizens, including the
ability to elect officials and be elected.

Conversely, we welcome the progress made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina on certain aspects of reform,
for example in the adoption of agricultural and energy
strategies and the eventual adoption of the criminal
procedure code - although the delay in doing so was
regrettable. We have also welcomed the continued
cooperation on women and peace and security and
encourage that to continue.

Finally, I want to echo what the High Representative
said about reconciliation. Srebrenica remains the worst
massacre in Europe since the end of the Second World
War. Nine thousand Muslim men and boys were taken
from their homes and murdered. It is absolutely vital
that reconciliation efforts be made in genuine earnest
and accelerated.

