Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Prosecutor
Bensouda for her briefing and for the twenty-third
report on the situation in the Sudan.

At this time last year, New Zealand expressed deep
concern and called for accountability for the serious
crimes committed (see S/PV.7460). The situation has
not notably improved since then. Civilians in Darfur
continue to suffer from the consequences of conflict.
The past year also saw further attacks on peacekeepers,
some fatal, and the human rights and humanitarian
situations remained dire.

As noted by the Prosecutor, all five International
Criminal Court (ICC) indictees remain at large.
Resolution 1593 (2005) placed an obligation on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully and to
provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor, as well as urged other Member States to
cooperate. Those obligations have been widely ignored.
Nor has there been any meaningful accountability at
the national level. It is not surprising that the victims
are losing hope that justice will ever be done.

The Sudan's ongoing non-cooperation with the
Court amounts to non-compliance with a Council
resolution and its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations. While this mostly relates to the four
Government of the Sudan indictees, the Sudan also
has not responded to the ICC requests for assistance
in the case against Abdallah Banda, a rebel group
indictee allegedly responsible for a deadly attack
against African Union peacekeepers in South Darfur
in 2007. Over the years, the Secretary-General has
relayed 11 findings of non-cooperation to the Council
with regard to that referral.

During the current reporting period, President
Al-Bashir has crossed international borders, and
further findings of non-cooperation may follow in the
coming months. The Council has yet to respond to
those findings in any meaningful way. While not every
member of the Council is an ICC State party, we share
a common interest in ensuring that the decisions of the
Council are complied with. When that does not happen,
the credibility and effectiveness of this institution
are undermined, and the message is sent that Council
decisions can be ignored without consequences. That
should be of concern to all those who value the role,
reputation and legitimacy of this organ.

In December, my delegation made two proposals
that we believe could help end the current malaise in
the Council's consideration of the issue. We believe
they are no less relevant today.

First, as noted by Ms. Bensouda, the Council needs
to be more structured in its consideration of the findings
of non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice for dealing with them. In most instances, the
Council does not even discuss them. In our View, when
a finding of non-cooperation is received, the Council
should discuss it. As we would with any other issue,
we should consider what tools the Council has at its
disposal to deal with the issue, whether it be a draft
resolution or statement, or something short of that, such
as a letter from the Council or a meeting with the country
concerned, and then the Council can determine on a
case-by-case basis what response is most appropriate.

We accept that the Council may not always agree on
how to respond. But if the Council were to ignore every
issue where agreement was difficult, we would hardly
ever meet. Simply continuing to not respond is neither
productive nor credible, which goes to the effectiveness
of the Council and its willingness to stand by its own
decisions. The Banda case seems an obvious place to
start in implementing a more structured approach. We
will continue to work with other Council members on
this in the coming months.

Secondly, we need to give serious thought to how
we can achieve a more productive relationship with the
Government of the Sudan. There is a clear need for the
United Nations and for the Council to consider what can
be done to change the nature of the current relationship
with Khartoum, proceeding from a firm understanding
of the current situation on the ground.

We have been encouraged by the initial progress
made under the new leadership of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in particular with the tripartite meetings
among the Government, the African Union and the
United Nations. But there is a long way to go. Those
positive steps have so far done little to resolve the
serious issues UNAMID faces with access and visa
issuance. But we believe the Council should look at
how it can best support a more constructive engagement
with the Government of the Sudan, including by
considering options such as a Council visit to the
Sudan. We are clear-eyed about the challenges involved
in forging a new relationship, and we need to see a
greater willingness by the Government of the Sudan to
engage constructively.

We have set up some tangible ways that we believe
the Council can show that it is willing to do more than
just talk about the protection of civilians. There is no
guarantee they will succeed, but given the alternative,
which is a continuation of the status quo, we believe it
is at least worth trying.

