Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
10 March, the crash of an Ethiopian Airlines plane
resulted in the tragic deaths ofmore than 100 passengers
and crew members, including Ethiopian and Chinese
nationals and citizens of more than 30 countries,
among them United Nations staff. China mourns the
death of the victims and expresses deep condolences to
their families.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing and I appreciate
his efforts. Ihave listened carefully to the statements of
the Afghan National Security Adviser, Mr. Hamdullah
Mohib, and the civil society representative, Ms. Tapesh.
The situation in Afghanistan is now at a critical
juncture, as the country has many important issues on
its political agenda. At the same time, the country's
security situation is a cause for concern and its
humanitarian situation remains challenging. We
hope that the country will achieve lasting peace and
development, which are not only in the best interest
of the Afghan people but also of regional security,
stability, peace and prosperity.

The international community should fulfil its
commitment by continuing its strong support for
Afghanistan.

First, we should promote political dialogue in the
country. We call on all parties in Afghanistan to act for
the country's greater benefit and to seize this significant
opportunity for political reconciliation to embark on
the path of development. The international community
should support an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led and
inclusive political process and assist the Government
in developing a comprehensive, inclusive and realistic
road map for political reconciliation, back the
Government's efforts to promote political dialogue and
encourage the Taliban to return to the negotiating table
as soon as possible. It should also support international
mechanisms such as the Kabul process and the Moscow
format to that end.

Secondly, we should facilitate the successful
holding of elections. Since the presidential election will
be held this year, we hope that the new Independent
Election Commission will scale up its preparation for
that election. We also hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
provide technical support to the Commission. In
addition, in the light of the developments on the ground,
UNAMA should adjust its mandate. The Mission and
other mechanisms should undertake a comprehensive
and in-depth assessment of the country's reconstruction
in the new conditions. All stakeholders across the
political spectrum in Afghanistan should strengthen
their unity, consider the maintenance of national
political stability a shared responsibility and resolve
their differences through dialogue.

Thirdly, the international community must help
Afghanistan to improve its security environment.
In 2018, fighting inside Afghanistan resulted in a
record number of civilian casualties. Statistics from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime also
show that drug production in the country remains
high. The international community should strengthen
cooperation so as to help the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces to build capacity. It should also
assist the country in promoting alternative development
activities, combating Afghan terrorists harboured
by the Eastern Turkestan Islamic Movement terrorist
organization and effectively overcoming such threats
as terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking.

Fourthly, we must effectively help to improve
the livelihoods of the Afghan people. In the past five
years, there has been a significant increase in the
number of people living in poverty in the country.
The international community should continue to help
the Government and the people of Afghanistan to
improve their lives by honouring its assistance pledges,
helping the country to fulfil its development potential
and supporting its integration into regional economic
cooperation. It should also assist the millions of
drought-affected Afghans, improve the humanitarian
situation of the Afghan refugees in the neighbouring
countries and support their return to their homeland at
an early date.

China has always supported the political process in
Afghanistan and the early achievement of an inclusive
political reconciliation. Through the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group,
the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign Ministers'
dialogue and other multilateral mechanisms, China
has always supported the political process and other
areas of Afghanistan. Ambassador Deng Xijun,
Special Envoy for Afghanistan of the Chinese Foreign
Ministry, has participated in all relevant international
conferences on Afghanistan, actively engaged with all
sides and provided good offices, thereby contributing
to the political process on China's behalf. China will
continue its efforts and support the early resumption
of the quadrilateral coordination group, comprising
China, Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States, to
facilitate the Afghan peace and reconciliation process.

China actively supports Afghanistan's

reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. Within the framework of the Belt
and Road Initiative, China and Afghanistan have
strengthened cooperation in all fields, including trade.
The road transport corridors between the countries have
been launched, with freight trains regularly travelling
to Afghanistan. Direct flights and trains between the
two countries have been operating steadily. China has
provided humanitarian assistance in the amount of more
than 60 million yuan renminbi to the drought-affected
people in Afghanistan. The Red Cross Society of China
launched an assistance programme for children with
serious illnesses in Afghanistan. By the end of 2018,
it had arranged for 100 children with congenital heart
disease in Afghanistan to receive treatment in China,
all of whom were cured and returned to the country.

China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
actively implement the memorandum of understanding
between the two countries on the joint promotion of
the Belt and Road initiative and to promote strong
cooperation in the areas of trade, energy, health care,
fibre-optic cable communication, tax supervision,
intellectual property rights, think tanks and other fields.

China is ready to work with the international
community to contribute to security, stability,
development and prosperity in Afghanistan.

