Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will deliver this
statement on behalf of the three co-penholders: Kuwait,
Belgium and Germany. Let me thank Mr. Rajasingham,
Director of the Coordination Division of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
their comprehensive briefings.

We would like to extend our heartfelt gratitude and
deep respect to all humanitarian and medical workers
throughout Syria, in the region and at Headquarters for
their tireless efforts to care for the affected population.

The figures given by OCHA speak for themselves.
With the Syrian conflict entering its ninth year,
the humanitarian needs in Syria remain huge. Our
response must be needs-based and comply fully with
humanitarian principles. It must also include cross-line
and cross-border assistance, as mandated by the Security
Council. In areas of Syria that recently shifted control,
continuity of services must be ensured. Humanitarian
access must be provided in an unconditional, safe,
timely, unhindered and sustained manner. The Syrian
humanitarian crisis is at its core a protection crisis.

Today I would like to focus on the following
aspects: the situation in the north of the country, that is,
Idlib and the north-east; the protection of returnees and
refugees; and the recent Brussels Conference.

First, concerning the situation in Idlib, we are
gravely concerned at the recent increase in violence
against civilians and their infrastructure. Shelling and
air strikes have killed civilians, including women and
children. We strongly condemn the loss of civilian lives
as a result of these attacks. We remind all parties of
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including humanitarian principles, and human
rights law that require them to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

As penholders, we would like to amplify OCHA's
clear and repeated assessment that any military offensive
would lead to an uncontrollable and unmanageable
humanitarian disaster. A breakdown of existing support

pipelines would multiply the human suffering. There
would be no winners.

The fight against terrorism must not impede
impartial humanitarian action. We therefore reiterate
our call for the continual and faithful implementation
of the Russia-Turkey memorandum of understanding.
We stand united in our call for a nationwide cessation of
hostilities, in accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

Secondly, with respect to the north-east, the
displacement situation is particularly unsettling, with
a new influx of displaced persons from Baghouz to
Hasakah province. Camps for internally displaced
persons are overcrowded, and the most important
point of refuge, Al-Hol camp, is operating far beyond
capacity. Ninety per cent of the people in Al-Hol are
women and children, and many are in poor health.
During the last week alone, 16 people died en route to
or after arriving at Al-Hol.

The special needs of the most vulnerable, including
the elderly and the disabled, must be urgently addressed.
We call on all parties to the conflict to allow sustained
access to displaced persons, including at screening
sites. The United Nations and its partners must be in a
position to provide needs-based assistance to all people
in need without delay or bureaucratic impediment.

Thirdly, concerning the protection of returnees
and refugees, the fragile situation in Rukban and
other parts of the country shows why the Council
needs to closely follow the security situation on the
ground. All returns and relocations must be voluntary,
safe, dignified and well-informed. Compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law is an
obligation. Let us be clear: those who favour more and
speedy relocations bear the burden of proof that the
right conditions are in place. Family unity needs to be
ensured during all phases. Key protection mechanisms
such as proper monitoring along routes and at screening
and reception centres must be in place at all times.
People willing to return must receive reliable safety
guarantees. The outcome of the intention surveys
carried out in Rukban made it clear that concerns go
beyond personal security. Other important factors
are access to documents and property and confirmed
information on amnesty and conscription procedures.

This burden of proof does not lie with the
humanitarian community or donors. In the first
instance, it is essential to provide regular, free and
unimpeded access by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to returnees and
refugees. That is the litmus test we are facing.

In the case of Rukban, additional assistance must
be made available to the camp population as soon as
possible. We cannot accept undue delays as in the past.
That would raise serious questions as to the willingness
of the parties concerned to help those in utter need and
without protection. Reports point to urgent medical
needs, in particular among children and young adults.
The quest for long-term solutions cannot distract
us from addressing the urgent needs that exist in the
camp now.

Lastly, the Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, held under the leadership
of High Representative Mogherini and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Lowcock, sent an unambiguous
sign of solidarity to the Syrian people. At more than
$9 billion, the pledges reached an unprecedented level.
As penholders, we would like to thank all donors for
their contributions, which will sustain a high level of
humanitarian engagement in 2019. As penholders,
we are committed to delivering on the pledges we
announced at the conference. We kindly ask all donors
to make their funding available as soon as possible.

The conference stressed the importance of
adherence to international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict and put special emphasis on the
urgent need for the improved protection of civilians and
humanitarian access to all people in need inside Syria.
The Conference renewed the strong commitment to the
United Nations-led political process under the guidance
of Special Envoy Pedersen. Obviously, there can be no
sustainable peace without justice. True reconciliation
in Syria requires a thorough investigation of breaches
of international law and that perpetrators be held
accountable. As a concrete step towards increased
accountability, we support the strong call to release
persons arbitrarily detained and underline that the
utmost needs to be done in that regard. The Conference
also acknowledged the extraordinary generosity of
neighbouring countries and host communities in
providing refuge and support for millions of displaced
people. The international community remains
committed to substantially supporting those efforts.

