Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China): The delegation of
China thanks Ambassadors Jurica, Verbeke and Urbina
for their respective briefings on the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). China appreciates the effectiveness of the
work of the three Ambassadors and their respective
teams.

We appreciate the fact that the 1267 Committee
has been making steady progress in all its work. The
Committee has made fresh progress in further
improving the integrity and accuracy of its sanctions
list, improving the transparency of its work,
strengthening its website and increasing the exchanges
and dialogue with the Member States and competent
international organizations, fully acknowledging such
progress.

China believes that maintaining the authority and
understanding of the Committee requires the vigorous
support of all Member States of the United Nations.
China encourages all countries, in dealing with issues
involved, to provide the Committee with detailed
information to the greatest extent possible so as to
improve the effectiveness and fairness of the sanctions
mechanism. China supports the Committee in
continuing to improve its working methods -
including its listing and de-listing procedures - and in
increasing its cooperation with mechanisms such as the
CTC.

China congratulates Ambassador Jurica on his
assumption of the chairmanship of the CTC. We
believe that he will lead the Committee to further
success in its work.

Since the previous briefing to the Council on the
CTC, the Committee has adopted a revised
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
implementation of the plan has had a positive impact
on the work of both the CTC and the CTED - a fact
that China appreciates. We have also noted that the
CTC has done a great deal of effective work in
reviewing Preliminary Implementation Assessments,
carrying out technical assistance visits to Member
States and increasing the transparency of its work.

China believes that Security Council resolution
1805 (2008) has not only extended and clearly defined
the mandate of the CTED, but has also pointed out the
direction for the future work of the CTC. China hopes
that the CTC and the CTED will follow the provisions
set out in resolution 1805 (2008), will continue to
follow the principles of cooperation, transparency and
even-handedness and will advance their work in all
areas, thereby making the Security Council's counter-
terrorism mechanisms more comprehensive and
effective.

China welcomes the fact that the mandate of the
1540 Committee has been renewed without difficulty.
We hope that the Committee will, in accordance with

resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1810 (2008), formulate a
comprehensive and balanced programme of work as
soon as possible in order to effectively promote the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). China values the role played by the Committee,
and we have been participating constructively and
actively in the Committee's work in all areas. We are
prepared to continue our active support for that work
and to contribute to facilitating the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to building
consensus on non-proliferation and to promoting
cooperation on non-proliferation throughout the world.

Over the past few months, despite the
international community's tireless efforts to combat
terrorism, terrorists and their violent acts have
continued to be widespread worldwide. Terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to the peace and
security of the international community. Therefore, the
United Nations should continue to play a central role in
the international fight and cooperation against
terrorism.

China believes that the Security Council's
adoption of resolutions 1805 (2008) and 1810 (2008) in
swift succession demonstrated its members' common
resolve to strengthen its counter-terrorism machinery
and to strongly combat terrorism by sending a positive
signal to the international community. China hopes that
the three Committees will continue to pool their
resources, improve their effectiveness and pay closer
attention in their work to the views of developing
countries and their counter-terrorism needs, so that the
Council's counter-terrorism mechanisms can better
meet the expectations of all Member States.

In September, the General Assembly will assess
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That assessment will be of
great importance for the counter-terrorism work of the
United Nations. China supports the three Committees
in actively implementing the Global Strategy within
their respective mandates, so that the Security Council
and the General Assembly can complement and
coordinate with each other in their counter-terrorism
efforts and can create favourable conditions for
assessing the Strategy.
