Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your country,
the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
your initiative to convene this open debate on the very
important issue of the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

Indeed, the Middle East, as the cradle of the three
monotheistic religions, might have served as a true
bridge between the peoples of the world. Regrettably,
however, for several decades it has remained a zone of
tension. Instability in that part of the world naturally
affects all other regions of the planet. Need I recall that
no issue more fully encapsulates all the resentments
prevalent in the region than the Palestinian question?

We believe that the settlement of the problem can
no longer be postponed. The outlines of a peaceful
settlement to the conflict, involving the creation of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State living in
peace and security within secure and recognized
borders alongside the State of Israel, have long been
well defined. It is therefore high time to work to
achieve that noble objective.

In that regard, it is important to ensure the
effective implementation of the relevant resolutions of
our Organization, especially those of the Security
Council, including resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January,
which calls for a ceasefire, the lifting of the blockade
against Gaza and the resumption of negotiations with a
view to reaching a comprehensive peace. We call for
the timely resumption of the peace process and
encourage Egypt's efforts to achieve reconciliation
among the Palestinians.

The situation has become all the more critical as
a result of Israel's recent aggression against the Gaza
Strip, which not only exacerbated the rift between the
Israeli and Palestinian communities, but also and above
all unleashed a humanitarian disaster in Gaza. We
commend the Secretary-General's initiative to dispatch
a fact-finding mission to Gaza in order to investigate
war crimes committed by the Israeli army. We also
applaud the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and other
humanitarian organizations, who are doing outstanding
work in the field.

Allow me to reiterate the constant and tireless
support of the people and Government of Mali for the
just and noble cause of the Palestinian people on the
path to comprehensive peace, which we all fervently
desire. Mali remains firmly convinced that, with the
support of the international community and the
solidarity of all peace- and justice-loving peoples, the
valiant people of Palestine will regain their national
rights, especially their right to a sovereign and
independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

