Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras)(interpretation from Spanish): The Secretary-General's report of 1 July 1996 on
the situation in Abkhazia indicates that, in general, there
has been no progress in the political negotiations between
Georgia and Abkhazia and that the peace process remains
at a standstill. The parties have not yet resolved their
differences to achieve a prompt solution to the conflict,
including the political status of Abkhazia within the State
of Georgia, with respect for Georgia's sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

In the light of this situation, Honduras believes that it
is necessary for the international community to intensify its
efforts to promote political dialogue between the parties, so
that they may achieve a broad agreement on those aspects
necessary to move the peace process forward - that is, the
safe return to their homes of refugees and displaced
persons, in accordance with international law and as
established in the Quadripartite Agreement of 4 April 1994,
and an agreement on a special status for Abkhazia, while
maintaining the territorial integrity of Georgia.

For this reason, we urge the parties, especially the
Abkhaz party, to make progress towards a political solution
of the conflict, to cooperate with the steps being taken in
this respect by the Secretary-General, with the assistance of
the Russian Federation as facilitator, and to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in Abkhazia,
we are pleased that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in cooperation with
non-governmental organizations, has begun three projects
in the Gali region to promote the reintegration of people
who have returned to their places of origin, and that
consultations are under way for the implementation of the
programme for the protection and promotion of human
rights, which has been accepted by the parties, and which
will undoubtedly improve the observance of human rights
in Abkhazia.

In spite of the insecurity and instability prevailing in
the Gali region, and despite the threat posed by mines to
the safety and security of the personnel of the Observer
Mission and its activities, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) continues to fulfil its
mandate and is cooperating satisfactorily with the peace-
keeping force of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and with UNHCR. As the Secretary-General's
report so rightly emphasized, the threat of mines is grave.
It is not confined to a single region, and could have
serious consequences when the repatriation of refugees
and internally displaced persons resumes. In this respect,
we urge the parties to prevent the laying of mines and to
cooperate fully with UNOMIG.

My delegation believes that while the peace process
is being reactivated through dialogue and mutual
concessions by the parties, the presence of the Mission
remains necessary. That is why we voted in favour of the
resolution extending its mandate. We hope that the parties
will show their desire for peace through the adoption of
concrete measures leading to a political solution to the
Abkhaz conflict.

