Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Quinlan, Loulichki and
Kim Sook, for their comprehensive briefings today and
for the effective manner in which they have taken on
leadership of those Committees.

Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat to
international peace and security. No Member State can
adequately respond to the challenges of terrorism by
acting alone. Only through continued cooperation will
the international community be able to tackle a problem
that transcends geographical borders.

The United Nations has an important role to play. It
is crucial that the States Members of the United Nations
strive to work together in an ever more collaborative
and comprehensive manner. True collaboration requires
breadth and depth of cooperation. A comprehensive
approach requires making full use of all the tools
available to us.

The three Committees under discussion today are
powerful tools. We fail in our responsibilities if we do
not use them effectively, thoroughly and creatively to
combat the threat of terrorism.

Al-Qaida sanctions play an important role in the
fight against terrorism by imposing targeted financial
sanctions on Al-Qaida operatives, denying them arms
and restricting their travel, in other words, limiting
their ability to carry out terrorist acts.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
unanimous adoption of resolution 2083 (2012), which,
inter alia, extended the mandates of the Office of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team. The United
Kingdom would like to pay tribute both to Kimberley
Prost and to the Monitoring Team for their continuing
exemplary work. We will continue to work with members
of the Sanctions Committee, the Ombudsperson and
other interested parties to embed the changes agreed
under the new resolution to further enhance the
Committee's important work. For the regime to be
effective, sanctions must be diligently implemented.
We welcome recent work by the Committee under
Ambassador Quinlan's leadership to focus on
implementation, including through consideration of
outreach and technical support activities.

The threat that chemical, biological or nuclear
materials may proliferate to terrorists has been a
growing concern to the international community
over the past decade. The year 2014 will mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004), the only
international instrument designed to prevent terrorists
from acquiring those weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). But the resolution will only ever be as
effective as the will of the States Members of the
United Nations to implement its measures. For that
reason, the United Kingdom urges States that have yet
to meet their reporting obligations to do so. We call on
all States to design and execute national action plans to
fight trafficking in WMDs.

We realize that the immense scale of the challenge
means that Governments and civil society must act in
concert to fight the threat. We therefore urge States
requiring support for implementation to approach the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for assistance. Our goal must be universal
implementation of the resolution by 2014, and to
achieve that the Committee and its Group of Experts,
whose work we commend, must also play their part in
continuing to seek opportunities to form partnerships
with international organizations and regional agencies
that have the resources to match those requests for
assistance, including by using the consolidated list of
assistance requests as soon as possible.

The United Kingdom continues to welcome the
recognition by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) of the need for States to pursue
a cooperative approach to defeat terrorism. We wish
to mark our deep appreciation of Mr. Michael Smith's
very effective leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as he nears the
completion of his term.

Acts of terrorism and the threat of such acts touch on
much of the work of the United Nations. It is important
that all the relevant components of the United Nations
system work together to counter terrorist challenges
while avoiding duplication across its infrastructure.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
are key tools to that end.

Today, in particular, the United Kingdom urges
the three Committees whose reports we have heard to
continue to intensify their collaborative efforts. We are
grateful to Ambassador Kim Sook for his briefing on
the joint work of the Committees and encourage further
collaboration along those lines.

The United Nations must also strive to work
effectively as much as possible with other multinational
organizations working on countering terrorism. For
instance, we look forward to increased cooperation as
a result of the regular European Union-United Nations
counter-terrorism dialogue. The United Kingdom also
recognizes the important contribution that the Global
Counterterrorism Forum can make to tackling the
terrorist threat and encourages the United Nations to
continue its work with that body.
The international community has a collective
responsibility for tackling terrorism. Only through
continued cooperation and recognition of the need to
strengthen collaborative efforts will States be able to
effectively counter terrorism.

