Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Mr. Zahir Tanin, and by
Mr. Joao Miguel Ferreira de Serpa Soares, Under-
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel. We also welcome the presence
of Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku.

Peru recognizes the important progress made in
strengthening the situation in Kosovo over the past
11 years. However, its real progress and prosperity
transcend political and economic reforms, requiring
mechanisms for dialogue and reconciliation. In this
regard, we are concerned about the serious exacerbation
of tensions among the various strata of the political
class, as noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/461), which has regrettable repercussions in
unfortunate social incidents. Political leaders are called
upon to set an example of prioritizing the interests of
the wider public, thereby contributing to strengthening
trust and good-neighbourly relations.

In this regard, we consider the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina to be imperative.
To that end, we invoke the commitment of the parties
to resolution 1244 (1999) and the Brussels Agreement,
and we call on them to take, in a constructive manner
and in good faith, the necessary steps to resume the
dialogue facilitated by the European Union.

We also believe that it is essential to respect
and strengthen the rule of law and the legitimacy of
institutions. We therefore highlight the work of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as
well as the role of the Specialist Chambers in support
of this task. Along those lines, we welcome the pending
judicial hearings and the entry into force of the new
penal code and the initiatives aimed at combating
corruption and organized crime, in accordance with
the law, human rights and international agreements
and standards. In that regard, we regret the incident on
28 May involving a staff member of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and hope that the facts will soon be clarified. Peru
reaffirms the responsibility of Governments to respect
the immunity of United Nations officials and of those
officials to act impartially in carrying out their duties.

However, we also want to recognize the initiatives
undertaken by UNMIK, in coordination with United
Nations system entities, to promote human rights, the
empowerment of young people, gender equality and
the protection of children and intercommunal dialogue.
All of that must be accompanied by the full recognition
and establishment of guarantees for the population's
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity, including full
respect for the linguistic rights of minorities, a safe and
dignified return for internally displaced persons, and
the protection of historical and cultural heritage.

We would like to conclude by reiterating our
appreciation of the work of undertaken by UNMIK, the
Kosovo Force, the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
international bodies committed to the shared task of
building sustainable peace in Kosovo.

