Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Zebari, at
today's meeting of the Security Council. We also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, Mr. Qazi, and Ambassador Khalilzad
of the United States for their briefings.

China strongly condemns the attack on the holy
shrine of Imam Ali al-Hadi in Iraq today. We call upon
the various factions of Iraq to maintain unity and
exercise restraint so as to stabilize the situation as soon
as possible.

Since the end of the Iraq war, the people of that
country have been traversing an extremely unusual
path, having overcome enormous difficulties under
exceptional circumstances. The people of Iraq have
basically completed the political transition as provided
by resolution 1546 (2004). At present, Iraq is entering
a new phase of development, where unity, stability and
development are the three major objectives that it is
striving to attain.

First, unity is the basis for stability. All ethnic
and religious groups should place the overall interest of
the nation above everything else by facilitating
dialogue, overcoming differences and promoting
reconciliation on such sensitive issues as the
constitution and legislation. The Government of Iraq
should spare no efforts in seeking the views of people
in all walks of life, with a View to reaching consensus
on a programme that satisfies all parties. In this regard,
we appreciate the constructive efforts made by the
Constitutional Review Committee and the Independent
High Electoral Commission.

Secondly, stability is the prerequisite for
development. Undeniably, how to improve the security
situation is the biggest challenge that Iraq now faces. It
will determine the future course of political, economic

and social development in Iraq. We have taken note of
the measures taken by the Government of Iraq and by
the Multinational Force in order to improve the
security situation and of the results achieved in this
regard. We hope that the Iraqi Government will be able
gradually to take on more responsibility for its national
security and thereby address the root causes of the
security problem. That is also what the Iraqi people
have been awaiting anxiously.

Thirdly, the pursuit of unity and stability has
development as its objective. The Government should
strive to achieve rapid progress in the field of
economic reconstruction, improve the lives of its
people and create a mechanism for the independent
development of Iraq. Last month the International
Compact with Iraq was launched at Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, where proposed measures for the reconstruction
of Iraq were considered and the international consensus
was reaffirmed. We hope that, with the joint efforts of
all the parties concerned, the International Compact
will be implemented.

The unity, stability and development of Iraq
cannot be achieved without the support and
participation of its neighbouring States and the
international community as a whole. In that regard, we
welcome the expanded ministerial meeting of Foreign
Ministers of States neighbouring Iraq held at Sharm
el-Sheikh last month, as well as the consultations held
between the United States and Iraq at the
ambassadorial level. We hope that the parties
concerned will continue their efforts to find an
adequate solution to other regional hotspots through
dialogue and consultation, so as to create an
environment conducive to the settlement of the
question of Iraq.

We support the taking of active measures by the
United Nations, where conditions permit, with a View
to expanding its role in the political and economic
reconstruction of Iraq.

As a longstanding friend of the people of Iraq,
China supports the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq and advocates the finding of
an adequate solution to the differences between the
various factions in Iraq through a political process and
in a peaceful and democratic manner.

China appreciates the efforts made by the
Government of Iraq aimed at achieving reconciliation
and at stabilizing the situation. China supports the
efforts made to speed up the reconstruction of Iraq, in
accordance with the principle of equality and openness,
and to improve the lives of the Iraqi people and the
humanitarian situation in the country.

The Chinese Government will provide 5 million
yuan renminbi in free aid to Iraq, which will be
earmarked for the health and education fields, inter
alia. The Chinese Government is ready drastically to
reduce the Iraqi debt to China and to cancel all
governmental debt to China. China sincerely hopes
that, with the support and assistance of the
international community and the unremitting efforts of
the people themselves, the Iraqi people will at an early
date achieve the rule of Iraq by the Iraqis themselves
and enjoy peace, tranquillity and prosperity.

