Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I wish to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing today's very important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their insightful briefings. Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the European Union. The Charter of the United Nations is the main pillar of the legal and political architecture built in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War. In the preamble of the Charter, the pledge to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war is unequivocal. That pledge is all the more imperative today, with new tensions arising in the world and the proliferation of regional crises. The current threats to global peace and security also make it more pressing than ever to recommit to and revitalize the multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation normative framework. It is true that the United Nations and the multilateral system based on the Charter face growing criticism. The Security Council struggles to offer solutions to major current political crises. Nevertheless, the underlying principles of the Charter are as compelling today as they were in 1945 and so are the objectives that they are supposed to serve - the global aspiration for peace and the well-being of all our citizens. The answer to the pushback that we are witnessing today is not less multilateralism but rather much more, with a more sophisticated approach that is designed to tackle today's more complex crises. Italy knows that well. As a Mediterranean country on the front lines of an area afflicted by major instability and multidimensional repercussions that transcend the region itself, we are deeply aware of the need for a holistic approach. Only by combining security, development, the rule of law and human rights, as well as environmental protection and the fight against climate change, will we be able to create conditions conducive to sustainable peace and a future of prosperity for the generations to come. As the Secretary-General said earlier, international cooperation is at a crossroads and, indeed, we need to do better to uphold the values of the Charter. As far as Italy is concerned, we strongly believe the ongoing reform processes started by the Secretary-General are crucial to improving the effectiveness of the United Nations and its capacity to achieve that goal. Italy reaffirms its steadfast support for conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding and recalls the prerogatives of the Secretary-General under Article 99 of the Charter. As the top troop contributor among Western countries, Italy champions the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. A reformed United Nations must continue to operate in a logic of shared responsibility among Members States and in partnership with regional organizations, such as the European Union and the African Union. That crucial notion is also reflected in our commitment to a reform of the Security Council to make it more representative, accountable, democratic, transparent and effective. A final word on discrimination and inclusion: in its Preamble the Charter reaffirms faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women. Let me stress the importance of gender equality. Women must be given the opportunity to participate meaningfully in decision-making processes. By the same token, we must give voice and space to young people. As President Mary Robinson said this morning, "Ti]f women had equal power ... we would have a very different problem-solving way of dealing with the challenges we face". Indeed, we must continue to work relentlessly to achieve gender parity for the sake of peace and prosperity for all.
