Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome First
Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim and Commissioner
Lamamra to the Council this morning and thank them
very much indeed for their briefings. I should also like
to thank Mr. Ould-Abdallah, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We greatly
appreciate the efforts of the Special Representative, his
team and all of the United Nations agencies active in
Somalia.

I would, however, like to register our
disappointment that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/234) was issued less than 24 hours before this
meeting; Deputy Prime Minister Ibrahim made this
same point too. Somalia is one of the most complex
issues on the Security Council's agenda, and late
reports do not help Council members take a considered
View.

The situation in Somalia remains of deep concern,
with a worsening humanitarian situation and continuing
instability. We strongly condemn attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
people by armed groups, especially Al-Shabaab. We
reiterate our support for the TFG and AMISOM. I pay
particular tribute to Uganda and Burundi for their
continuing commitment to this difficult operation.

There has been important progress on a number
of strands over the past few months, as some of the
previous speakers have highlighted. We welcome the
signing of an agreement with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a
in March as an important step forward in terms of
political reconciliation. But as the Secretary-General's
report highlights, the situation remains fragile. We now
have only 15 months remaining of the transitional
period as defined in the Djibouti Agreement. Important
transitional tasks still need to be completed. It is
crucial that all parties redouble their efforts to achieve
greater progress towards a stable and peaceful Somalia.

The instability in Somalia continues to have a
significant destabilizing effect on the region and
beyond. Somali extremists pose a serious threat to
many countries, including the United Kingdom. We
have seen close links between terrorists in Yemen and
Somalia. Instability in Somalia hinders cooperation in
the region on areas of common interest, promoting
distrust rather than dialogue. Progress towards a
peaceful, stable Somalia would allow the region to
cooperate on the economic development that it so
desperately needs.

But the most serious impact is on the people of
Somalia themselves. They have suffered for far too
long. The humanitarian situation is appalling and
continues to deteriorate. Attacks on aid compounds,
worsening security conditions and the threats by
Al-Shabaab, which led the World Food Programme to
suspend its operations, have all compounded the
problem. We home the World Food Programme can
resume its work safely as soon as possible in order to
deliver the aid which is so desperately needed.

The United Kingdom is committed to supporting
the TFG and AMISOM. Last year the United Kingdom
contributed over £15 million to support AMISOM,
£11.5 million in humanitarian aid and £26 million in
development assistance. That is roughly equivalent to
over $60 million in total.
On piracy, the United Kingdom plays an
important role in the European Union's (EU) Operation
Atalanta and we, of course, fully support the EU
training mission currently underway in Uganda.

In looking forward, I would make three points.
First, we need a strong United Nations lead for our
efforts in Somalia. We welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to review the role of the United
Nations. This should lead to a more dynamic operation
in Nairobi and a growing presence in Mogadishu, as
both Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
Commissioner Lamamra have said this morning. We do
not underestimate the difficulties, but we need all parts
of the United Nations working in an integrated manner
to deliver a single strategy.

Secondly, the United Nations cannot work alone
so the international community needs to regalvanize its
efforts in support of AMISOM. and the TFG. We look
forward to the Istanbul Conference on Somalia on
22 May, which we hope will demonstrate the
international community's continued support to the
TFG and to United Nations leadership in Somalia.

Thirdly, the future of Somalia lies, ultimately, in
the hands of the Somali people. We welcome the
progress made by the TFG over the past few months.
We urge them to continue and intensify their efforts on
dialogue, reconciliation, governance and security
sector reform. We call on all parties fully to support the
Djibouti peace process and join efforts to bring peace
to Somalia. The clock is ticking, and we risk losing the
rare moment of opportunity provided by the Djibouti
Agreement.

