Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
my colleagues, I would like to thank Ambassador
Quinlan for presenting the quarterly report on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I would like to assure him of my
delegation's full support in carrying out his functions
as Chair of that sanctions committee, which is at the
heart of the non-proliferation regime. We also thank the
Panel of Experts for their invaluable assistance to the
Committee's work. Its role is crucial in ensuring that
the sanctions measures adopted by the Security Council
be fully upheld. My country had the opportunity to host
the Panel on 6 and 7 February during a working visit to
Luxembourg.

The quarterly report of the 1737 Committee
considers the various aspects of its work with regard
to restricting Iran's ability to develop its nuclear and
ballistic missile capability for military purposes. It is
important that the Committee continue on that path
and we fully support its efforts along those lines. In
that regard, we note with concern the recent report of
the Panel of Experts, which unequivocally decides that
Iran violated the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010) in June 2012 by launching ballistic missiles
in the context of a military exercise. We believe that
the report must be followed up. The Committee must
respond. The same applies to the weapons intercepted
on 23 January off the coast of Yemen. In the light of
the outcome of the inquiry under way, the Committee
should ensure an appropriate follow-up.

The credibility of the appeals to Iran, insisting on
its effective cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), also depends of the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime. Iran will
regain the trust of the international community only by
fully cooperating with the IAEA. Iran must therefore
clarify the numerous outstanding issues and allow
the IAEA inspectors to test the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme.

Regrettably, the IAEA's recent report does not
enable us to believe in Iran's readiness to uphold its
international obligations. In contravention of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors, Iran has not suspended its uranium
enrichment and processing activities. On the contrary,
it has continued to develop its enrichment capacities
by using new-generation centrifuges at the Natanz
site. Continuing heavy-water projects and refusing the
IAEA access to the Parchin site are just are worrying.
In such conditions, it is difficult to know the exact
nature of Iran's nuclear programme. That in no way
helps to create a climate of trust.

While calling on Iran to comply with its international
obligations and to fully clarify the nature of its nuclear
programme, Luxembourg nevertheless reaffirms its
commitment to a negotiated solution based on the
dual-track approach. That is why we are pleased about
the talks between Iran and the E3+3 on 26 February
in Almaty, facilitated by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
At that time, a proposal was put on the table that sought
to establish trust and to provide true substance to the
dialogue. If accepted, that proposal should allow for
progress towards a long-term solution on the basis of
compliance with the resolutions ofthe Security Council
and the IAEA Board of Governors.

We hope that the Iranian Government will positively
view the proposal made in Almaty and that the follow-
up meetings planned for 18 March at the technical level
and for 5 and 6 April at the political level will finally
allow for a positive dynamism.

