Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Madam President, I would like to thank you for having
convened this open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Today marks the commemoration of
the tenth anniversary of the attack on the United Nations
compound in Baghdad. My delegation joins others
in paying tribute to United Nations staff, including
Sergio Vieira de Mello, who perished in that brutal and
merciless terrorist attack.

The present conflict and violent situations around
the world, particularly in the Middle East and North
Africa, indicate that civilians are still suffering in
massive numbers. Despite the progress made on the
issue of civilian protection, there have been some
failures as well. A large part of the shortcomings in this
field is due to the double standards used and injustices
in dealing with different situation of armed conflict,
including the situation of territories under foreign
occupation, as well as the fundamental failure of parties
to respect the principles of international human rights
and humanitarian law.

That double standard becomes more visible in
the context of the fight against impunity and for
accountability for the most serious crimes. I would
like here to refer to the crimes committed by the
Israeli regime against civilians in Palestine. It seems
that that regime, while stoking the crisis in the Middle
East, is continuing to base its policies on blaming
others, while itself enjoying impunity. There is hardly
any need to mention that that regime, with its brutal
killing apparatus, is notorious for targeting the civilian
population. The mass killing of civilians in Gaza
and other occupied territories with the most dreadful
and sophisticated arms, including poisonous white
phosphorus and cluster bombs, is just one type of crime
committed by the regime. The Israeli regime has thus
excluded a large number of innocent people from the
jurisdiction of international law, as if those people did
not deserve the protection required under the Geneva
Conventions and international instruments.

In Gaza, 1.5 million Palestinians are deprived of
humanitarian assistance and all the basic needs of life.
Gaza continues to be the largest prison maintained by
the Israeli occupying authorities. We add our voice
to the call raised this morning by Ms. Pillay, High
Commissioner for Human Rights that

"[t]he illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip imposing
restrictions on the enjoyment of fundamental
rights must be lifted. The freedom of movement
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory
should be ensured."

It is expected that, by ensuring accountability for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights, and ensuring justice for victims,
our efforts for the protection of civilians would be
translated into meaningful and practical actions.

In his written reports and in his statement today,
the Secretary-General has emphasized the need for
enhancing compliance with international human rights
and humanitarian law and enhancing accountability for
the protection of civilians. To a large degree, in many
conflicts accountability - in particular with regard to
extremist and terrorist groups - is the absent factor
that paves the way for further violations.

In some instances, terrorist attacks target religious
and sacred places and pilgrimage sites, with large
numbers of fatalities among pilgrims and innocent
people. The Security Council should take measures in
preventing such crimes against civilians. Furthermore,
due attention should be paid to the root causes of
conflicts in order to ensure durable peace and stability.

The root causes behind some conflicts include
poverty, exclusion and marginalization, foreign
intervention and military excursions and occupation.
We are sure that the members of the Security Council
consider those elements to be extremely important
for the credibility of the Council. In addressing the
suffering of civilians in the armed conflicts, the
Council should take stock of those causes and seek
a balanced solution in resolving conflicts. Justice
demands that the perpetrators of crimes be prosecuted
and brought to justice. Let us hope that this open debate
will be an opportunity to assess the ways and means
of providing better protection to civilians in armed
conflict situations.

