Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing,
and I join others in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Pakistan.

The bloodshed in Syria has now entered its twentieth
month. The facts and figures cited by other Council
members on the human cost of the conflict have sadly
become all too familiar. In July, we again warned about
the consequences of continued inaction by the Council
(see S/PV.6816). We said that if the Council did not act,
there would be further violence and bloodshed and that
the deteriorating situation would spill over the borders,
drawing in the region and clearly posing a threat to
international peace and security.

That, of course, is exactly what we are now seeing.
In particular among recent developments, we strongly
condemn the Syrian shelling across the border into
Turkey. The Security Council press statement of
4 October responding to that outrage (SC/10783) was
welcome, but that alone, of course, has not stopped
the activity, and is unlikely to stop the regime from
pursuing its murderous path.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
impact of the conflict. As winter approaches, there
is an urgent need for suitable shelter, fuel and warm
blankets. We, the United Kingdom, are doing what we
can to address that. The United Kingdom is the second
largest bilateral donor to the international humanitarian
response, to date providing $60 million for food,
medical care, shelter and other essential support to the
tens of thousands of people affected by the fighting in
Syria and the refugees in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey and
Iraq. I echo Under-Secretary-General Feltman's appeal
to Member States to contribute to the humanitarian
assistance.

However, the overwhelming priority remains an
end to the violence and full and unhindered access for
humanitarian agencies so that civilians can escape the
fighting and aid can get through to save lives in the
worst affected areas. United Kingdom aid is making a
difference and is helping to save lives, but we should
be under no illusion about the difficulties involved in
delivering such assistance. Civilians have been targeted
and killed. Medical workers have been attacked and
blocked from helping those in need.

There is evidence of atrocities committed by both
the Government and the opposition in violation of
international law but, as the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
makes clear in its report (A/HRC/l9/69), the greater
responsibility clearly lies with the regime. We urge all
parties to comply with their obligations and to protect
civilians from the scourge of conflict.

We should of course continue to work to assist
those affected by the conflict. However, the Council
has a moral imperative to work to address the causes of
the conflict. We are all fully committed to supporting
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, in his work towards a political settlement and
a political transition.

As the Council, we have achieved a great deal over
the past year on issues concerning Somalia, Yemen
and the Sudan and South Sudan but, in each case, the
Council was united in making clear that there would
be serious consequences if one or other of the parties
failed to meet its commitments. We need to apply that
lesson to Syria. The brutal regime has been impervious
to the repeated efforts of international actors, including
some around this table, to persuade it to follow the
route of dialogue. It has ignored its obligations to cease
violence under the six-point plan pursuant to resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). Instead, the violence has
escalated. The Council needs to apply the firm and
consistent pressure that has so far been lacking.

In the meantime, it is notable that, in August, the
General Assembly overwhelmingly voted in favour
of a resolution that deplored the Security Council's
failure to agree on measures to ensure the compliance
of the Syrian authorities with its decisions. Resolution
66/253 B called on all Syrian parties to rapidly
implement the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and encouraged Member States to support that
implementation.

As our Foreign Secretary, William Hague, has said
in a statement today, it is utterly unacceptable that the
regime continues to attack its own people with brutality
and without remorse. No country should shut its eyes
to the horrors that we are witnessing. History and the
Syrian people will judge it harshly if it does.

Grave as the situation in Syria is, we must not lose
our focus on the unresolved Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
whose resolution remains central to the stability of the
region. The frequency with which that issue was raised
during the general debate of the General Assembly last
month underlined its continued importance. Our shared
goal remains a negotiated two-State solution based on
the 1967 lines, a fair solution for refugees and security
arrangements that respect Palestinian sovereignty and
protect Israeli security and Jerusalem as ajoint capital.
A negotiated end to the occupation remains the
best way to allow Palestinian aspirations to be met in
reality and on the ground. A demonstration of political
will and leadership is needed from both sides to break
the current impasse. We have urged both sides to focus
on dialogue, to avoid steps that could undermine the
prospects for peace and to work towards the resumption
of direct negotiations.

Israeli settlement activity remains the most serious
threat to the two-State solution. Settlements are illegal
under international law and undermine the very viability
of a two-State solution. Any step that entrenches the
presence of settlements in the West Bank risks sending
the message that Israel is not serious in its support for
a two-State solution. Like others, we also remain very
concerned about the increasing number of incidents of
settler violence and the fact that many such incidents
appear to go unpunished.

As Under-Secretary-General Feltman reported, last

month the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on Assistance to
the Palestinians highlighted the Palestinian Authority's
continued State-building efforts. However, it also
focused on the severe fiscal crisis that the Palestinian
Authority is now facing. The Palestinian Authority
will continue to face regular and increasingly profound
crises unless its finances are put on a more sustainable
footing in the medium term. External factors severely
constrain the Palestinian Authority's ability to help
the private sector to develop, to promote Palestinian
livelihoods and to address the fiscal gap.

The United Kingdom will continue to be one of
the principle supporters of Palestinian State-building
efforts, assisting it to tackle poverty, build institutions
and boost its economy. However, a shift in the freedom
of movement of goods and of people and in the
framework for doing business across the Palestinian
territories is also urgently needed.

With our European partners, we call upon Israel
to halt the demolition of Palestinian housing and
infrastructure in Area C of the West Bank and the
subsequent forced transfer of the population, as well
as to address humanitarian needs. We encourage Israel
to accelerate the approval of Palestinian master plans
and to simplify administrative procedures to obtain
building permits for Area C. Without Palestinian
control over that land, including planning, building and
security, the viability of a future Palestinian State, and
thus the two-State solution, is reduced.

We also remain concerned about the situation in
Gaza and continue to press the Israeli Government
to ease restrictions on movement and access. We will
never underestimate Israel's security needs but, for any
sustainable peace deal, there must be an economically
viable Gaza.

Rocket attacks from Gaza must also stop. We
continue to urge all parties to exercise restraint and
to prevent civilian casualties and loss of life. The
escalation of violence earlier this month only served to
entrench the status quo.

The developments in the wider region underscore
the importance of achieving a peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict that gives the Israeli people
peace and security and the Palestinian people the State
that they need and deserve. We will continue to urge
both sides to show the political leadership and courage
required to make progress towards that shared goal of a
two-State solution.

