Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement. 1 would like to begin by congratulating
the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for June and for organizing this
open debate on a very important and timely topic. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement today.

As the concept paper (S/2014/384, annex) states,
there is indeed a dire need for a thorough discussion
among the relevant United Nations intergovernmental
bodies if we are to develop a balanced United Nations
approach, including through those bodies' regulatory
documents, to address the new trends relating to
peacekeeping missions, which in many ways differ
drastically from the usual missions of past decades.

The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) stresses that
the development of concepts, policies and strategies
should be done at the intergovernmental level,
particularly the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, and should run parallel to similar efforts to
improve development, planning and oversight capacities.
NAM. also emphasizes that policy development in
peacekeeping must be coupled with the provision of the
resources needed to ensure effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates. Accordingly, the Movement
re-emphasizes its commitment to supporting all efforts
to make peacekeeping operations more effective, and
reiterates the following points.

First, we stress the importance of reaching
consensus among Member States on policy development
and ensuring that only ideas and approaches they
have collectively agreed on are implemented. We call
on the Secretariat to refrain from working on policy
directions that have not been agreed on through an
intergovernmental process. The Special Committee is
and remains the sole body in charge of policymaking
in peacekeeping.

Second, it is vital that all necessary support,
including in the areas of financing and human resources
as well as military and civilian capabilities, be provided
to peacekeeping missions if they are to be able to fulfil
their tasks within a framework of full respect for
host countries and their laws and regulations. In that
context, NAM. particularly underscores the importance
of drawing on the experience and expertise of troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) when the Security
Council implements, extends or adjusts United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. In that regard, we emphasize
the necessity for prior consultations with TCCs, which
are best placed to contribute to an objective assessment
of the situation on the ground.

Third, the results of the survey conducted
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/261
clearly demonstrate the deficit between the current
United Nations reimbursement rate to troop- and
police-contributing countries and the high financial
costs that those countries actually incur. It is important
that the Assembly take a decision before the end
of this month on increasing the standard rate of
reimbursement in line with the survey results. As the
resolution requested, all the information necessary
for an informed decision has been collected. Now
that this complex process has been completed, it is up
to Member States to deal with increasing the rate of
reimbursement in light of the results of the survey. The
full implementation of the resolution's provisions will
be guaranteed only when we agree on a new rate. NAM
will not accept an interim or ad hoc solution to this
issue again.

Fourth, we need a strong and clear commitment on
the part of the Security Council to drafting clear and
achievable mandates, based on an objective assessment,
and without any rush to adopt mandates that lack a
political basis or sufficient resources, or that are not
practically achievable. Developing integrated planning
and consistent approaches to achieving a link between
policy formulation and implementation on the ground is
crucial to success in this area.

Fifth, we stress the importance of troop-
contributing countries' full participation in policy- and
decision-making in order to achieve the partnership
and effectiveness that United Nations peacekeeping
missions require. NAM. underlines the need for effective
triangular cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council.

Sixth, we emphasize that the establishment of any

peacekeeping operation and the extension of existing

operation mandates should strictly observe the purposes

and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and

of the basic principles that have evolved to govern such

operations - that is, the consent of the parties, the

non-use of force except in self-defence, and impartiality.
NAM. believes that these basic principles, which have

guided United Nations peacekeeping operations for the
past five decades without controversy, remain relevant
and should be preserved.

Seventh, NAM. stresses that the use in peacekeeping
operations of technology designed to enhance situational
awareness, including unmanned aerial vehicles, should
be conducted on a case-by-case basis and must uphold
the principles enshrined in the Charter. We underscore
the importance of considering the legal, operational,
technical and financial implications of the use of
such assets in the field in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations without further delay.

Eighth, we must enhance the integration of
peacekeeping with peacebuilding, so that peacekeeping
work is accompanied by economic recovery and
capacity-building efforts on a basis of national
ownership. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund have a significant role to play in that
regard. The objective should not be to cut peacekeeping
costs but to enhance the potential of States so as to
avoid their relapse into conflict.

Lastly, the Movement strongly believes that primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security rests with the United Nations, and that
the role of regional arrangements should be organized
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
call for intensified support on the part of the United
Nations for the African Union's operations, by ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for those missions.

NAM, as the one group that includes most if not
all of the top troop- and police-contributing countries,
continues to support peacekeeping operations. Its
member States have continued to increase their
contributions to military and police components, as well
as to civilian expertise, in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, clear evidence of our commitment to
maintaining international peace and security.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
the men and women of the United Nations who are
working to implement peacekeeping activities, as well
as to those peacekeepers who have lost their lives in
the field defending the flag of the United Nations and
contributing to upholding the positive and noble image
of the Organization and its peacekeeping operations.

