Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Chambas for his briefing.

The recent situation in West Africa and the
Sahel has generally been stable. Several countries
have successfully held presidential, legislative and
local elections, which China welcomes as a positive
development. At the same time, terrorist attacks,
transnational organized crime and other factors pose
challenges to regional peace and security, while
intercommunal conflicts and Violence continue to grow.

In the light of the current situation, China wishes to
touch on three points. First, we must vigorously support
countries of the region in building their capacity and
institutions. The Multinational Joint Task Force of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) have
played an important role in combating terrorism at the
regional level. Their approach has set a good example
of how African countries can independently respond to
regional challenges and maintain regional peace and
security. The international community should continue
to support African countries in their efforts and help
them to strengthen their counter-terrorism capabilities.
China supports the United Nations in providing the
necessary financial support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. Based on the specific requests of States, we
should help them to establish mechanisms to prevent
and address intercommunal conflicts and promote
harmonious coexistence among communities.

Secondly, we should fully leverage the role of
regional organizations and institutions, given that
challenges such as terrorism are transnational in nature
and especially given that the situation in Libya is having
a spillover effect on West Africa and the Sahel. The
coordinating role of relevant regional and subregional
organizations must therefore be fully utilized. Regional
and subregional organizations such as the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community ofWest African States
(ECOWAS) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission have
unique advantages in facilitating dialogue, mediation
and good offices and in promoting political solutions
to regional problems. United Nations agencies should
strengthen their collaboration with the AU, ECOWAS
and other entities in order to help achieve peace and
stability in the region.

Thirdly, attention should be given to resolving
deep-rooted problems in the region. We should actively
promote the economic and social development of
countries in West Africa and the Sahel, focusing on
improving such sectors as agriculture, health care,
education, economy, trade, interconnectivity and
infrastructure, help countries of the region to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to
eradicate poverty, and provide them with strong support
for their economic development, better livelihoods and
job creation.

China appreciates the positive role played by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
We hope that, while respecting the sovereignty and
leadership of the countries concerned, the Office will
continue to strengthen communication and coordination
with relevant countries and regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU and ECOWAS.

China attaches great importance to strengthening
cooperation with Africa and developing countries.
The Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, which took place in September 2018,
identified areas such as peace, security and economic
development as the focus of China-Africa cooperation
in future. China is actively implementing the China-
Africa peace and security initiative, which was
announced by President Xi Jinping at the Forum.

We have taken practical steps to support the
Sahel region in its counter-terrorism operations and
in the capacity-building of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Within the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, China has been fully and pragmatically
cooperating with West African countries, with a View
to helping them accelerate development and strengthen
their capacities. These measures reflect China's firm
support for peace and development in West Africa and
the Sahel. China is ready to work with the international
community in continuing to play a constructive role in
promoting long-term stability and security in the region.

