Mr. Mevian Miaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is with great satisfaction and enthusiasm
that Equatorial Guinea welcomes the convening of this
meeting, which allow us once again to analyse and share
perspectives on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. My
delegation would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita, and Ambassador
Vieira for their comprehensive and useful briefings. We
also welcome the presence of Ambassador Da Silva at
this meeting.

This a crucial year in terms of Guinea-Bissau
moving quickly from the current political and
institutional crisis to a phase that offers opportunities
to promote the political and economic transformation
of the country. I once again welcome the peaceful
holding of legislative elections in March and commend
the people of Guinea-Bissau on the great sense of
responsibility and civic-mindedness it showed. Those
were elections in which 21 political parties took part and
more than 760,000 people - representing 85 per cent
of the electorate - turned out to vote. The population's
civic involvement has been amply demonstrated by
what are remarkable and encouraging statistics for any
political process. We welcome the election results and
the work done by the National Electoral Commission,
which, by remaining transparent throughout the
process, has ensured that the results are credible and do
not give rise to post-electoral incidences.

It is well known that the elections were crucial
to ending the political stagnation experienced by
the country since 2015 and to paving the way for a
process of democratization, stabilization of peace
and economic recovery. In addition, the massive
participation of women masse in the electoral process
should be praised. There has never been a greater
number of women candidates or voters in the country's
entire history. The importance that the authorities have
ascribed to women is reflected in the composition of
the current Government, in which women account
for 35.48 per cent. This represents a significant step
forward in gender equality and makes Guinea-Bissau
the first country in West Africa to have an inclusive
and balanced Government, thereby giving both sexes
the opportunity to showcase their ability to improve the
population's living conditions.

However, the legislative elections were the first
step to these ends and, as stressed in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph of resolution 2458 (2019),

"all stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau should work
to ensure short, medium and long-term stability
through clear commitment and genuine inclusive
political dialogue aimed at creating conditions
conducive to finding viable and sustainable
solutions to the country's social, economic,
political and military problems, which would
facilitate the implementation of key reforms and
the strengthening of State institutions."

The consolidation of these achievements through
the stabilization of the country should translate into an
obligation and responsibility for the new Government
to organize credible, free, fair and peaceful presidential
elections on 24 November. In this regard, it should be
noted that, as was the case with the legislative elections,
a fundamental element of successful presidential
elections is international mobilization to ensure that
the necessary funding is allocated to the smooth
completion of the electoral process. Just yesterday in
Guinea-Bissau, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) assessment mission and
Prime Minister Aristides Gomes met to discuss the
matter. We therefore encourage all partners and friends
of Guinea-Bissau to spare no effort to that end and to
fulfil their commitments.

In line with the press release of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 11 June,
Equatorial Guinea expresses its deep concern at the
growing trend of drug-related crimes in Guinea-
Bissau, which continue to be a major security concern
and contribute to ongoing instability in the country. In
that regard, the Government of Guinea-Bissau should
strengthen national laws to better combat drug-related
crimes. In that connection, we highly appreciate the
joint efforts of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau the (UNIOGBIS), the Judicial
Police and the National Guard, which led to the burning,
three days ago, of more than 1.8 tons of cocaine seized
on 2 September. That was the largest drug seizure in
the history of the country. Guinea-Bissau is certainly
not a narco-State. Like all other States, however, it
is unfortunately affected by that phenomenon. We
continue to commend the determination of the Judicial
Police to neutralize drug traffickers.

With regard to the closure of UNIOGBIS at the end
of next year, our position fully aligns with resolution
2458 (2019), which stresses the need to guarantee an
efficient transfer of tasks and responsibilities from the
mission to the United Nations country team, as well as
to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and other partners.

I conclude by stressing that Guinea-Bissau is
a country with great biodiversity wealth and many
assets, considering its relatively small size, and should
be easier to manage. Unfortunately, persistent long-
standing institutional problems do not help to promote
economic development and ensure a bright future for
all its citizens.

Guinea-Bissau can also boast that its elections
have all been endorsed by the international and local
communities. The problems always arise after the
elections. The real difficulty is managing the post-
election period. My country's Government does not
want to see election results disputed again in the wake
ofthe next presidential elections. We hope that citizens'
votes will be respected.

As the Secretary-General stressed in his report
(S/2019/664), the security situation could be adversely
affected if political tensions persist in the midst of a
worsening socioeconomic environment, currently
characterized by strikes and long-standing claims by
civil servants. We reiterate our call for the armed forces
to remain neutral with regard to the political process
and to protect the constitutional order.

That is why, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador
Anatolio Ndong Mba intends to make his second and
final visit to Guinea-Bissau before the presidential
elections of 24 November and days before the start of
the electoral campaign.

