We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM1]), for her insightful briefing. South Africa supports the mandate renewal of UNAMI, in its current form, as it partners with the Government of Iraq in its post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts and provides much-needed humanitarian assistance throughout the country. South Africa would like to commend the Government of Iraq for the actions it has taken to combat the threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic has greater impact on countries emerging from conflict, like Iraq. We appeal to the international donor community to continue providing the much-needed humanitarian assistance and medical supplies to assist the Government of Iraq as it addresses COVID-19. One of the unfortunate negative consequences of the virus is the increased in domestic violence. The Iraqi Government must ensure the protection of women, provide the necessary support services and commit to prosecuting perpetrators of domestic violence. Regarding political developments, South Africa congratulates the Government of Iraq and its people on the election of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Khadimi. We look forward to the formation of a full Cabinet, with the hope that it will enable Iraq to implement new programmes to improve the lives of all Iraqi citizens, balance external relations, safeguard Iraqi sovereignty and secure the return of internally displaced persons. South Africa supports the initiative for an inclusive Government that will bring together the diverse aspects of Iraqi society into governance structures. National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital if it is to avoid future challenges related to fractured Government policies and actions. South Africa notes with appreciation the fraternal manner in which the central Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government reached an agreement on oil production. Continued dialogue between them on oil and revenue-sharing is also essential, especially in the light of the severe economic challenges. The Secretary-General's call to act now in order to boost the immunity of our societies against the virus of hate could not be more relevant. Iraq continues to face severe challenges that accelerate the spread of extremism and finds itself entwined in regional rivalries that arise out of the military misadventures of others. We wish to reiterate the Secretary-General's calls for international and regional partners to exercise restraint, pursue immediate de-escalation, support Iraq in its efforts to maintain security and stability and prevent Iraq from becoming an arena for external conflicts. South Africa supports the consolidation of the Iraqi army's full control over its territories, as well as the efforts of its Government to eradicate the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Peace and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop its infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic services to all of its citizens. South Africa wishes to highlight the success of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting the Government's inclusivity efforts, specifically in institution-building and post- reconstruction development. South Africa is encouraged by the collaborative efforts of the Governments of Kuwait and Iraq to locate missing Kuwaiti nationals and others, as well as missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. We are encouraged by positive developments in that regard, as reflected in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/358). We urge both countries to work together with the relevant United Nations institutions to resolve those outstanding issues. In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in line with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and continues to support UNAMI in the implementation of its mandate. South Africa echoes the sentiments of Special Representative Hennis- Plasschaert - that Iraq does not have the luxury of time. The Iraqi people must set aside their differences and join hands to build an Iraq that belongs to all its people and to ensure lasting peace.
