The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council remains concerned at
the continuing conflict in Angola. It reiterates its
position that the primary responsibility for the
continued fighting lies with the leadership of the
armed faction of the Uniao Nacional Para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) headed
by Mr. J. Savimbi, which is refusing to fulfil its
obligations under the 'Accordos de Paz'
(S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol
(8/1994/1441, annex) and relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, which remain the only
viable basis for political settlement of the conflict
in Angola.

"The Council considers the four-point
agenda for peace proposed by the Government of
Angola a useful indication of areas where an
agreement or progress should be reached. It calls
on the UNITA armed faction headed by Mr. J.
Savimbi to cease all military action and to enter
into a dialogue with the Government of Angola
on how to conclude the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol on this basis.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist attacks by UNITA
forces on the civilian population of Angola. It
stresses that such attacks are unacceptable and
cannot be justified by any political goals. The
Council reminds their perpetrators that such acts
are in violation of international law and may have
further implications.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
failure by the armed faction of UNITA to
implement its obligations under the 'Accordos de

Paz, the Lusaka Protocol and its relevant
resolutions remains the reason for the Security
Council sanctions against UNITA. The Council is
determined to keep sanctions in place until it is
convinced that the conditions in its relevant
resolutions are met. It reiterates its call on all
States to implement strictly the sanctions regime
against UNITA and urges them to strengthen,
where appropriate, their internal legislation
related to application of sanction measures
imposed by the Council. The Council reaffirms its
intention to keep sanctions under close
monitoring and periodic review in order to raise
their effectiveness, including as they relate to
UNITA activity abroad.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction that, at their recent summit, the Heads
of States and Governments of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC)
countries undertook to prepare a report on how
SADC countries implement Security Council
resolution 1295 (2000). The Council encourages
SADC countries to cooperate fully in their efforts
to implement the Security Council's measures
against UNITA.

"The Security Council encourages the
Government of Angola to promote the peace
process and in this regard welcomes the
initiatives by the Government of Angola, as well
as by the Angolan people, including the civil
society and the churches. It calls on the Angolan
authorities to continue efforts aimed at national
reconciliation and stabilization of the situation in
the country in consultation with all segments of
the Angolan society, including the civil society
and the churches. These should focus on re-
establishment of the State administration,
improvement of the social and economic situation
of the population, promotion of the rule of law,
protection of human rights, the activity of the
Interagency Committee and of the Peace and
Reconciliation Fund.

"The Security Council supports the
intention of the Government of Angola to hold
elections as a part of the ongoing democratization
process in Angola in conformity with the
universally accepted democratic principles and
standards. It stresses the need to create the
necessary conditions for elections to be free and
fair. The Council requests the Secretary-General

to provide appropriate support, in coordination
with the Government of Angola, in preparation of
elections, including through the work of the
ongoing United Nations technical assistance
mission.

"The Security Council notes the positive
contribution that the United Nations Office in
Angola (UNOA) is making towards finding the
solution to the Angolan conflict. It reiterates its
full support for the work of UNOA and the
Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council is seriously
concerned with the plight of the Angolan
population, particularly the internally displaced
persons, and, in order to alleviate its suffering,
calls again on all parties concerned to facilitate
the delivery of emergency relief assistance. The
work of the United Nations agencies and other
international organizations delivering assistance
to those in the affected areas is of the utmost
importance and must continue unobstructed with
the financial support of the international
community."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/24.

I once again thank the Minister of Interior and the
Deputy Ministers accompanying him for having come
to New York to honour us with their presence at this
meeting.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30pm.
