Ms. Janiak (Poland): I would like to begin by
thanking the briefers for their valuable presentations.
I also want to take this opportunity to welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/837),
which provides a valuable factual record of the current
situation in Burundi.

With regard to the political situation, Poland notes
some signs ofpositive change in the country in the past
few months, chiefly the registration of new political
parties and the Government's efforts to enhance
dialogue with the opposition. Those are steps in the right
direction, in line with President Nkurunziza's repeated
announcement that he will refrain from seeking a fourth
term in 2020, as he promised the Burundian people
in 2015. However, we are worried about the reported
increase in acts of political intolerance, vandalism and
intimidation against the opposition. We believe that
only inclusive political dialogue, held in good faith, can
restore trust among the parties.

As the electoral process approaches, Poland calls
on the Burundian authorities to open the political
space, ensure the freedom of the media and comply
with obligations relating to fundamental rights. In that
respect, we think it will be crucial to address the doubts
expressed by some members of the media in connection
with the recent adoption of a code of conduct for the
media during the electoral period. At the same time,
we recognize the need for all parties, at all levels, to
engage constructively in dialogue and to participate in
the electoral process.

Poland welcomes the fact that the security
situation across the country has improved and the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
has decreased, as the Secretary-General's report
states. Nevertheless, Burundian society is still facing
serious challenges, including a difficult socioeconomic
situation and epidemics. We remain deeply concerned
about the continuing reports of human rights
violations. Poland urges the Government of Burundi
to significantly increase its engagement in addressing
hate speech and condemning all forms of intolerance
and violence in the country. While we note the efforts
that have been made so far, Poland emphasizes that it
is the obligation of the authorities to guarantee, protect
and promote fundamental rights, including freedom
of expression and freedom of assembly. We therefore
reiterate our call to the Burundian Government to take
concrete steps to restore cooperation with international
human rights mechanisms, particularly the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council's Commission of
Inquiry on Burundi.

Bearing in mind the regional significance of the
situation in Burundi, Poland strongly supports all the
efforts made by the East African Community to date
and encourages its leaders to engage more closely in
discussions with the African Union and the United
Nations. The constant and focused commitment of
the region to achieving a regional consensus on the
situation in Burundi is a matter of priority.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Michel Kafando for his work as the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi. His mission
must continue so that the gains made so far are not lost.
Poland also appreciates the efforts of the whole United
Nations team and the other international institutions
working on the ground to bring about a sustainable
improvement to the lives of the Burundian people. We
believe that fair and transparent elections in 2020, held
in an inclusive environment and in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement, can still be a significant step in the
political transformation of the country, and the people
of Burundi can count on our support in that regard.

