Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful to the
Chairs of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism
Committees for their solid work during the reporting
period. The reports issued by those bodies make an
important contribution to strengthening international
counter-terrorism cooperation under the auspices of
the United Nations. That cooperation is particularly
pertinent today, given the unprecedented growth of
contemporary terrorist threats.

The epicenter of terrorist activity is currently
Iraq and Syria, where radicals from the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the Al-Nusra Front and
other groups associated with Al-Qaida are operating.
They are carrying out heinous acts of barbarism
and are desecrating centuries-old cultural sites and
undermining the very foundations of States. Attempts
by ISIS to gain a foothold in Afghanistan and Libya,
where it has already done terrible things to Egyptian
Coptic Christians and Ethiopians, are also worrying.

We welcome the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Al-Qaida Commitee in the area
of countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2178 (2014) focuses on the Security
Council's approach to combating that type of threat.
We are convinced that the key to eradicating terrorism,
including the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon, may
be found in combatting radicalization and the spread of
extremist ideology. Particular attention should be paid
to curbing the use by terrorists of modern information
and telecommunication systems and technologies. We
are in favour of expanding the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), as well as that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), in that area in line with the above-mentioned
resolutions.

Curbing the financing of ISIS and Al-Nusra
Front through the illegal trade in oil, precious metals
and cultural artifacts in the area of Syria and Iraq is
an important area of cooperation between United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies. Resolution 2199
(2015) establishes a clear mechanism for ensuring
accountability in implementing its provisions.
However, the mechanism is not currently functioning
at full capacity and, given the urgency of the problem,
that is of serious concern.

We strongly urge Member States to regularly report
steps taken to implement resolution 2199 (2015) to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). First and foremost, with regard to cases of
illegal oil transactions, we trust that the forthcoming
report of the Committee's Monitoring Team on the
implementation of the resolution will contain specific
and realistic proposals to increase the effectiveness of
the implementation of this important Security Council
resolution.

We urge the CTC to continue monitoring the
implementation of the basic Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Priority should be given
to States that are most subject to terrorist threats, inter
alia, when planning country visits. We must renew the

comprehensive reviews of the implementation of these
resolutions.

The counter-terrorism capacity of States should
be strengthened through targeted technical assistance.
CTED's experience and methods for coordinating
technical assistance, as well as the trust it has earned
from States, puts CTED in a unique position. We
expect that the joint work of CTED, the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office and the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in the area
of technical assistance, based on the provisions of the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/11) of 29 May,
will be effective.

The sanctions list of the 1267 Committee is one of
the most effective tools for combatting terrorism, and it
should appropriately reflect the threats stemming from
Al-Qaida. The responsibility of the Ombudsperson,
enshrined in resolution 2161 (2014), should ensure
the greatest level of transparency for the Committee's
work. We trust that the new expert who will assume
that position will meet the advertised professional
requirements as much as possible and will scrupulously
assess the potential risks linked with delisting and
carefully consider the opinions of interested and
affected States.

The 1540 Committee, headed by the Permanent
Representative of Spain, plays a leading role in
coordinating international efforts in the area of
non-proliferation. In our view, the main aim of the
Committee and its Panel of Experts is to continue
to ensure a decrease in the number of countries that
have not submitted their first national reports on the
implementation of this important resolution. Another
very important aspect of its work is to carry out
a comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We agree that there is a need
to analyse the Committee's experience in the area of
cooperation with all organizations involved in the
process, as well as the outreach programme for States
and civil society. The purpose of the review should be
to evaluate the effectiveness of such activities.

We should also focus attention on the advisability
of having a differentiated approach to countries
depending on the effectiveness of their implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). There is also a need to
focus attention on those that need real assistance.
Recommendations should be targeted so as to enable
more efficient use of the by-no-means-unlimited
resources of the 1540 Committee.

We consider it important to further strengthen
contacts between the subsidiary organs of the Security
Council and specialized agencies and mechanisms, so as
to expand the network of counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. To that end,
we note the cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1267 and 1540 Committees with the
international conference of heads of law-enforcement
agencies and security services held by the Federal
Security Service of the Russian Federation. We also
welcome the participation of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in the World Bank meeting on
the international database on combating terrorism. We
would like to see a continuation ofthe practice ofholding
briefings among the heads of those conferences and
representatives of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

The United Nations has developed a solid
international legal framework in the area of counter-
terrorism and has created a set of effective tools.
However, successful implementation will be possible
only though coordinated and voluntary inter-State
cooperation, without politicization, double standards,
opportunistic approaches or differentiating between
"good" and "bad" terrorists. It is such cooperation that
we in the Russian Federation insist upon.

