Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): Ithank the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts for their continued

work in supporting implementation of the Security
Council's resolutions on Iran. I particularly welcome
Spain's leadership on this sensitive issue.

We have made progress in recent weeks in the
negotiations on Iran's nuclear programme. However,
a lot of complex issues remain unresolved. We remain
commited to finding a comprehensive agreement, and
still believe that is possible. But we will not agree to
a bad deal. Iran will need to show greater flexibility
and take some tough decisions in the coming days if we
are to achieve a deal when talks resume in Switzerland
later this week.

We are at an important moment in the negotiations.
If we are able to resolve the main issues, technical
work will follow to convert a political framework into
a detailed text. We will continue to work together with
our E3+3 partners to ensure a successful outcome.
We welcome the unity of purpose shown by our
fellow Council members involved in the negotiations,
and recognize the important role played by the High
Representative of the European Union in the talks.

While negotiations continue, the bulk of sanctions,
including all United Nations sanctions, and the
obligations on Member States arising from Security
Council resolutions, remain in place and fully in force.
We therefore welcome the notifications from Member
States regarding designated entities and the delivery of
equipment intended for use in a light-water reactor at
the Bushehr nuclear power plant. That report reminds
us that we must continue to report any violations
in accordance with the requirements set out in the
resolutions.

Turning to the work of the Committee, we must
continue implementation work to enforce the relevant
Security Council sanctions measures on Iran. We
welcome the Committee's continued guidance and
assistance to Member States and to international
organizations.

We remain concerned by Iran's continued failure
to respond to previous requests for information on
various incidents, including the interdiction of a vessel
carrying a cargo of conventional arms in the Red Sea.
Once again, we urge Iran to engage with the Committee
on such incidents.

On the work of the Panel of Experts, we welcome
the range of activities carried out in 2014, and in
particularly the recommendations set out in the 2014
final report (see S/20l4/932) regarding designated
individuals, as well as on bioidentifiers and the updated
sanctions list.

The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful and lasting negotiated solution to the Iran
nuclear issue, and will continue to work closely with
our E3+3 partners to achieve that goal.

