Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his detailed and, as usual, very clear briefing.

This first Council debate on such a sensitive area
as the Sahel is very important to the stability and
security of a number of African subregions. It is very
timely, given the alarming events that have taken place
recently in the Sahelo-Sahara region. The analyses and
recommendations contained in the report (see S/2012/42) presented by the Under-Secretary-General
outline key modalities for supporting national, regional
and international efforts aimed at finding sustainable
solutions to the many challenges facing that area.

Given that it is located both in the Maghreb and
in the Sahelo-Sahara region, Morocco is naturally
directly concerned by the threats emanating from the
Sahel region and is therefore following very closely the
developments in that part of our continent.

The up-tick in the number of attacks and
kidnappings carried out by Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, the increase in the number of terrorist attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram, the re-emergence of old
rebel movements, the proliferation of all types of
weapons and trafficking of all kinds all are sources of
concern on which all the States of the region and the
rest of the international community must seriously
focus.

The security challenges emanating from the
Sahelo-Sahara region are not new. For several years
now, that region has been facing an unprecedented
resurgence in the activities of transnational organized
crime networks and terrorist groups.

More recently, the major transatlantic drug-
trafficking networks have gradually transformed the
Gulf of Guinea and West Africa into a transit and
redistribution area, from which hard drugs are shipped
through certain Sahel countries, destined for Europe
and for countries in the Maghreb countries and the
Middle East. The dangerous developments in the
Sahelo-Sahara region are the result of the confluence
of many interlinked structural and cyclical factors.

The situation is the result of the difficulties faced
by the States of the region in securing their borders and
of the increased poverty in certain areas of the Sahara,
which provides an incentive to resort to criminal
activities for survival purposes. That combination of
factors has enabled rebel armed groups, secessionist
movements and many transnational organized crime
networks and terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, in
the Islamic Maghreb, to take up residence there and
create grey areas.

The situation was recently exacerbated by the
Libyan crisis, whose effects continue to be felt in many
Sahelo-Saharan countries in terms of security but also,
and especially, at the humanitarian and socio-economic
levels.

A number of commendable initiatives at the
national, bilateral and regional levels were undertaken
with a view to providing solutions to the challenges in
the Sahel well before the Libyan crisis. Unfortunately,
those initiatives have not enabled us to date to address
the problem in a holistic, inclusive and coordinated
manner.

The time has come for enhanced regional
cooperation on the part of all States in the region. We
hope that the international community, led by the
United Nations, will devote greater attention to the
situation by providing solutions to the structural
problems relating to secessionist armed movements or
groups, which perpetuate the existence of the grey
zones, thereby facilitating the proliferation of terrorist
and criminal activities.

United Nations bodies and agencies in the region
have a key role to play in building the capacities of
States of the region to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
Given the alarming facts linked to the
proliferation of weapons, it is clear that regional
cooperation is necessary among the countries of North
Africa and between that subregion and West Africa.
Moreover, the strengthening ties among transnational
organized crime networks, in particular, drug networks
coming from the Atlantic Ocean and armed or terrorist
groups in the Sahel, are a serious threat to international
stability and security.

The international community should also give
special attention to the humanitarian and socio-
economic challenges facing the States of the Sahel, in
particular owing to recurring food security problems
and in the light of the recent return of migrant workers
from Libya to their country of origin.

My country supports the recommendation in the
report of the assessment mission that the United
Nations should develop an integrated strategy that
addresses the security, humanitarian and development
challenges in the Sahel region in a consistent and
comprehensive way in the medium and long term. My
country fully supports the idea of creating a regional
cooperation platform for the Sahel region, as set out in
the report. That cooperation mechanism should be
transregional in nature and scope, involving all
countries of the Arab Maghreb and the Sahel, as well
as any other relevant country of West or Central Africa,
with the cooperation of the United Nations and
international partners.

Finally, my delegation fully supports the draft
press statement proposed by France on this issue.

