Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of Korea on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and for its dynamism,
transparency and able leadership in chairing the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We very much welcome
the personal participation in today's meeting by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Yun Byung-se, and
we thank the Deputy Secretary- General for his briefing.

This open debate is an opportunity to assess the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) over the past 10 years and to contribute
to the discussion on the best way to strengthen and
consolidate its achievements and correct its failures.
Resolution 1540 (2004) occupies a significant position
in the area of non-proliferation, and is designed to
strengthen the focus of non-proliferation commitments
without affecting its direct connection to the fulfilment
by all States' of their obligations in the areas of the
other pillars of disarmament, including the peaceful
use of nuclear energy. Its aim is to ensure that all
Member States comply with their obligation to prevent
the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction
and related materials and their acquisition by non-State
actors, and to see that they have the resources and the
capacity to do so.

We also acknowledge the valuable work of the
Committee's Group of Experts and its efforts in the
areas of outreach, awareness-raising, application,
assistance and capacity-building, particularly through
country visits. In addition to country visits, the Group of
Experts participates in numerous workshops, seminars
and events around the world. In a way, they are the
face of the Committee, and the Group's composition
should therefore reflect the universal nature of this
important resolution and take due account of broad
geographical representation as a factor in integrating
its investigations.

Universal, general and balanced implementation
of the resolution depends on Member States playing
a central role and requires that the Committee fully
comply with its mandate. We support the Committee's
efforts to fulfil its mandate by increasing the number of
reporting countries, gathering experience concerning
the resolution's application and promoting international
cooperation and assistance with its core activities.
We believe that the two elements that are key to full
implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) are assistance
and information exchange. In that regard, in addition
to continuing to seek ways to improve and advance its
role in facilitating assistance between donor countries
and Member States that request it, it would be helpful
to go beyond that one function and play a more direct
role, through training or creating its own assistance
programmess for States, for example.

We also commend the efforts made to set up better
communication mechanisms with Member States, such
as through the establishment of national and regional
points ofcontact. And country visits should involve other
Committee members besides members of the Group of
Experts. It is also important that close relationships
be established with States. Communication and
cooperation with specialized regional and international
organizations should be established and encouraged in
order to achieve full implementation of the resolution.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the role of
the United Nations Regional Centres for Peace and
Disarmament in this area.

I will conclude by noting that in December 2013,
Guatemala presented its third national report and
updated matrix, in accordance with resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), and thereby reaffirmed its
unequivocal commitment to the cause of a safer world
in which nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of
mass destruction no longer exist.
