Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank
Mr. Edmond Mulet for his comprehensive and very
useful briefing and for having introduced the
Secretary-General's report (S/20l2/72). I welcome the
presence of Mr. Farid Zarif via video teleconference. I
would also like to welcome Foreign Ministers Vuk
Jeremic' and Enver Hoxhaj and thank them for their
statements.

I will focus my statement on three specific
aspects. The first is the referendum on the acceptance
of the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo, which is
being planned in northern Kosovo. That project has
already been condemned by the international
community in general and very pointedly by the
Republic of Serbia.

The rhetoric that serves as the basis for some
actors in northern Kosovo who entertain the idea of a
referendum is unhelpful to the process of improving
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, and is
potentially destabilizing for Kosovo. It demonstrates
the extent to which some actors in northern Kosovo are
pursuing independent agendas. In that regard, President
Boris Tadie's rejection of the partition of Kosovo must
be highlighted and is to be much welcomed. In fact,
that unacceptable initiative is a challenge to the
territorial integrity of Kosovo. Furthermore, it strays
from the accepted path towards peace and stability in
the region under resolution 1244 (1999). It is meant to
put pressure on the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and to disturb Serbia's clear, deserved and,
indeed, necessary path towards European integration.

The second aspect is the situation created by the
barricades in northern Kosovo. Last November in
particular, we witnessed violent clashes between
Kosovo Serbs and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). I need
not mention how much the barricades and related
violence have hampered the normalization of the
situation in northern Kosovo. The barricades are also a
clear obstacle to the development of unimpeded
economic relations between Serbia and Kosovo, which
represent an important dimension of the ongoing
negotiations in the European Union to facilitate a
dialogue.

We must vigorously deplore the continued
existence of the barricades. They stop the population of
northern Kosovo from leading a normal life. They
prevent the international forces in Kosovo from fully
implementing the mandates they were given by the
Council and from fulfilling their duties to the
population. Finally, they are a source of great tension
and therefore cast a permanent shadow over the
negotiations and dialogue between the parties. Those
negotiations are indeed decisive. The barricades are
imprisoning Kosovo Serbs in a situation for which a
solution acceptable to all is made more difficult by
their action. I am happy to echo President Boris Tadie's
appeal for the dismantling of the barricades.

Finally, allow me to briefly address the third
aspect, the report on the activities of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (see S/2012/72, annex I). I wish to underline the ambitious scope of the
Mission's activities, which include ensuring
accountability for war crimes, rooting out corruption,
fighting organized crime and trafficking in human
organs, and investigating the allegations made in the
Dick Marty report.

Portugal commends the efforts already
undertaken by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and welcomes the recent
activity of the Lead Prosecutor of the Special
Investigative Task Force, Ambassador Clint
Williamson. The contacts he has established with the
Presidents and Governments of Serbia, Albania and
Kosovo, as well as the strong support he has gathered
for his mission, allow us to expect transparent and
efficient cooperation from all involved. It also raises
our expectations about the Mission's initial findings,
which we would like to hear about very soon, for the
endeavour to uncover the whole truth behind the
allegations of hideous crimes must remain our ultimate
goal.

In that context, I would like to note with great
appreciation the recent letter from the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Albania, in
which full cooperation with EULEX investigative
action was promised. In line with the position we have
always held on serious crimes, be it in the region or
elsewhere, we believe that impunity in itself is not only
intolerable, but also an obstacle to peace. Those
allegations must be fully investigated and, if
confirmed, their perpetrators brought to justice.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, both
sides at the highest levels have adopted a more
conciliatory stance in some important respects and
have renewed efforts to achieve results. We encourage
them to move forward on that path. Progress has been
made in the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. In December
2011, another agreement was reached on the integrated
management of crossing points, which we hope, once
implemented, will help to normalize the situation in
northern Kosovo. Furthermore, we have seen
encouraging steps towards implementing previous
agreements.

We reiterate our call on both parties to continue
their commitment to that process and to finding
compromise solutions. We should not allow minor
irresponsible stakeholders to play a spoiling role
disproportionate to their contribution to peace and
stability and their representation among the population.
The Security Council must therefore continue to play
its crucial role in ensuring stability in Kosovo and the
region, as Mr. Mulet underlined.

Portugal believes that the European perspective
of Serbia and Kosovo constitutes an important
encouragement for both parties to remain
constructively engaged in their negotiations. While we
are aware of the challenges ahead, we stress that time
is of paramount importance in that regard. We appeal
to both parties to renew their efforts, both internally
and bilaterally, so as to make headway on all
fundamental issues.

In concluding, let me once again express
Portugal's appreciation and full support for the
important work being carried out in Kosovo by the
various international presences there, mainly the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the Special Representative Farid Zarif.

