Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Recent reports of an escalation of violence in the Idlib region of Syria and the resulting civilian casualties are of great concern to South Africa. That increase in violence has also forced the displacement of thousands of people since the beginning of 2020. Living under the constant threat of violence and displacement disproportionally affects the most vulnerable groups of society, including women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities. South Africa calls for the utmost restraint, the de-escalation of hostilities and for all parties to adhere to their international human rights and international humanitarian law obligations with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. We once again urge all parties to abide by their commitments under the various ceasefire agreements that have been previously agreed to. Armed groups must cease their activities, and State actors who have the ability to encourage those groups should impress upon them the need to abide by the ceasefire and comply with international law. While South Africa recognizes the right of States to counter terrorism, such actions should be in line with international human rights law and international humanitarian law obligations. In order to address the prevailing humanitarian challenges in Syria, efforts must be geared towards facilitating humanitarian assistance. We commend the various humanitarian agencies and their personnel for continuing their essential work in challenging circumstances. Tens of thousands of people remain in camps in Syria. We have also taken note that many are seeking to leave those camps. We call on the relevant authorities to provide the necessary access to the United Nations and its partners to support those who wish to leave, in line with the principles of a dignified, safe and voluntary return. South Africa supported the adoption of resolution 2504 (2020) earlier this month, which extends the mandate of the cross-border humanitarian assistance programme. We note the upcoming report of the Secretary-General on his assessment of the impact of the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing for the provision of humanitarian assistance. It should be acknowledged that, for the comprehensive distribution of aid to all those in need, a cessation of hostilities and a ceasefire must be enacted. South Africa is firm in its belief that the political and humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be addressed independently of one another. The continuation of violence and hostilities has a negative impact on the humanitarian situation, which in turn also affects political progress. Similarly, progress in the political sphere will support efforts towards ensuring that all Syrians are able to live in a safe, secure and prosperous environment free of violence. In conclusion, South Africa remains committed to supporting the protection of the fundamental interests of the Syrian people and the maintenance of peace and stability in the Middle East in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
