Mr. Bellerive (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would
like to express my gratitude to the members of the
Security Council for having agreed to listen, through
me, to the voice of Haiti during their deliberations.

My statement will be short, given the fact that it
is in line with the views expressed in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/200) and the statement made
by his Special Representative in Haiti.

The Government of Haiti wishes to thank the
members of the Security Council for the outpouring of
solidarity towards the people of Haiti following the
earthquake. We especially thank the Security Council
for having authorized the deployment of additional
military and police contingents within the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Among other initiatives, we welcome the deployment
of engineers from Japan and the Republic of Korea in
February to bolster the operational capacities of the
Mission and to assist humanitarian actions.

Given the major challenges posed by the
management and establishment of displaced person
camps in Port-au-Prince, as well as the rehabilitation of
infrastructure destroyed by the earthquake, we urge
Member States, as far as possible, to deploy further
engineers, especially as MINUSTAH possesses the
necessary space for the deployment of additional
engineering equipment.

We understand that the dispatch of additional
trained police units is under discussion. In this
connection, the Government of Haiti would welcome
the foreseen strengthening of the Mission's police
component.

The earthquake profoundly changed the context
in which MINUSTAH supports the Haitian State. For
the Government, the next 18 months will present new
risks and heightened challenges to the management of
the post-disaster response and the recovery,
reconstruction and rebirth of the country.

The presence of MINUSTAH remains necessary
to consolidating the achievements of the stabilization
process and to creating conducive conditions to initiate
lasting sustainable socio-economic development. We
consider the current mandate of the Mission to be
adequate. However, it appears that a temporary
adjustment of the mandate would be desirable to ensure
that support for the Government should, in the short
term, more efficiently and directly meet the needs of
the post-disaster situation. All of this has been
discussed broadly in Port-au-Prince with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

We endorse the approach proposed by the
Secretary-General and the minor adjustments to the
mandate, as spelled out in his most recent report
(S/2010/200), in the field of security, assistance to rule
of law institutions and Government initiatives in favour
of decentralization.

On the topic of public security, the Haitian
National Police (HNP) force suffered great losses in
human life and equipment in the earthquake of
12 January. A strengthening of MINUSTAH's police
presence would promote the development of the
capacity of the HNP to ensure the security of
individuals, and especially of displaced populations,
and to prevent a resurgence of armed groups.

One of the Government's priorities is to restore,
through the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the
operational capacities of the judicial authorities and to
guarantee access to justice within affected communities.
We welcome the proposal to provide the Government
with MINUSTAH facilities and equipment to enable
rule of law institutions to better fulfil their duties. At the
same time, increased logistical and technical support for
the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial Collectivities
in the 10 departmental delegations over the brief course
of 18 months would enable the Government to progress
in the implementation of a decentralization and regional
development policy, which is one of the best possible
responses to the causes and consequences of the scale of
the disaster that resulted from the earthquake of
12 January.

The consolidation of the democratic process and
of political stability is crucial for the success of the
reconstruction process as well as for efforts to attract
investment and promote job creation. In this respect,
the President has clearly reaffirmed his desire to
organize general elections before the end of his term of

office, on the basis of the conclusions of the electoral
feasibility mission that the Secretary-General was
gracious enough to send to Haiti.

Given the current conditions, technical, logistic
and security support by MINUSTAH will be necessary
to ensure the holding of free and transparent elections
according to timetable to be drawn up by the
competent authorities. In the same vein, MINUSTAH
should play a significant role in coordinating
international electoral assistance to guarantee its
effectiveness.

The challenges on the road to the stabilization of
Haiti were enormous before 12 January 2010. They are
even greater today. However, the solidarity so clearly
demonstrated by the international community, in
particular by the United Nations, provides the people
and Government of Haiti with the hope - indeed, the
certainty - that a brighter future is possible.

I would like to conclude by thanking the United
Nations for having appointed this wonderful friend of
Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, to replace the late Hedi
Annabi. I would like to pay tribute to the thousands of
men and women who, within the framework of the
Organization or in cooperation with it, struggle every
day for the reconstruction of my country. We continue
to require their assistance, and we will do everything to
deserve it.

