Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, to join my colleagues in thanking
the representative of Azerbaijan for the outstanding
work carried out in the month of May, as well as to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you every success in
carrying out your duties. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and to congratulate Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. Her election to the post of Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was welcomed with
great pride across our continent.

Morocco supports a political solution among all
the parties involved in order to reduce the suffering of
civilians. We reiterate our commitment to respecting the
principles of international humanitarian law and human
rights. We also reiterate our commitment to respecting
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

Since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005), the
ICC has regularly provided the Council with reports
on the implementation of that resolution. The fifteenth
report submitted by the ICC enumerates the main
actions undertaken by the Court since resolution 1593
(2005) was adopted, on 31 March 2005, and evaluates
its actions.

Today we can affirm that the situation in Darfur is
developing and that significant efforts have been made
to resolve the conflict. That progress must be encouraged
and supported.

Morocco welcomed the signing of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the launching of the
implementation of the provisions contained therein. That
ambitious agreement tackles all of the issues that gave
rise to the conflict, such as measures for an equitable
redistribution of power and resources, compensation,
the return of displaced persons, reconciliation and the
maintenance of dialogue.

The failure of several rebel movements to subscribe
to the agreement and the resulting instability make its
implementation difficult. In addition, the main structure
arising from the agreement, namely, the Darfur Regional
Authority, has been established. However, the lack of
funds available to it currently prevents it from becoming
operational.

The Sudan is an ancient African nation that, with
the richness of its history, culture and civilization, has
contributed to the history of the entire African continent.
The history of the Sudan did not begin with the conflict
that has ravaged the country; its history goes back
centuries and is intimately linked to the history of the
continent.

The Sudan has made important sacrifices for
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. The decision of the ICC
to indict President Al-Bashir is not based on international
consensus. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Non-Aligned Movement have called into question
such an approach. The cooperation of States not parties
to the Rome Statute is also a complex issue in many
respects.

The League of Arab States clearly expressed its
position with regard to the indictment of President
Al-Bashir only a few days after the decision ofthe ICC,
at its twenty-first Summit, held in Doha in March 2009.
The League of Arab States has since then reiterated its
position several times.

We believe that the long process that will enable
a return to peace and stability in Darfur cannot be
achieved without effective and coordinated cooperation
on the part of all those involved, regional organizations
and the mediation mechanisms involved.

