Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank the French delegation for having
convened this open debate. I also wish to thank Under-
Secretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for their statements.

China is deeply concerned about the safety of
civilian lives and property during armed conflict,
which have been negatively impacted and threatened.
We condemn acts of violence deliberately targeting
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

Today, I wish to underscore four points.

First, the strengthening of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must strictly abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The responsibility to protect civilians lies first
and foremost with the Government of the country
concerned. The international community and external
organizations can provide constructive assistance, but
they must observe the principles of objectivity and
neutrality and fully respect the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the
country concerned. There must be no attempt at regime
change or involvement in civil war by any party under
the guise of protecting civilians.

Secondly, in order to fundamentally address the
objective of the protection of civilians, more must be
done in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution.
The Security Council should as a priority engage in
preventive diplomacy and prevent or reduce conflict in
regions where there is turmoil. The Council should as a
priority urge the parties concerned to cease hostilities
and achieve a ceasefire. Only by actively promoting a
political solution by peaceful means through dialogue
and negotiation can civilian casualties be minimized.
Military means are not an effective answer to these
issues.

Thirdly, strengthening the protection of civilians
in armed conflict must be done through implementation
of Security Council decisions in a comprehensive and
strict manner. The original intention of resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) was to put an end to
violence and to protect civilians. We are opposed to
any attempt to wilfully interpret the resolutions or to
take actions that exceed those mandated by the
resolutions. In implementing the resolutions, efforts
must be made to avoid yet greater civilian casualties.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict involves the development and evolution of the
norms of international humanitarian law, which should
be discussed in depth by the wider membership of the
United Nations in order to reach consensus. Conflict
situations vary, and there must be no one-size-fits-all
approach to the protection of civilians. Various parties
still hold divergent views on the responsibility to
protect, and the General Assembly should continue its
discussion on this matter.

The deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations alone cannot fundamentally address the
issue of the protection of civilians. In authorizing the
United Nations to protect civilians, the specific
situation of the country concerned, as well as the
capabilities of the United Nations, must be taken into
full consideration. United Nations peacekeeping
operations must continue to abide by the principles of
objectivity and neutrality and avoid taking sides in
local political disputes or even becoming a party to the
conflict.

