Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, I should like to thank you for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro. I also
welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister of
the Republic of Serbia and Montenegro here today,
although we regret the events that have brought him to
New York.

We strongly condemn the events that took place
on 13 August near the village of Gorazdevac that took
the lives of two children and wounded a number of
others. The killing of children is utterly despicable.
There can be no justification for it; it is unacceptable.
Allow me to convey our condolences to the bereaved
families.

This occurrence is yet another in a series of
recent events in the region which the Security Council
has condemned. It has also expressed its concern as to
their impact on the ongoing process in Kosovo.

Every effort must be made to find those
responsible for these and other atrocities, who to date
have gone unpunished. The perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We welcome the steps taken so far
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and it is our hope that its efforts
to find those responsible will be stepped up even
further.

Any act of violence, harassment or discrimination
on ethnic grounds is detrimental to the building of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo and goes against the spirit of
resolution 1244 (1999). The Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo have a central role to play
in achieving reconciliation in Kosovo, so as to make
possible the building of a multi-ethnic and democratic
society that includes all inhabitants, with no
exclusions.

The events that have brought us here today must
serve as a catalyst for us to recommit ourselves to this
process. The future of Kosovo presents a major
challenge. We therefore agree with what Mr. Holkeri
said on 14 August about the urgent need to strengthen
the rule of law, step up the combat against organized
crime and promote economic development.

We urge the parties to intensify and broaden the
scope of the dialogue. In the absence of a constructive
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and between
UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly, it will be very
difficult to achieve any concrete and tangible results
with respect to the major challenge that is faced.

We reiterate once again our thanks for the efforts
and the professionalism of UNMIK personnel, and we
offer our full support to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri Holkeri, whom we
know from his excellent work as President of the
Assembly. We wish him well in his current work.

