Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
During the past few years, Chile has been following with
close attention and great concern the results of the
conflict in the territories of the former Yugoslavia. We
have not been untouched, in spite of the geographic
distance separating us from the Balkan region, by the pain
and tragedy suffered by so many human beings, the
victims of a war that is often cruel and always senseless.

Today the international community, as never before
in this long process of constantly seeking a negotiated
political settlement, takes hope that these many years of
suffering will fade into the past. Last November we
celebrated when the parties reached a General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Dayton as well as the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium, which is the subject that has
brought the Council together today. Politically, the two
Agreements are part of the same process. We support the
continued verification of the demilitarization process on
the Prevlaka peninsula, and we therefore support the
adoption today of the draft resolution on this subject.

My delegation would like to pay a sincere tribute to
the representatives of the Secretary-General and of the
European Union, who have worked so hard for years in
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia,
to the negotiators of the Agreements just mentioned, to
the humanitarian organizations and particularly to the
Blue Helmets and the diplomats who have given their
lives in the noble cause of peace.

In supporting this draft resolution of the Security
Council, Chile welcomes the shifting of the focus of the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia from the military realm
to the realm of political negotiation. As so often in the
past, Governments and the parties involved will do their
calculations and determine how successful they were in
the negotiations, what they won and what they lost. Only
time will tell whether the understandings reached are
sound and honourable. What is clear even now is that
there is already a big loser in this whole tragic story -
the peoples of the territories involved. The daily lives of
thousands upon thousands of families and communities
have been shattered, often irreparably. Today in many
parts of these regions the agreements notwithstanding,
fear, distrust and sadness still reign. Normal life still
seems very far away. It takes a great injection of hope for
anyone to think positively about the future.

 

In this connection, it might be useful to assign the
World Health Organization (WHO) the task of dealing with
the frame of mind and the psychological state of the
residents of the region who have been most affected, in
order to help them overcome their own deep-seated doubts
and strengthen their ability to get along with those who
only yesterday were their enemies.

The draft resolution we are going to adopt has
importance beyond political and military considerations. It
is an effort by the United Nations to help restore normalcy
and to create conditions of greater security, greater trust and
greater happiness for the entire natural population of
Eastern Slavonia. The United Nations goes there at the
request of the parties to administer the territory during the
transitional period, while the Agreements are being fully
implemented. In theory, the scene is set for a successful
intervention. Therefore, there is no reason to refuse. In
practice, however, it is not advisable to respond
affirmatively without making a few comments.

The recent history of the region as a whole is well
known. Agreements have not been implemented and, most
especially, a lack of respect has been shown for members
of the United Nations by the very parties who are today
demanding their presence. The success of this provisional
administration which is being assigned to the United
Nations will depend first and foremost on the leadership
qualities, on sensitivity and character of the person and the
team that discharge this task. Success will also depend on
the credibility of the practical means made available to
them for the implementation of the task. I believe that in
the implementation of these responsibilities, lessons learned
in Namibia and Cambodia will be very useful.
In the last analysis, real and lasting success will
depend on the parties concerned. It will depend on their
good faith, their mutual trust and their ability to think about
the lives of people more than about grand strategic
schemes. For this reason, this draft resolution appeals to the
parties to continue to take confidence-building measures
and make good will gestures and to take small and great
steps towards reconciliation. These are practical ways to
show their willingness to implement fully the Agreements.
The reports we have received from the representatives of
the Secretary-General are positive in this regard.

In this respect, we welcome measures conducive to the
implementation of the Basic Agreement as regards
demilitarization, assistance to and return of refugees in
conditions of security and the need to guarantee the lasting
right of minorities to live in the area and of their right to
recover their property or to receive compensation when
property cannot be returned.

My delegation believes that the draft resolution
before us contains the necessary elements and
characteristics to allow for a successful deployment of the
peace-keeping operation.

We believe it is necessary to take into due account
on this occasion the harsh experiences of the military
forces of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in what were until recently called the "safe
areas" of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
draw from those experiences the right conclusions. In this
respect, we believe that an adequate, well-equipped
military contingent, in Eastern Slavonia, meeting the
requirement of deterrence, will make the people of the
region feel secure while also avoiding exposure of the
peace-keeping forces to unnecessary risks.

The effectiveness of the operation will also depend
on the support received by the United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) in the event of
difficulties, as spelt out in operative paragraph 14, which
states that

"Member States, acting nationally or through
regional organizations or arrangements, may, at the
request of UNTAES and on the basis of procedures
communicated to the United Nations, take all
necessary measures, including close air support, in
defence of UNTAES, and, as appropriate, to assist
in the withdrawal of UNTAES". (S/1996/23, para. 14)
This authorization should be used decisively, but
also cautiously, with emphasis on its defensive character.

We agree with the statement in the Secretary-
General's report that this new peace-keeping operation is
complex and difficult. For this reason, we believe that the
proposed safeguard measures are appropriate and that the
cooperation of the multinational Implementation Force
(IFOR), authorized by Security Council resolution 1031
(1995), is essential. We believe that the success of the
tasks carried out by IFOR in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is closely linked to the tasks that UNTAES
should carry out. That, in its turn is closely linked to the
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel in this peace-keeping operation, which must be
guaranteed at all times by the parties. In this draft

 

resolution, the Security Council provides in operative
paragraph 13 that Croatia should include UNTAES and the
United Nations Liaison Office in Zagreb in the present
Status of Forces Agreement with the United Nations.

We also believe it is essential that the demilitarization
process be fully carried out in accordance with the
timetable laid out in the Agreement and that the transition
force should therefore be deployed without delay.

While it is true that the military aspects of the
operation being established today are essential, they are but
one component of the main task to be carried out by the
Transitional Administration, whose purpose is to achieve
the peaceful reintegration of the region into the
constitutional system of Croatia through the implementation
of the Basic Agreement.

Among the tasks assigned to the civil component of
UNTAES, my delegation ascribes a fundamental role to
efforts to promote economic development and the speedy
reconstruction of the region. In this regard, we appreciate
the role that the financial institutions and international
cooperators are called upon to play in the normalization of
the activities of the people, as well as in the creation of a
climate of stability and confidence.

My delegation wishes to highlight the importance it
attaches to full cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, as provided in paragraph 20 of
the draft resolution.

In adopting this draft resolution, we cannot forget the
large total of still unpaid contributions for other peace-
keeping operations and the new costs implied in this
operation. The Security Council's actions must be
politically effective, but also financially responsible. This
issue, although it is not the direct responsibility of the
Council, is in the background and cannot be disregarded.
For this reason, Croatia can make a very important
contribution to a process whose final result is of great
interest to it.

Finally, my delegation wishes to reiterate the urgency
and importance of the parties' creating the climate of
confidence necessary for peaceful reintegration of the
region of Eastern Slavonia into the Republic of Croatia, in
accordance with the timetable laid down in the Agreement.

