Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council has returned yet again to address the
tragic results of the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian territories, people, institutions and
infrastructure.

Over the past few weeks, the Israeli Government
has flouted the resolutions of the United Nations and
the Security Council calling on it to withdraw from the
cities, villages and territory that it has aggressively and
unjustly entered and to respect the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War. It has thereby challenged all the values and
principles of international humanitarian law, and the
civilized world must respond with deterrent measures.
It must affirm that it has not forgotten the lessons of
the past century, when the international community
stood resolutely against aggression and defeated it,
erecting the pillars of a new world that today faces the
open challenge of preventing history from repeating
itself. We must reject the double standards, the
violation of international law and the policies of
arrogance and force that the Council has so far failed to
deter.

The Council and all its members, particularly its
permanent members, must stand up today in defence of
the principles of international law and international
humanitarian law and compel Israel, the Power that has
reoccupied the Palestinian territories, to respect them.
The Council must act decisively and immediately to
dispatch a mission of its members to investigate the
devastation wrought by Israeli aggression on
Palestinian cities, the crimes committed against the
Palestinian people and the destruction of Palestinian
infrastructure. This mission should be accompanied by
representatives of all the bodies and organs of the
United Nations system, of its Secretary-General and of
humanitarian assistance and human rights agencies.
The mission should submit a report to the Council
within two weeks. On the basis of that report, we could
consider the international community's options with
respect to legal measures to address recent and ongoing
events. The aggressors of right and truth will know
thereby that they shall not escape the hand ofjustice.

Also necessary is the Security Council's
agreement immediately to dispatch an international
force to verify a full Israeli withdrawal from the
Palestinian territories, cities and villages that have been
reoccupied since late March. One function of such a
force would be to monitor the implementation of a
ceasefire, the violence and the military confrontations
and to protect the Palestinian people. It would also
ensure that Israel does not in future resume the kind of
practices, violations and aggression that have occurred
in the past two weeks.

In this connection, Egypt supports the
comprehensive proposal submitted by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan this morning. The Security
Council must today compel the Israeli Government to
respect the freedom of action and movement of
international relief organizations, such as the
International Committees of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent.

What is required today of the States and
organizations of the international community is to
provide assistance and relief to the Palestinian people
and to the legitimate Palestinian Authority, represented
by President Arafat and his Government. We should
start the process of rebuilding what has been destroyed
by Israel's brutal aggression, which has left deep
wounds in the physical well-being and in the psyche of
the Palestinian people.

We have full confidence in the support of all
friendly and principled Powers in rebuilding the
institutions and infrastructure of the Palestinian
Authority, which Israel has destroyed, and in the
perseverance of the Palestinian people. These are two
elements that will enable us to overcome the present
crrsrs.

What is required of the Council and its members,
particularly its permanent members, is immediately to
compel the Israeli Government to lift its siege on the
headquarters of the legitimate, elected President of the
Palestinian people, President Arafat, and to halt all
desecration of Christian and Islamic holy places,
particularly the Church of the Nativity, which is still
hostage to Israel aggression.
The right of all peoples to resist foreign
occupation is a legitimate legal right under
international law and the United Nations Charter. To
state otherwise is to confuse the facts and is a denial of
internationally recognized legitimacy. It is not possible
or conceivable to ask the Palestinian people to accept
occupation, the settlements and the colonization of its
land by aggressive groups living in the settlements with
the support of the Israeli Defence Force, which is
implementing a policy of oppression against the
Palestinian people.

I would like to make some final comments
concerning the grave and tragic situation in the Middle
East arising from the Israeli Government's actions.
These observations are basically an attempt to find a
way out of the crisis and to avert confrontation. First,
there is no military solution to this conflict. Israel and
its Government will eventually come to the conclusion
that acts of resistance to occupation will not end until
Israel ends its aggression and its occupation.

Secondly, the settlement of the Palestinian
question should stem from Israel's recognition of the
inevitability of its full withdrawal from all the
Palestinian territories occupied since 4 June 1967, thus
realizing the legitimate national aspiration of the
Palestinian people to establish a Palestinian State, with
its capital in East Jerusalem. Thus, finally, measures
could be agreed upon to provide security for everyone.

All these elements possess the legitimacy of
unanimous international acceptance. The international
community must fully back this concept and must use
the ways and means necessary to bring about a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, on the basis
of the norms of international law and international
agreements.

It is essential that all parties recognize their
responsibilities in this matter and act accordingly,
taking into account the pressures of time and of the
accumulating anger and hatred. We must therefore take
immediate action to gain control of the situation,
dispatch an international force immediately and insist
on Israeli withdrawal from the reoccupied territories
and the cessation of all military operations against the
Palestinian Authority and its territory. We hope that the
Security Council will rise to the challenges it faces and
to the demands of this very serious situation.

