Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Stephen O'Brien for their detailed
briefings on the military-political and humanitarian
situations in the Lake Chad Basin region.

Of particular concern are the ongoing activities of
Boko Haram, which continues to undermine stability in
Cameroon, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad and threatens
many other countries of the continent. We recall
that Boko Haram has declared its allegiance to the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, which has become
entrenched in Libya, where chaos and a de facto power
vacuum have prevailed for the past five years. That
linkage makes it even more urgent than ever to find
an urgent, cohesive and robust response to the terrorist
threat in Africa. We are also concerned about the new
and innovative tactics used by Boko Haram, which
avoids direct confrontations with Government armed
forces and prefers attackingpeaceful civilians and
civilian infrastructure through suicide bombers and
improvised explosive devices.

It will be impossible to improve the humanitarian
situation, resolve the issue of refugees and many
problems linked to the terrorist threat in the region
without eliminating the threat posed by Boko Haram.
That is evident to us all today and is our highest
priority. We note the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, their Multinational Joint Task Force and
Benin, and welcome the results they have achieved. We
are convinced that collective action alone can defeat the
terrorist hydra in Africa and elsewhere in the world.

We also welcome the positive decision taken at the
recent African Union Summit in Kigali to establish an
anti-terrorist fund to meet the needs of the continent,
which will play an important role in the elimination
of terrorism throughout Africa. We also highly
commend the measures taken by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the United
Nations specialized agencies that provide multifaceted
assistance to the Lake Chad Basin countries. The
most important decisions have been taken and must
now be implemented. Russia will maintain its active
multilateral and bilateral cooperation with the States
of Africa.
