The President: At the outset, I should like to
acknowledge and welcome the presence at the Council
table of the distinguished Minister of State in charge of
External Relations of Cameroon, His Excellency Mr.
Francois-Xavier Ngoubeyou. I believe he is going to
join us later.

I should also like to acknowledge and welcome
the presence at the Council table of the distinguished
Minister for International Development of Norway, Her
Excellency Ms. Hilde E. Johnson, accompanied by the
Minister of Children and Family Affairs of Norway,
Her Excellency Ms. Laila Daavoy.

I should also like to acknowledge and welcome
the presence at the Council table of the distinguished
National Coordinator for the Mexican Child and
Family Protection System, Her Excellency Ms. Ana
Teresa Aranda.

And while I am issuing special words of
welcome, I also want to acknowledge the presence of
young people in the Chamber, including young students
from the Collegiate and Sacred Heart Schools in New
York City, where my children happen to be studying.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.

It is so decided.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Graca Machel,
former Minister of Education for Mozambique, former
Independent Expert of the Secretary-General on the
Impact of Armed Conflict on Children, and author of
the recent book entitled "The Impact of War on
Children" - which I highly recommend to everyone
here.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Graga Machel to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mrs. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF).

It is so decided.

I invite the Executive Director of UNICEF,
accompanied by the three children who will be
speaking to us - D. Wilmot Wungko, Eliza Kantardzic
and Jose Cabral - to take their seats at the Council
table. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the children.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I shall now make some opening remarks on
behalf of the Security Council.

On behalf of the Security Council, I am pleased
to welcome Ms. Graga Machel, former Minister of
Education of Mozambique and former Independent
Expert on children and armed conflict; Mrs. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as
the three child representatives: Wilmot from Liberia,
Eliza from Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Jose from
East Timor.

The Security Council is pleased to hold this
meeting in order to demonstrate support for the
General Assembly special session on children. Indeed,
we had planned to hold this meeting last September,
under the presidency of France, but 11 September
caused its postponement. At the same time, this session
provides a valuable opportunity for the Security
Council to reaffirm its collective and firm commitment
to the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict, which has become progressively
mainstreamed into the work of the Council.

In the early years of the history of the United
Nations, there were a number of international
instruments containing important child-specific
provisions, such as the 1949 Geneva Convention and
Additional Protocols of 1977 and the 1989 Convention
on the Rights of the Child.

The real breakthrough came after Ms. Graca
Machel's groundbreaking study, issued in 1996
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 48/157 of 20
December 1993. The study suggested a comprehensive
agenda for action by the international community to
enhance the protection of children during armed
conflict.

She also recommended that

"the Council should therefore be kept continually
and fully aware of humanitarian concerns,
including child-specific concerns, in its actions to
resolve conflicts, to keep or to enforce peace or to
implement peace agreements." (A/51/306, para. 282)

A year later, Mr. Olara Otunnu was appointed
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, and both his Office and UNICEF have
worked hard to push this issue.

In 1998, the Security Council held an open debate
on the subject and issued a landmark presidential
statement. This was followed by three significant
Security Council resolutions - 1261 (1999), 1314
(2000) and, most recently, 1379 (2001).

Resolution 1379 (2001) lays out most
comprehensively the Council's extensive support and
guidance for international efforts to protect and assist
children in armed conflict. Notably, the resolution
identifies concrete steps to be taken by States, non-
States and international actors to protect children
affected by armed conflict.

Another recent development on the subject was
the statement by the President of the Security Council
before the Executive Board of UNICEF in December
2001. In his statement, the then Council President
referred to the situation of children affected by armed
conflict in West Africa and highlighted this as an ideal
case for cooperation between the Security Council and
UNICEF, and proposed the creation of a joint
mechanism to make this cooperation possible.

More recently, in March 2002, as part of the aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Council drew attention to the importance
of addressing the specific assistance and protection
needs of children, including, inter alia, prevention of
the recruitment of child soldiers in violation of
international law, family reunification of displaced
children and the provision of a secure channel for child
refugees and internally displaced children, who are
especially vulnerable to exploitation and to abuse.

In recent years, the Council has also included
child- protection provisions in several specific Security
Council resolutions, including 1260 (1999) on Sierra
Leone and resolution 1279 (1999) on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, the Council is also
engaged, through Arria-formula meetings, with non-
governmental organizations, which often provide
valuable insights and perspectives into the problem of
children in armed conflict.

At the same time, through various Security
Council missions to the field - and, I am sure,
including Ambassador Levitte's recent mission, which
he has just returned from this morning - Council
members have also had to opportunity to witness
firsthand the conditions of children in conflict and
post-conflict situations around the world.

In a similar vein, members will recall the moving
statement made by 14-year-old Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
from Sierra Leone, who related his experiences here in
this Chamber last November. We believe that the
personal testimonies of the three young persons in our
meeting today will help us better to understand what
children go through in situations of armed conflict and
thus underscore the importance of provisions for
children under such circumstances.

We hope that today's meeting will make a further
contribution towards raising awareness of a major
concern of the international community.

That ends my opening remarks as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Olara
Otunnu.


