The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Germany, India, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan and Poland, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan), took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Charge d'affaires of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Schwaiger to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/ZOlO/ 127, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and
security.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.


