Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the delegations of the United
Kingdom and France for requesting this meeting. I
would like to thank the President for having managed
to do whatever it took to make this meeting happen.

I would also like to thank Mr. Feltman and
Mr. O'Brien for their briefings. I am not losing hope
that one of these days Mr. O'Brien might enter the
Chamber and say "I have some good news." But in
the four months that I have been here, unfortunately,
reality in all its cruelty has been imposed on us. Some
50 years ago, speaking of another war, the American
poet, Robert Allen Zimmerman, better known as Bob
Dylan, asked the question:

(spoke in English)

"How many deaths will it take till he knows
That too many people have died?"

The question remains as valid today as it was then.
How many more deaths will we have to see? How many
more hospitals will need to be destroyed? How many
more children will have to be killed? How many more?
It would seem that for some people, certain games are
more important than the lives of human beings.
In an intergovernmental organization such as ours,
the main responsibility for such issues falls on States,
particularly those most directly involved and especially
those that are directly involved and support one party
to the conflict or another. We welcome the joint efforts
of the United States and Russia that have allowed the
cessation of hostilities to include Aleppo. Syria is
suffering and Aleppo is suffering. We therefore hope
they will be able to exert the necessary pressure on the
various actors on the ground.

We must not forget that, in the confusion prevailing
on the ground in areas where various non-State
armed groups are taking part in the combat, any
non-State group that crosses the border - even if
it is merely circumstantially allied with a terrorist
group - is as much a terrorist as the terrorist group
itself. Consequently, the main countries currently
involved in the negotiations should exert all possible
influence on any party over which they have influence
in order to affect the situation on the ground.

Uruguay remains ready to support efforts and
initiatives aimed at strengthening the cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian access and the political
process - the famous three pacts mentioned by
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We will continue to devote all
our efforts to that end.

