We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga- Anyanga for their briefings. This reporting period has been marked by positive steps influenced by the peaceful transitions in both countries. Nevertheless, the recent violent attacks that have taken place in Abyei, which have resulted in deaths, kidnappings and burnt villages, in addition to other fatalities, are highly concerning. Owing to the insecurity, humanitarian agencies have been unable to implement aid projects in some territories. The very fragile situation is exacerbated by recurrent armed attacks, the effects of climate change and, now, the threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which requires united efforts in order to contain its spread. Since the conflict started, the Sudan and South Sudan have paid limited attention to their responsibilities in respect of Abyei as they face other pressing issues. More needs to be done to allow for the consolidation of peace and security by fostering a viable political process that ultimately leads to the full implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011. Accordingly, it is also critical that the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) be provided with an appropriate mandate, capabilities and resources. The appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission and other key civilian and police staff, as well as the operationalization of the Athony airstrip, would be a great boost to that end. We welcome the progress made on the deployment of the joint military observer teams across the Abyei area and on the implementation of the benchmarks of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The people of Abyei expect solutions to their priority needs, including health care, nutrition, food and water, as well as their human rights to be protected. It is concerning that cases of sexual and gender-based violence involving minors are being reported and that women in the Abyei area lack representation in decision-making processes. In that regard, we welcome the reappointment of a female representative on the Ngok Dinka joint community peace committee and the ongoing drafting of an action plan to promote coherent implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. To conclude, we would like to highlight the initiative to convene a conference of traditional leaders on 9 April, as well as the scale and comprehensiveness of advocacy for the protection of human rights, especially those of women and children. In order to achieve sustainable peace, the Sudan and South Sudan must take concrete action to fulfil their commitments and the Council should turn its attention back to that issue. The upcoming discussions on UNISFA's mandate present us with the perfect opportunity to do that.
