Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would first like to express my appreciation
for briefing of the Special Representative, Ambassador
Tanin, on the text of the most report (S/2016/99) of the
Secretary-General. I also like welcome the presence of
the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and of Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Ambassador Tanin has provided us with an
interesting analysis of the current situation in the
territory ofKosovo. It is interesting and at the same time
worrisome. From what he described, and given the text of
the report of the Secretary-General that we have before
us, it seems that the situation in Kosovo continues to be
unstable. A peaceful development of political activity
that is in keeping with the law is increasingly replaced
by violent demonstrations and aggressive actions, even
within the Parliament, that are entirely unacceptable.
Spain notes with great concern that the climate of
political tension that the Secretary-General highlighted
in his report (S/2015/833) in October has not improved.
To the contrary, it is becoming a recurrent standard in
the political life of Pristina. Spain is also worried by
the recurrent use of incendiary rhetoric, which is once
again reflected in the report of the Secretary-General.
This is clear evidence that we are far from being able
to speak of true and lasting reconciliation between the
various communities that share the territory of Kosovo.

Everything that I have just said once again
demonstrates the fact that the presence of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), and possibly of other international missions
in Kosovo, continues to be essential. This also clearly
underscores that the Security Council must remain
attentive to this topic, working on it regularly and
assiduously, as we have in the past.

As is well known, Spain strongly supports the
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
facilitated by the European Union. We take note of the
most recent meeting held in that context on 27 January.
We view that as a step in the right direction, following
the total absence of high-level meetings during the
three-month reporting period covered by the report of
the Secretary-General. However, we regret that at that
last meeting there was no significant progress made or
progress on new agreements or, which perhaps is worse
and more worrisome, progress on the implementation
of the agreements already reached. The Brussels
dialogue must continue to have a central and priority
nature. Abandonment of this key aspect, which appears
to be reflected in the report of the Secretary-General,
runs the risk of progressive deterioration of trust, and
that inevitably would have negative repercussions on
the European perspective regarding the many efforts
the European Union is making at this time. It is not
realistic to consider making new demands without
showing beforehand the readiness to implement what
has already been agreed to.

In that context, we would like once again to call
attention to the need to implement, without delay, the
agreement reached on the association/community of
Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo. That agrement
was reached in good faith, and it should be followed
up by the efforts of all to make it a reality, including
active and committed work for its implementation with
the various political and social actors, as well as at the
legislative level.

Finally, I would like to comment on something
mentioned in paragraph 3 of the report of the
Secretary-General - a comment on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement with the European Union.
As is known, the content of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement of Kosovo affects only the
exclusive competencies of the European Union, which
preserves the position of those member States of the
European Union that do not recognize the validity
of the unilateral declaration of independence. For
Spain and the other countries that do not recognize
it, the Agreement is an end in itself. It incorporates
the territory of Kosovo into the stabilization and
association process, but it does not establish precedents
nor does it imply the inclusion of this territory in the
process of the expansion of the European Union. This
is in keeping with the constructive position of Spain,
which we have repeatedly expressed in the Council.
It is a constructive position, without detriment, that
respects positions of principle. Along those lines, and
as long as that position is respected, we are more than
ready to support measures that could benefit the entire
population of the territory of Kosovo.

