Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It
was four months ago, in this same Chamber, when we
had the Council's last public meeting on the issue
before us today. On that occasion, inter alia, we
mentioned the following points, which I would like to
reiterate this evening.

The Security Council can and must act vis-a-vis
the situation in the Middle East, because this is a
conflict that undoubtedly represents a real threat to
international peace and security. In this way, the
Council will be fulfilling the responsibilities entrusted
to it in the Charter.

In acting, the Council must use the greatest calm
and prudence, being careful not to negatively affect a
very volatile situation. The Security Council is
obligated to create conditions so that violence can
come to an end and negotiations can be resumed.

At that time, we reaffirmed that the situation had
spiralled into violence, to the benefit of no one. Thus,
the excessive use of force, as well as extrajudiciary
killings by Israelis and extremist acts committed
indiscriminately against civilians, cannot be accepted.
We have appealed to the parties to welcome the
recommendations of the Mitchell report, and we have
supported the diplomatic efforts of high-level envoys
on the ground. We said this before, and we reiterate it
today: the weakening of the Palestinian Authority will
erode the peace process, which will only benefit
extremists and the enemies of peace.

It is clear that, after August, serious events have
taken place that directly or indirectly affect the
situation in the Middle East. On the one hand, the
Council has engaged in deeper reflection; yet, on the
other, it is necessary for the Council to avoid - on an
issue that is so closely related to the events of
11 September - sending erroneous messages to the
parties involved in the conflict in the region.

It is also clear that since August the situation has
deteriorated to a level that only four months ago we
could not even have imagined.

Given all of this, the Security Council now has a
role that it must responsibly shoulder, while avoiding
greater polarization between the parties, and helping
them to seek alternatives to an escalation of violence.
We see our work as complementing the efforts by other
actors in the international community, including the
activities of the Secretary-General. We therefore
believe that the Security Council should primarily
ensure the full implementation of the recommendations
in the Mitchell report, a document that was welcomed
by members of this body on 22 May. This can be
achieved only if we act in the strength of a solid
political consensus among all its members.

