Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): It appears that I am the
last speaker on the list, so allow me to join all previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate, which serves as an engine to generate
complex and open dialogue for examining the
conceptual issue of the rule oflaw.

In recent years, the international community has
increased its efforts to address the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. Following the
commitment to the rule of law in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/ 1), the rule of law was
placed high on the United Nations and national
agendas. A consensus emerged that the rule of law
should be promoted at both the national and
international levels and be based on the United Nations
Charter, the norms of international law and the
principles of good governance.

Armenia attaches utmost importance to the
promotion of justice and the rule of law, as these
values are indispensable for the maintenance of
international and regional security and the protection
of human rights. Moreover, the systematic breaches of
the rule of law contribute to violations of these basic
human rights and fundamental freedoms of peoples,
which are among the major and immediate causes of
regional conflicts.

The full and fair implementation of the norms and
principles of human rights, such as the free exercise of
democratic values, should be welcomed and
encouraged by the United Nations Member States and
should not be conditioned on the current status of the
territory within which people choose to live
democratically. Core United Nations values and
principles cannot be compromised or ignored when it
comes to people who live in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
As we discuss the concept of the rule of law, we
should emphasize the need for and importance of
interaction with the representative authorities
legitimately elected by the people of conflict regions
during settlement negotiations. Armenia pursues an
approach of dialogue, negotiations and mutual
compromise, and strongly rejects the language of force,
threats and militaristic rhetoric.

The notion of the rule of law represents a concept
that is diametrically opposed to the rule by force or use
of force. This principle stipulates a framework for
peaceful conflict resolution and democratic
governance. Strengthening the rule of law based on
justice and security therefore requires a deeper
commitment and a broader vision of the future.

Adherence to the principle of non-use of force or
threat clearly and unequivocally declared by the parties
concerned in conflict and post-conflict settings is
another crucial factor for creating a environment
conducive to building mutual trust and in achieving
justice and security.

Armenia believes that the conflict resolution
process must inevitably be based on the resolve and
will of all concerned parties - first and foremost, of
those who will be directly influenced and affected by
the settlement. Our approach must also be built on the
understanding that any conflict resolution should
impartially and fully address the root causes of the
conflict under discussion in order to prevent their
renewal in the future, and should provide reliable and
adequate security guaranties to the populations
concerned, thus ensuring sustainable peace and
development for the whole region.

The rule of law is a concept at the very heart of
the stated mission of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is a well-known fact that,
in an increasing number of its operations on the
ground, the United Nations is calling on the services of
relevant regional and subregional organizations, since
in certain areas and in some cases these international
actors are able to provide expertise and a better
understanding of local peculiarities to complement that
of the United Nations.

Since 1992, for example, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has been
providing a forum for the settlement of a conflict in our
subregion, and we believe that that organization has
adequate capacity to maintain its lead in the

10-4285]
negotiation process. We are confident that continuous
negotiations within the framework of the OSCE, which
have been uninterrupted since their inception, serve as
one of the major prerequisites for a just and lasting
resolution of the issue.

While the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, other main bodies of the United
Nations and relevant international organizations,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, can play a
significant role in contributing to the development and
strengthening of international law, the rule of law and
the maintenance of international peace and security.

