Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba has been deeply concerned about the
pernicious deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East since the last open debate on the topic (see S/PV.8167). We reiterate our firm condemnation of
the criminal aggression perpetrated by the Israeli
army against the Palestinian population in the Gaza
Strip on 30 March, which led to the death of dozens of
people and left more than 400 injured. This cruel and
disproportionate act is a gross and blatant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
humanitarian law, heightens tensions in the region
and reduces the likelihood of success of efforts aimed
at resuming peace talks between Palestinians and
Israelis. It is very regrettable that, because of constant
obstruction by one of its members, the Security Council
has not even been able to condemn the tragic events
in the Gaza Strip or enforce respect for international
law and international humanitarian law, including the
protection of Palestinians, at a time when the urgent
action of the international community is needed.

Cuba calls on the Security Council to assume its
responsibility under the United Nations Charter with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security and take the necessary decisions and demand
that Israel puts an immediate end to the occupation of
Palestinian territories and to the aggressive colonial
policies and practices, and comply with Council
resolutions on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).

We express our solidarity with the Government and
the people of Palestine. We reiterate our unwavering
support for a comprehensive, just, peaceful and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question - which lies at
the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict - that is based
on a two-State solution and allows Palestinians to
exercise their right to self-determination and to a free
and sovereign State, with East Jerusalem as its capital
and within the pre-1967 borders, as well as the right
of refugees to return. We will also continue to support
the admission of Palestine as a full Member of the
United Nations.

Furthermore, we join in the international
community's firm rejection of the unilateral decision
made by the Government of the United States to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, which
constitutes a serious and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. That decision, intended to alter the
historical status of Jerusalem, can only undermine the
legitimate interests of the Palestinian people and the
Arab countries.

Cuba also expresses its most emphatic
condemnation of the recent attack perpetrated by
the United States and some of its allies on 13 April
on military and civilian facilities in the Syrian Arab
Republic, using as a pretext the alleged use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Government against civilians in
Douma, without any proof that the Syrian Government
had used such weapons and prior to the investigation
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Fact-Finding Mission. That unilateral action,
which sidestepped the Security Council, and the
Israeli attack on a Syrian airbase in the governorate of
Horns on 9 April are yet further flagrant violations of
the principles of international law and the Charter of
the Organization.

Cuba demands the full and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian Golan and
all occupied Arab territories. We reiterate that any
measure or action that has been taken or is to be
taken to change the legal, physical or demographic
status or the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel's measures to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration on that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), and the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Cuba advocates a constructive and respectful
dialogue among the peoples of the region and calls
for non-interference in internal affairs and an end to
foreign aggression and to support, financing or the
supply of weapons to terrorist groups with the goal of
promoting instability and conflict in the Middle East.
Moreover, Cuba calls for an end to the fabrication
of excuses and concepts in the Council that aim to
legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States. Let us uphold multilateralism,
strictly based on the purposes and principles of the
Charter and international law.

