Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their overviews of the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We listened attentively to the striking, even heartbreaking stories delivered by Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy and Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi about the lives of ordinary Yemeni civilians in the midst of conflict. We support the mediation efforts undertaken by Mr. Griffiths to rekindle political dialogue and reach a settlement to the conflict. The international community is united in the understanding that Yemen's problems cannot be resolved militarily. It is important for the Yemeni parties themselves to promptly embrace this premise and to undertake to craft measures to build trust and establish a universal ceasefire. To that end, the interests of all Yemeni social groups must be taken into account and the settlement needs to be both a compromise and satisfactory to all. The same approach can and should be applied to address the SFO Safer tanker issue with the assistance of the United Nations. We are firmly of the view that both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock are well positioned to help the Yemenis reach the necessary arrangements. Unfortunately, it behoves us to note that the implementation of the Stockholm and the Riyadh agreements is stalled. We welcome efforts aimed at reviving those agreements, which would help to facilitate to a comprehensive settlement. We call on the parties to the conflict to refrain from the use of force and to take measures to de-escalate tensions and to facilitate the efforts at the United Nations to reach ceasefire and revive the political dialogue process. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is of growing concern. It is deteriorating not by the day but by the hour. The conflict has already inflicted irrevocable damage on the country's economy, the social sector and civilian infrastructure, which will take years to rebuild. Millions of Yemenis are starving and unable to access the critical medical services and treatment, and they require various forms of assistance. Before these problems could be solved, the country was engulfed by the tidal wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), with the unfortunate statistical distinction of having the world's highest mortality rate. That is why the provision of humanitarian assistance to Yemen needs to be our priority, with a parallel pooling of efforts to settle the conflict. This is the only way to launch a full-fledged humanitarian response. In this connection, we note the positive contribution of the international High-level Pledging Event for the Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen, which addressed ways to improve the dire humanitarian situation and to deliver assistance to the Yemeni population. At the same time, I recall that humanitarian assistance must be impartial in nature. The Russian position on the Yemeni settlement remains unchanged. We shall continue to assist Mr. Griffiths and United Nations mediation efforts in Yemen, including through contacts with all the political forces in the country and other interested sides, both in our national capacity and in our capacity as one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. We wish to emphasize that a settlement of the conflict is not helped by attempts to shift blame to other regional players. This is all the more true when these regional players are positioned to play a positive role in ending the conflict. The necessary basis for this already exists, namely, resolution 598 (1987), which called on the Secretary-General, in conjunction with regional States, to develop a security architecture and national initiatives, including the Russian blueprint for collective security and the Persian Gulf zone.
