Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, during which the Council carried an important
visit to the African continent. I also thank Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his briefing on the situation in Darfur
and on the Secretary-Generals' quarterly regular report
(S/2015/14l) and the special report (S/2015/163) on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). The latter report covers the
strategic review and covers an entire year.

There was an increase in the activities of armed
groups in the first quarter of 2015, with attacks ocurring
at seven localities in Darfur. At the start of the year,
we were therefore forced to deploy the Rapid Support
Forces, which, as I have often stated, are regular armed
forces that are deployed rapidly. They are part and
parcel of our armed forces, the sort of groups that exist
in all countries. But the situation now is different, and
we must look at it in the light of these facts. The report
that we are considering covers the past three months.
The assessment, which covers the whole year, is not
accurate.

Paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014) clearly
requests the Secretary-General to conduct a
comprehensive review of UNAMID's activities and the
implementation of its strategic goals, in cooperation
with the African Union and the parties concerned. That
request is made in operative paragraph 7. The principle
of an exit strategy is therefore mentioned in a resolution
of the Security Council, which the Council admits.

The goal is also to determine which missions
could be transferred to country teams, and the report
of the Secretary-General also covers the exit strategy,
in keeping with what Mr. Ladsous said. This is based
on the progress that has been achieved in the peace
process in Darfur. The special report of the Secretary-
General, which covers the past year, states that the
peace process is not unfolding as envisioned. In fact,
the Doha agreements have been mostly implemented,
except for several provisions, where there has been a
delay regarding certain issues. But overall the process
is moving forward very satisfactorily, and currently
peace and stability prevail in most of Darfur.

Pockets of conflict remain in Darfur where armed
groups that did not sign the Doha Document continue to
operate. These groups are trying to sabotage the Doha
process and to hinder the current exit strategy. Why
is that? It is because these factions want to see a halt
to large-scale returns; they want internally displaced
persons to remain in the camps, so as to have the pretext
of continuing to fight on their behalf. That is wrong.

Regarding the special report of the Secretary-
General on the exit strategy, specifically paragraph 76,
there are currently two rounds of negotiations between
the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and
the United Nations. These negotiations have led to the
establishment of a working group tasked with defining
and implementing an exit strategy. We are currently
implementing this strategy in a gradual manner. The
first step is the withdrawal of armed elements and then
that of the other parties. Such exit should take place
gradually, as agreed during the two negotiation sessions
in Khartoum. Our forces are ready to proceed. We
would ask the United Nations to strengthen the capacity
of the country team in order for it to fulfil the missions
of UNAMID that will be transferred to it in accordance
with resolution 2173 (2014) regarding mission transfer.

Regarding the working environment of UNAMID,
the most recent report of the Secretary-General, which
covers the past three months, states in its paragraph 36
that:

"During the reporting period, the Government
of the Sudan issued 523 visas for UNAMID
personnel, including 12 civilians, 141 military, 236
police, 131 contractors and three consultants. As at
26 January, that is, a month and a half ago, 21 visa
requests were pending".

We are speaking here of a mission composed of
thousands of personnel, and there were only 21 visa
requests pending.

I have just read out a paragraph from the report
of the Secretary-General. Therefore any reference to
constraints imposed on UNAMID is inaccurate. This
mission is made up of thousands of personnel, and
only 21 visa requests were pending. We respect and
appreciate UNAMID and have cooperated with it ever
since it was deployed, and we will continue to work with
it. We will even strengthen our cooperation, because
this is a very important time in terms of drawing up
an exit strategy with respect to groups that did not sign
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We have said
repeatedly that there are no more reasons for these
armed groups not to join the peace process and the
national dialogue.

The Government has provided guarantees so as to
enable the armed movements to take part freely in these
various processes, and so we reject what the report
states about the freeze in the political process and the
fact that preparatory measures have been stopped.
Those things are not true. It is therefore paradoxical that
the report states in paragraph 37 that these processes
made it possible to organize workshops in Addis
Ababa from 17 to 20 November, with the participation
of groups that did not sign the Doha Agreement. The
report also mentions direct talks with JEM/Gibril
and the SLA/MM, from 23 to 30 November. So any
information referring to a stalling of the peace process
is not accurate. It is true that the factions are very
stubborn, and this requires a strong commitment on the
part of the Council. The report also attempts to suggest
that the situation is unstable owing to crime and armed
conflicts. However, as we have said repeatedly, tribal
violence in Darfur is as old as Darfur itself. We have
never claimed that there was no more tribal violence,
criminal activity or theft, but we cannot condition the
withdrawal of the Mission on such considerations,
which are as ancient as Darfur itself.

We would also like to point out that there has
recently been reconciliation between two tribes in the
region. The report mentions this reconciliation process
in paragraph 73. We have been trying hard, together
with UNAMID, to bring this conflict to a definitive
end. Regarding what Mr. Ladsous said regarding the
national dialogue process and the fact that certain
factions have withdrawn from it, and the situation of
Mr. Musa Hilal, who is a tribal chief. I would like to
point out that the Mr. Hilal expressed his support for
the elections yesterday - yet further information in the
report that is not accurate.

Finally, I reaffirm our hope that the process of
national dialogue that was launched on 27 January at
the initiative of the President of the Republic will allow
for the elections to be held in April. Of course, that does
not mean that we are abandoning the dialogue; these are
two parallel processes, and as the President stated, the
dialogue will continue even after the elections.

Council members will be aware of the details of
the President's visit to El Geneina in West Darfur
on 4 March and the warm welcome he was given by
the crowd. This is an excellent omen for the process
of national dialogue and the elections. We therefore
reiterate our request to the Security Council to pressure
the armed groups that have refused to sign the Doha
Document to join the peace process so that we can
dedicate our energies and resources to the development
and reconstruction of Darfur.

