Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): My
delegation, too, would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Butagira and thank him for his valuable
cooperation.

We also thank you, Sir, for presiding over this
timely meeting. This morning, we heard from Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and Special
Representative Annabi of the new challenges facing
United Nations peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping is one of the most valuable tools of
the United Nations to promote peace and security. We
must ensure that peacekeeping missions have the
necessary mandates, resources and policy oversight to
achieve their objectives. In that regard, my
Government welcomes this initiative to review United
Nations peacekeeping and pledges to take an active
role.

In recent years, the Security Council has asked
peacekeepers to take on multiple and increasingly
complex tasks. In Haiti, Liberia, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur and
elsewhere, peacekeepers have been mandated to protect
civilians, to facilitate humanitarian access, to support
political negotiations and elections, to implement
security sector reform and disarmament, and much
more. The Secretariat has made great efforts to
implement these complex mandates. We applaud the
Secretariat for the frequency of its briefings to the
Council and for its outreach to troop-contributing
countries. We look forward to cooperating with the
Secretariat as it implements its new-horizon project, an
effort to anticipate challenges to peacekeeping
missions.

We also want to make certain that the Secretariat
has the ability to respond to the increasingly complex
mandates the Council is adopting. In that regard, the
United States supports the streamlining of United
Nations procedures for deploying and supporting
United Nations missions.

Despite all of our concerted efforts to improve
peacekeeping practice, we cannot say, more than eight
years after the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) was issued,
that we have fully succeeded in institutionalizing its
call for clear, credible and achievable mandates. As one
means of approaching that standard, my Government
believes that the Council should include specific
benchmarks, whenever possible, when creating new
peacekeeping mandates. We believe that such
benchmarks would greatly improve mandate clarity,
and we believe that they can be articulated without
overlooking the unique circumstances that give rise to
each peacekeeping operation.
Clearly-stated strategic goals would greatly
enhance the capacity of the United Nations to
undertake effectively complex peace operations and to
review those operations once undertaken, to ensure that
they contribute to the strategic objectives sought by the
Council.

The Council should carefully review these
mandates periodically to determine whether missions

have fulfilled their objectives or outlived their
usefulness. Member States must also ensure that these
missions are cost-effective and efficient. And we must
continue to demand that peacekeepers meet ethical
standards, particularly regarding sexual exploitation
and abuse.

My Government believes that improving United
Nations peacekeeping performance demands that we
help improve the operational capacity of available
peacekeeping troops. Too often, Member States that are
willing to assume the responsibility and risk inherent in
peacekeeping deployment find that the domestic
training and equipment available to their troops are
inadequate to the task at hand. Some Member States,
including the United States, make bilateral efforts to
train and equip troops of troop-contributing countries.
But this effort needs to be far more systematic and
greater in scale if we are to meet the ever-increasing
demand for effective peacekeeping troops.

Also, peacekeepers can only be one part of a
larger effort of political reconciliation and economic
development that will ensure their ultimate success and
eventual departure. United Nations peacekeepers
cannot be the solution to every problem. Peacekeepers
neither fight wars nor develop economies. In the right
circumstances, and as part of an integrated solution,
Blue Hats can be the difference between endless strife
and suffering and a reasonably quick return to stability
and development.

The United States looks forward to working with
our partners on the Council, with the Secretariat, with
troop-contributing countries and with other Member
States to ensure the success of United Nations
peacekeeping.

