Mr. Vieira de Mello (Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator):
I thank you, Sir, and all members for this opportunity to
speak again, for the strong support they have expressed and
for their recognition that the humanitarian consequences of
conflict are of direct concern to this Council and its
members and to the maintenance of international or
regional peace and security. It is a very important
encouragement to my colleagues - United Nations and
non-United Nations alike - and indeed to myself and to
my colleagues in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

(spoke in Spanish)

On your example, Sir, I too shall use - and perhaps
butcher - the language of Cervantes to refer to the
statement made by the Ambassador of Argentina and to
thank him for his comment to the effect that this Council,
and Argentina in particular, will show zero tolerance for
violations of international humanitarian law and
humanitarian principles. I wish to ask Ambassador
Petrella and all the other members of the Council to help
us translate this zero tolerance into specific actions in
specific geographic areas.
(spoke in English)

I also wish to thank other members who indeed
insisted on something that is key to our concerns here:
that humanitarian problems are key to political solutions.
As the representative of China indicated, the focus must
be - not least in a preventive sense, as also suggested by
the Permanent Representative of Slovenia - on
prevention and on tackling the root causes. All heads of
humanitarian agencies have insisted on this and I
welcome this clear recognition by members of the
Council.

I wish to thank the representative of the Russian
Federation - and to apologize for not being able to
express myself in his language - for mentioning the
curbing of arm flows as an important element. As a
matter of fact, I had thought of including it in my
statement, but for the sake of brevity decided to refrain
from doing so. This is also central to the concerns of
humanitarian organizations. We welcome the European
Union initiative and the West African moratorium, which
I think is a model of what can be achieved at the
subregional and regional levels with strong international
support. We must continue a well-coordinated effort and
achieve something similar for the Ottawa Convention on
anti-personnel landmines.

The representative of Bahrain, later supported by the
representative of the United Kingdom, asked me what
concrete steps could be taken to protect humanitarian
workers. First of all, let me thank the representative of
Malaysia for repeating here a statement he made at the
humanitarian segment of the Economic and Social
Council last year on the need, perhaps, to better recognize

 

the sacrifices made by humanitarian workers, particularly
those who have lost their lives in action. I thank him for
that and I can assure him that, since he last spoke at the
humanitarian segment of the Economic and Social Council,
we have been working hard and the Secretary-General
himself has decided to pay personal attention to this.

Obviously, as in peacekeeping operations, the
cooperation and consent of the parties are essential but, as
we remarked, seldom present. As the Ambassador of
Bahrain indicated, in extreme circumstances, in extreme
conditions of insecurity, the only choice humanitarian
agencies have is to suspend and withdraw, although clearly
we wish to avoid such decisions from having to be taken.
Therefore, deterrence is essential, which is why we
welcome statements, such as those made by the
representative of the United States and others, that the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel must be broadened and strengthened. I have also
spoken of the role of the International Criminal Court in
providing us with a modicum of deterrence by including
such attacks against humanitarian personnel in its purview.

Other active protection mechanisms are, obviously,
peacekeeping operations, whether United Nations,
multinational or others, including very sui generis
arrangements, such as the United Nations guards in
northern Iraq or, indeed, the Zairian contingent for security
in refugee camps in eastern Zaire, which was also entrusted
with providing humanitarian workers and supplies with
protection.

The role of the Security Council is also essential, as
noted by Namibia and others. I must say, that the
representative of Namibia alluded to a point I made only
yesterday, in connection with Angola, and I welcome very
much that support. Local arrangements are also essential,
and I wanted to point out that we have, to the extent
possible, worked out practical agreements, such as the
security protocol signed with the Taliban movement in
Islamabad at the end of October of last year, and indeed
another such security agreement, signed with the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese People's
Liberation Movement at a technical meeting held in Rome
last December. These, we hope, will increase our ability to
ensure a security regime on the ground.

I was also asked by the Ambassador of Bahrain what
the new obstacles are to humanitarian work. I mentioned a
few. So did he. Financing is one, and he asked me what
the gap is between needs and contributions. The gap last
year was about 50 per cent globally, although some
operations, such as those in the Sudan and the former
Yugoslavia were financed up to 80 or 82 per cent, while
others, such as in Tajikistan, were financed up to only 23
per cent. This year, the 1999 consolidated appeals have
globally been reduced by one third as an expression of
our realism and also of our expectation that what is
available in terms of humanitarian assistance will actually
come forward. So we very much hope that this reduction
in the overall humanitarian budget for 1999 will bring
about greater generosity on the part of the donor
community - without forgetting the generosity of host
countries, whose contribution is seldom acknowledged.

Regarding access, I think I described that in my
introduction, but I wish to welcome the statement by the
Permanent Representative of the Gambia supporting our
call for minimal guarantees, as he also did yesterday in a
different debate. Long and protracted conflicts and the
search for political solutions is another obstacle to
humanitarian work. It is practically impossible for
humanitarian personnel in humanitarian operations to
uphold impartiality and to be perceived as impartial when
conflicts are prolonged for so many years. This is one of
our major dilemmas, the only answer to which is,
obviously, greater efforts in terms of prevention and early
resolution of conflicts.

The representative of the United Kingdom asked me
what could be done to support the development of civil
society and greater cohesion and cooperation among
agencies, particularly as conflicts die down. Obviously, an
early strategy which, in Afghanistan we have called, as
members know, a strategic framework - although it
came belatedly in that case - might be the answer. I
believe that member States now strongly support this
approach, as did the Permanent Representative of France
and others.

I think the integration here and the consultations in
the Secretariat with our colleagues in peacekeeping
operations and political affairs are excellent, as they are
with our colleagues in the United Nations Development
Programme and, it goes without saying, with humanitarian
agencies. But we need to broaden such coordination and
consultations to include other actors, not least the
international financial institutions. As the Council knows,
the Deputy Secretary-General is considering applying the
strategic framework approach to new in-conflict or post-
conflict transitional situations from conflict to peace. One
of the options is, in fact, Sierra Leone, where a lot needs
to be done and where we must act now, as in that country
we are back, unfortunately, to square one. I also welcome

 

what the Permanent Representative of Brazil and our
President stated about the role of the Economic and Social
Council and its humanitarian segment in bringing about this
cohesive approach, in particular in post-conflict situations.

I think I have mentioned a few ideas on how to
improve protection to refugee camps, such as the role of
national authorities. One example is the support that the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has provided the Tanzanian
Government, and its Ministry of Home Affairs in particular,
in improving its capacity to ensure the strictly humanitarian
nature of Burundian refugee camps in north-western
Tanzania. The Zairian contingent on security and camps in
eastern Zaire in 1994, 1995, and 1996 is another example
of what can be done to provide training and financial
support to local forces. Peacekeeping operations and
multinational forces would also be welcome, but, as the
representative of France remarked, they cannot always be
counted upon, as was the case in eastern Zaire with the
multinational force approved by this very Council, but
which never saw the light of day.

Finally, one important element in reply to the United
Kingdom is strategies to counter disinformation. We have
developed those in the humanitarian community, but I must
say that they are not always effective when the grip, the
psychological grip, exercised by criminal elements that
control refugee populations is more powerful than the truth
we try to provide them with.

There was a question from the representative of the
United States on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As members know, there have been ups and
downs in the situation in Kinshasa, and the situation in
Kisangani is dire. In the south, Angolan refugees keep
pouring in, and UNHCR has great difficulties in coping
with the problem. And we have the situation in the east,
where refugees remaining from the dispersion of the camp
populations in 1996 and 1997 - refugees, as distinct from
criminals, from ge'nocidaires and from members of the
interahamwe and of the Rwandese Armed Forces - these
people are still in need of international protection, as are
others who have entered eastern Zaire in recent months as
well.

We also have populations of internally displaced
persons fleeing discriminatory treatment and, indeed,
persecution on both sides. They need support. We have
been discussing this with President Kabila and his
Government, and my deputy, in fact, is there today. We
hope to obtain the explicit agreement of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide support
for the needy in rebel-controlled areas, using the territory
of Tanzania, because it is much easier from a logistical
point of View and much cheaper. I shall report back to the
Council on the success of those talks.

I can only say, as far as the Great Lakes region is
concerned, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, that what we need is not a humanitarian
coordinated response - we have a plan of action for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo which we will try to
implement in coming weeks - what we need is progress
in the Lusaka political process, to which the Secretary-
General, and, indeed, Council members themselves pay
priority attention, leading to a ceasefire and all that should
follow in terms of bringing stability, tolerance and
reconciliation to that area.

(spoke in French)

The Permanent Representative of France asked
whether new rules of international law might be needed
in order to fill the gaps that are of concern to us today. I
would like to say, and I hope I am not misinterpreting my
colleagues in the Red Cross Movement, and in the
International Committee of the Red Cross in particular, by
saying that the current instruments and the existing
conventions, those of 1949 and 1951, the Organization of
African Unity Convention on refugees, the Genocide
Convention, and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child obviously could and should be improved. But there
is always a risk, and often when one tries to fill gaps in
international law there is a risk of opening the door to a
weakening or an erosion of existing law.

Thus, the current priority of the Red Cross
Movement, and our own priority, is to strengthen respect
and to find ways to ensure respect for existing norms.
This was emphasized by the representative of Gabon and
other speakers. Perhaps the best opportunity to obtain this
commitment to existing instruments will be the
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, which is to be held in Geneva next November.
That could be the most important event of 1999, and we
all want to contribute to it, starting with today's debate.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the representative of Canada in
particular for his suggestion that a thorough study by the
Security Council of its role in ensuring the protection of
civilian populations, which is central to our concerns, be

 

given priority attention by members of the Council. This is
important, as I have just said, in creating momentum for the
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, which will be held next November in Geneva.

We welcome what the representative of the
Netherlands stated, i.e., that there is a dominant role for
humanitarian concerns in the Security Council's agenda.
Nothing, I would suggest, is more logical. Peace and
security are about ensuring order and ethics in international
relations for the good of humanity and for the prevention of
conflict. That is to say, to make humanitarianism, as such,
unnecessary, redundant and, hopefully, anachronistic.

You may count on us as your servants to make the
seemingly impossible a reality.

I thank the representative of the United Kingdom for
stating that verbal moral indignation is important but that
it is definitely not enough; and Brazil for reminding us
that the Security Council's collective moral responsibility
is aimed at results. As the Ambassador of Slovenia
stated - and I fully share this comment - please help
us make sure that the evil does not prevail.

