Mr. Wetland (Norway): We meet here in New
York knowing that the situation in Somalia is
deteriorating. This morning, we met in the Contact
Group for Somalia, addressing the political process
that may lead towards stability and legal authority or, if
it fails, plunge Somalia even deeper into lawlessness.

Here, piracy is the issue. We have a dramatic
symptom, we have a set of root causes and we need to
address both. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is
escalating. It is a threat to international trade, to the
freedom of navigation and to what that freedom means
to our prosperity. It is a grave threat to the countries
and peoples in the region, who will suffer the
consequences of failing supplies. And let us not
forget- this scourge is a telling sign of the lawless
misery that continues to haunt the people of Somalia.

Norway is gravely concerned. We condemn all
acts of piracy. We need to act against piracy, as well as
the roots of piracy. We greatly appreciate the efforts of
all countries and regional organizations that actively
take part in combating this crime off the coast of
Somalia. We also commend the Transitional Federal
Government for its attitude of cooperation with the
international community. We pay tribute to the Security
Council for its leadership and for adopting resolutions
1816 (2008), 1838 (2008), 1846 (2008) and now, today,
1851 (2008).

Norway is a shipping nation. One thousand
Norwegian-owned ships pass through the Gulf of Aden
every year. We are open for requests for technical
assistance and Norway is ready to make a contribution
to the naval operations in the area in 2009.

We must cooperate to apprehend pirates and to
bring them to justice, and we must do this within the
framework of international law, including applicable
human rights standards. Furthermore, the more ships
that are made available to naval operations, the greater
is the need for proper organization and coordination. A
clear United Nations role should be explored.

The existence of piracy off the coast of Somalia
has its roots in the situation on Somali territory. A
long-term sustainable solution to the problem of piracy
will be difficult to achieve without improving stability
on land. An improvement of that situation seems to be
far from imminent, and that is why today the Council is
authorizing special measures against those who
undertake acts of piracy, threatening lives as well as
lifelines, security interests, commercial interests and an
important part of civilization.

The measures authorized must be in accordance
with international law and humanitarian principles. It is
a principled decision, but not an easy decision. But a
decision to the contrary now would somehow send the
message that States with broken security sectors may
be used as safe havens for pirates. And that we cannot
accept.

The efforts to resurrect Somalia must continue
with full force. Millions of people are in need of
humanitarian aid and more than a million are internally
displaced. Norway commends the regional efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
sustain the political reconciliation process in Somalia.
We take note of the decision of the Government of
Ethiopia to withdraw its troops from Somali soil. This
decision also means a great challenge, both to the
African Union and to the international community, to
assist the Somalis in avoiding a new security vacuum
in the country until such time when the Somali
institutions themselves may be able to provide the
necessary security and stability to their people. We
therefore urge the Security Council to address this
challenge with speed and determination, so as not to
cause any undue delay in the Djibouti peace process.

Norway shall continue to be an active partner in
the international efforts to bring about peace and
stability to Somalia, as well as to assist the people in
need. The Somali leaders and the Somali people should
know that the international community is ready to
assist, but they should also know that it is only the
Somalis themselves who can make the necessary
decisions to steer the country in the right direction.

