Let me begin by addressing the announcement by the Southern Transitional Council: we are concerned and urge all parties to exercise restraint and engage in an inclusive dialogue that addresses the legitimate concerns of all Yemenis, including in the south. We emphasize the importance of implementing the Riyadh and Stockholm agreements and encourage continued political engagement under the auspices of the United Nations. We fully support the efforts of the Special Envoy to secure a nationwide ceasefire, confidence-building measures and the resumption of an inclusive political process. In this regard, we welcome the extension of the coalition's unilateral ceasefire and urge the Houthis to join the Government of Yemen by immediately following suit. The humanitarian situation described by Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, remains deeply disturbing. Half of the people in need - approximately 12.24 million people - are children. As more cases of coronavirus disease are confirmed, I commend the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the entire humanitarian community in Yemen for their efforts to save lives and preserve dignity. In response to the call last month for increased financing, Belgium will continue its contribution of €5 million to Yemen's Country-based Pooled Fund this year. Amid the pandemic, which have brought dire times to us all, our solidarity with the fate of the Yemeni people remains strong. Belgium's humanitarian assistance will reach a record amount of almost €200 million this year, with a strong focus on flexible disbursement mechanisms, such as the Central Emergency Response Fund and country-based pooled funds. I also reiterate the importance of humanitarian access. We remain concerned about the obstruction of humanitarian assistance and remind all parties to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and human rights law. There must be accountability for violations. Women have been particularly impacted by the crisis in Yemen. We are extremely concerned about reports of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence as well as of intimidation and arbitrary detention, including of women human-rights defenders. What women-led civil society organizations are achieving is impressive - such as negotiating prisoner releases - often with little means or official recognition. We urge parties to fulfil their commitments for women to fully and meaningfully participate in the peace process, including by implementing the national action plan for women and peace and security, and we are counting on the Special Envoy to promote and facilitate the realization of these goals. In conclusion, I repeat the importance of economic recovery and of access for the United Nations to the FSO SAFER tanker.
