Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (interpretation from French): The Afghan delegation deeply appreciates your
decision, Mr. President, and that of the other members of
the Council to convene this meeting.

 

We heard the voice of Ambassador Moubarak of
Lebanon and the statement of the Ambassador of Israel. We
also heard other delegations, from countries which, in some
cases, are very well versed in the situation in the region.
We know that the Secretary-General remains deeply
concerned by the continuation of hostilities along the
Israeli-Lebanese border and within Lebanon.

Someone who was there - the Commander of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon - has lodged a
protest with the head of the liaison unit of the Israeli
Defence Force, expressing his fear that this action could
lead to a further escalation of violence.

Israel speaks to us of self-defence. Let us compare the
number of dead and wounded on the two sides of the
border. Is there any proportionality? Does Israel believe that
by acting - as Israel puts it - in self-defence, it has the
right to exceed all the limits? The Israeli military actions of
the last five days have been extremely violent. They have
exhibited no restraint, aiming at civilians, including women
and children. Does Israel believe that it will achieve peace
by such means? Does Israel believe that by running counter
to the spirit of the peace process, it can claim to strengthen
that process?

Has Israel asked itself what there is to gain by forcing
thousands of innocent civilians to flee from their homes, by
engendering suffering and hatred among the peoples
neighbouring Israel? Can that country improve its future
security? In asking these questions my delegation is not
seeking to teach Israel lessons, but we have the
fundamental right to ask ourselves those questions. Faced
with the tragedy of the Lebanese people, and looking at this
escalation of acts of violence and unrestrained acts of
revenge, we wonder how this can encourage the peace
process in the region. How can these military actions,
running counter to resolution 425 (1978), which reaffirms
in absolute terms the importance of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, encourage the maintenance of peace and
especially the coexistence of nations in adjacent territories
in the future? What are the political and ideological
consequences of a massive flight of civilians, so massive
that it is beyond the potential of Lebanon itself and even of
the international community to provide enough assistance?

Once again Israel, by such attacks against innocent
civilians, is violating article 33 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, of which it is a signatory. Can this escalation
of violence lead to an end of violence? Can these losses of
human life, as a result of destructive airpower, bring about
good neighbourliness in the future between men on Earth?
Does rocket fire against ambulances work in favour of
peace and the future? By destroying one's neighbours'
villages, can one build a future for peace?

Israel did not turn to the Security Council before
undertaking these large-scale military activities. For the
last five days these vast attacks have been taking place
from land, air and sea. Israel, contrary to its claims, has
not exhausted peaceful means. We therefore ask the
United Nations to take effective and necessary measures
for the establishment of a cease-fire, so that resolution
425 (1978) can be fully applied.

