I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing and welcome the Syrian and Turkish Ambassadors to today's meeting. I also listened carefully to Ms. Sirkin's remarks. China wishes to express its growing concern over the economic and humanitarian situation in Syria. We are deeply worried about the suffering of civilians across the country. In his latest report (S/2020/576), the Secretary-General also shares his deep concern over the accelerating economic decline and its impact on the prices of essential items for the Syrian people. Since June last year, there has been a 200 per cent increase in food prices. The Syrian pound reached its lowest point on record against the United States dollar. The World Food Programme has estimated that 9.3 million people are food insecure in Syria. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic brings a further challenge. The big picture of the Syrian humanitarian situation is gloomy. The prominent factor causing the economic and humanitarian crisis in Syria is unilateral sanctions. The Secretary-General has made a distinct appeal for the waiving of sanctions that undermine countries' capacity to respond to the pandemic. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights echoed this global appeal. Countries of the region have also voiced their concern over sanctions on Syria, holding that such sanctions have already affected the region's economy. We once again strongly urge relevant countries to lift these sanctions. Rich and convincing research and analysis has been done, including by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), on how sanctions trigger humanitarian consequences. For example, sanctions and economic blockades lead to increased unemployment and further result in reduced household income for workers and reduced nutritional intake for their dependents. We call on OCHA to give greater attention to the negative impact of sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria and other countries and update the Security Council with a comprehensive review on this topic. As we have repeatedly stated, the Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria, including preventing and containing the spread of COVID-19. It cannot shirk its role. We are glad to learn about the progress in cross-line humanitarian operations. In May, the World Health Organization dispatched an overland delivery of medical supplies from Latakia to the north-east, apart from deliveries that continued by air. United Nations agencies and relevant parties should put more focus on removing the obstacles to cross-line operations and work with the Syrian Government to use the crossing points under its control and with its consent. With regard to cross-border humanitarian assistance, we take note that such operations are still needed in Syria, even if relevant parties have different positions on the cross-border mechanism. We believe that any decision of the Security Council must show respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We are willing to maintain communication with fellow Council members on this issue. I would like to take this opportunity to express appreciation to the humanitarian workers who are delivering services to the people in need, in accordance with the guiding principles of humanitarian emergency assistance set forth in General Assembly resolution 46/182. With regard to the security situation, China supports the ceasefire appeals made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy and calls on all parties to use this opportunity to enhance political dialogue and mutual trust. Meanwhile, we should remain alert to the fact that armed groups and terrorists are seeking to take advantage of this period to escalate attacks, as mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General. Effective, cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism efforts must be put in place. Finally, but not with any less importance, let me reiterate China's firm position on supporting the Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process, which we do while fully respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
