Mr. Janelidze (Georgia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate against the
background of a global protection crisis, as outlined
by the Secretary-General in his most recent report
on the protection of civilians (S/2018/462). Record
high numbers of people around the world are in need
of humanitarian assistance and protection, a situation
caused predominantly by conflicts.

Addressing the challenge of the protection of
civilians requires collective action along the entire
peace continuum, ranging from conflict prevention to
strengthening governance and institution-building. The
path to protection provided by the Secretary-General
in his report serves as a valuable guideline for us to
focus on. Therefore, let me echo the three priority
areas, based on respective observations from my
national perspective:

First, respecting international law is at the heart of
resolving the Russia-Georgia conflict and addressing
its humanitarian consequences. While Georgia is
committed to that principle, its disrespect by the
Russian Federation, as the occupying Power, is the
major impediment to settlement of the conflict. Russia
continues to violate the Charter of the United Nations
and the main principles of international law, as well as
up to 39 Security Council resolutions.

Ten years have passed since the Russia-Georgia
war, and the Russian Federation has yet to fulfil
its obligations under the European Union-mediated
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. The only
international security presence - the European Union
Monitoring Mission - is unable to fully exercise its
mandate because it is denied access to the territories
that are under illegal military occupation by the
Russian Federation. According to the fifth point of the
agreement, the Russian Federation has to withdraw its
troops and allow international security mechanisms
to be established on the ground. Those factors have
contributed to the creation of an environment that puts
in danger the lives and basic rights of civilians living in
and along the occupied territories.

Unfortunately, incidents resulting in blatant killings
of civilians still take place. Last year a Georgian citizen,
Giga Otkhozoria, was chased and killed by a so-called
border guard at the Abkhaz occupation line, and earlier
this year another Georgian citizen, Archil Tatunashvili,

an internally displaced person (IDP), was brutally
killed while in detention in the Tskhinvali region.
Respect for international law goes hand in hand
with the question of accountability. Georgia, in full
transparency, has cooperated with the International
Criminal Court (ICC), conducted unprecedented
investigations to investigate the crimes committed
during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war and facilitated
the opening of the ICC Office in Georgia. The
non-cooperation and refusal to allow access to the
occupied regions from the other side, however, hinders
further progress in addressing the question of impunity.

Another practice in which Georgia has shown its
constructive approach is the Incident Prevention and
Response Mechanism (IPRM). The IPRM. was created
within the framework of the Geneva international
discussions and meets regularly in both the Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali regions in order to prevent and react
to the incidents happening along the occupation
line. However, despite the regular meetings in that
format, responses to the major incidents were not
always appropriate.

In that connection, I would like to thank the
International Committee ofthe Red Cross for its essential
role in Georgia in preventing disappearances, locating
the whereabouts of missing persons and identifying
and handing over human remains to families. With
the help of the Committee, the remains of 162 people
were recovered from 22 grave sites located throughout
the region.

When it comes to the second priority area, my
main message pertains to the urgency of allowing
humanitarian access. Despite the full determination of
the Government to protect its civilian population affected
by the Russia-Georgia conflict, we are prevented from
extending that protection to the population residing in
Georgia's occupied regions. The civilian population in
those territories are deprived of minimal safeguards for
their safety and are stripped of their fundamental rights
and freedoms, including, but not limited to, the right
to freedom of movement, the prohibition of education
in a native language, the right to health care and gross
violations of the right to property. No international
monitor is allowed to enter the occupied regions and
provide credible information about the humanitarian
and human rights needs on the ground. That should be
totally unacceptable to the international community
and the Security Council.

The third priority area, on preventing and finding
durable solutions to the issue of forcibly displaced
persons, has special importance for Georgia. While
over 10 per cent of our population has been exiled, we
do our utmost to improve the livelihoods of the IDPs,
including by providing them with housing. However,
the fundamental question of respecting their right to
return and claim their property back home remains
unresolved. As the world suffers from unprecedented
flows of forced displacement, with the number of IDPs
alone exceeding 65 million, how we as the international
community address that humanitarian question is of
immense importance.

Ensuring respect for resolution 2286 (2016) remains
pivotal, but its effective implementation will require
further action by the Security Council, including its
permanent members.

In Georgia, after the 2009 veto on the continuation
of the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia, we faced a vacuum and a need for the
establishment of international security arrangements
on the ground, which directly affect the protection
of civilians.

Against the backdrop of ongoing conflicts and high
casualties in many parts of the world, be it in Yemen,
Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ukraine
or elsewhere, we must step up our efforts to make a
tangible impact on the ground. In order to prevent the
repetition of those crimes, the international community
must intensify its efforts to combat impunity and use
all available mechanisms to ensure that the perpetrators
are held accountable.

We fully support the Secretary-General in his
endeavour to mobilize the UnitedNations and its Member
States to strengthen the protection of the human rights
of civilian populations in armed conflicts, and we call
for the implementation of his recommendations to that
end. Georgia stands ready to contribute to those efforts.

