Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to express our gratitude to the Russian delegation
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
convening this very important debate so that we can
address the very critical situation of the Palestinian
people and the Middle East. We would also like to
express our gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and
Mr. Stephen O'Brien for their briefings.

Ihave the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM) in our capacity as
Chair of that group of 120 countries, Member States of
the United Nations that make up nearly two thirds of
the United Nations membership.

During the seventeenth NAM. Summit, held on
Margarita Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and
of Government stressed, inter alia, the urgency of
achieving a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is at
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Summit called
for a concerted effort by all the parties concerned to
achieve that long-overdue objective. The Heads of State
and of Government stressed that a peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine remained a priority on the
Movement's agenda and reaffirmed their principled
support for efforts to resolve the conflict, while stressing
their readiness to contribute to the achievement of a
peaceful solution.

It is on the basis of that clear and comprehensive
position, which is in keeping with long-standing
principles, that the Non-Aligned Movement has
consistently come before the Security Council to urge it
to uphold its Charter responsibilities and its numerous
resolutions with regard to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, which, all agree, continues to pose a threat to
international peace and security and which requires the
Council to act with urgency and responsibility.

NAM. reiterates its deep regret that the question
of Palestine remains unresolved after the passage
of more than 68 years since the 1948 Al-Nakba
that befell the Palestinian people. The Movement
also expresses its deep regret that, since 1967 - for
49 years, in other words - the Palestinian people
have suffered continuously under the brutal Israeli
military occupation of their territory and continue to
be denied their fundamental human rights, including
the right to self-determination. Incredibly, that brutal
military occupation has entered its fiftieth year,
and the world stands witness to its entrenchment, in
complete violation of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention. It also bears witness to the
countless violations and crimes being perpetrated by
Israel, the occupying Power, in order to impose and
maintain its illegal occupation in a belligerent manner.

Each time the Council holds an open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries appeals for international attention and for
urgent action to address the question of the illegal
and brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people and provoking deep
anger and frustration and inflaming tensions. The
breaches of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, that are being committed by
Israel, the occupying Power, are inflicting widespread
human suffering and are deliberately destabilizing the
situation, with far-reaching negative consequences for
the prospects for a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and for peace and security in the Middle
East and other regions - goals that everyone in the
Chamber professes a commitment to seek.

At every opportunity, we repeat our call to the
international community, first and foremost to the
Security Council, to act in such a way as to ensure
respect for international law, to prevent further
deterioration of the situation, including through the the
adoption of the measures needed to compel Israel to
end its war crimes and human rights violations against
the Palestinian people, and to put an end to the illegal
foreign occupation of another people's land. We also
believe that the Security Council must play its rightful
role in advancing a peaceful solution to the conflict and
maintaining international peace and security.

It is against the backdrop of those calls, which
continue to run up against the paralysis of the Council,
that Israel persists with impunity in its disregard of any
and all provisions of international law. That includes its
illegal settlement activities, whereby Israel continues
to confiscate Palestinian land and to build and expand
colonial settlements, and erecting its wall on Palestinian

land, which continues to reveal the intentions of the
occupying Power to continue the illegal seizure and de
facto annexation of Palestinian land and to continue
undermining its contiguity and the viability of a two-
State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. The
latest Israeli settlement announcements have further
highlighted such ill-intentioned schemes and plans.

Regrettably, the Security Council has failed to
uphold its obligations, despite a clear global consensus
on both the illegal nature of Israel's policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, and the urgency of ending the decades-
long conflict so that the Palestinian people can finally
enjoy the freedom, rights and justice they have been
unjustly denied for too long. Israel, the occupying
Power, has been clearly emboldened by that inaction
on the part of the international community and the lack
of accountability.

Consequently, Israel has intensified its illegal,
oppressive measures against the defenceless Palestinian
civilian population, including, inter alia, by using
excessive force against civilians, including women and
children, and causing death and injury. Israel continues
with its illegal, repressive and punitive measures
against the Palestinian people. Examples include home
demolitions, the forced displacement of civilians, mass
arrests and the detention of civilians, and the inhumane
blockade of the Gaza Strip, all of which constitute
flagrant forms of collective punishment and cause
extreme isolation and suffering for the Palestinian
population in the area. The destructive impact of
such Israeli violations is immense, as reflected
in the enormous tensions and the deterioration of
socioeconomic conditions and the intensification of
frustrations and despair.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries calls for
a cessation of all of those illegal Israeli policies and
practices against the Palestinian people and calls for
respect for international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law, and for all the relevant
United Nations resolutions. It is unconscionable and
unjustifiable to continue to permit such grave and
systematic breaches of the law without consequences.
The law must be respected and implemented; it is
obligatory upon all States. It is not voluntary, and Israel
should not be the exception.

The Security Council must act in accordance with
its resolutions and the clear provisions of international
humanitarian law so as to address the ongoing crisis,
rectify the injustice and ensure the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population under Israeli occupation
until a peaceful, just and lasting solution is found.

The Council must address, on a priority basis,
Israel's violations of international law, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Council's own
resolutions, in order to bring a halt to Israel's ongoing
illegal colonization ofthe occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which constitutes the source
of innumerable other violations, including flagrant
human rights violations, by the occupying Power and
which are destroying the possibility of the two-State
solution approved by the Council's own resolutions,
beginning with resolution 242 (1967). That is a minimal
and fundamental request to the Security Council that
is not beyond the realm of reason or its obligation in
this matter.

Finally, at a time when the Palestinian people
are facing increasing Israeli aggression and when
their hopes for realizing peace and justice are rapidly
diminishing, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
takes this opportunity to reaffirm its long-standing
solidarity with the Palestinian people and to recognize
their decades of resilience despite so much suffering
and injustice. NAM. reiterates its support for the
realization of their national aspirations and inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
freedom in an independent and viable Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for a just
solution to ease the plight of the Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). NAM. will also continue to offer its support for
international and regional efforts aimed at achieving
those noble objectives.

Furthermore, Lebanon continues to suffer
from continuous Israeli violations of its borders
and incursions into its territory, following years of
occupation and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel has
heightened its incursions into Lebanon by continuing to
violate Lebanese airspace. Such activities are a blatant
violation of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant
international resolutions, in particular resolution 1701
(2006). The provisions of that resolution should be
implemented in a manner that ensures that Lebanon's
foundations for stability and security are strengthened,
and that prevents Israel from undertaking its daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan and
especially inview ofthe recentblatant defiance exhibited
against the will of the international community, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries condemns all
the measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, measures that have intensified
since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. NAM. demands
once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders established on 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolution 242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1973).

In my national capacity, I wish to highlight the
informal meeting on 14 October, which was jointly
sponsored by Angola, Egypt, Malaysia, Senegal
and Venezuela, on the serious problem posed by the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied territories of the State of Palestine. That
meeting - considered by the Israeli Government to
constitute diplomatic terrorism - was attended by
members of the Security Council and the United Nations,
and its speakers included the following representatives
from civil society: Lara Friedman, Hagai El-Ad and
Francois Dubuisson. It should be noted that, following
the meeting, the Israeli Government threatened civil
society organizations from Israel and the United States
of America.

In their presentations, both the briefers and the
members of the Council overwhelmingly agreed that the
occupation is the main cause of the precarious situation
of the Palestinian people, and that the settlement policy
is not only one of the most notorious expressions of
the injustice of that reality, but is the main obstacle to
peace and thereby to the two-State solution. A relevant
remark made by the speakers in the meeting was that the
Israeli political establishment does not recognize that
its illegal activities have international consequences
and they continue to carry them out, without adhering
to international legal principles and without paying any
attention to United Nations resolutions.

In that context, Venezuela therefore reiterates that
the Security Council has a primary and inescapable
responsibility to take decisions regarding the prolonged
occupation, including the issue of illegal settlements.
It is therefore also necessary to overcome the inaction
of the Council and take steps to demand an end to the
occupation and its related policies. We encourage,
and will support, any initiative to adopt a resolution
demanding that Israel end its illegal settlement policy.
Likewise, we support all diplomatic proposals aimed
at achieving a political and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian issue, such as the Arab Peace Initiative and
the efforts of the Quartet and the Security Council, and
we decidedly support the French initiative to hold an
international conference on the Israel/Palestine issue at
the end of the year. Moreover, we emphasize the need
for the international protection of Palestinian civilians,
as called for by the President of the Palestinian National
Authority, and demand that Israel put an end to its
imprisonment of Palestinian children. More than 400
Palestinian children have been imprisoned by Israel,
and we demand that those children be freed.

Finally, our country reaffirms its support for the
request of the State of Palestine to be admitted as a full
Member of the United Nations. We therefore call on the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities in that
matter, so that the General Assembly may proceed in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

