Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): At the outset, let
me join others in congratulating New Zealand on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. I also join others in thanking New
Zealand for convening this open debate on the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States (SIDS).

Given the time limit, I will restrict myself to
speaking on climate change, which for SIDS remains a
multiplier of threats to international peace and security.

This open debate is being held at a time when global
warming is altering the face and balance of our fragile
planetary system. Water and land are becoming scarce,
triggering climate-induced migratory patterns. Floods,
disease and famine have intensified competition for
basic needs. In other words, climate change is dividing
populations and creating poverty that is not only causing
instability but also aggravating existing threats.

All these outcomes have been recognized at
previous Council debates, going as far back as 2007,
when the United Kingdom first brought the issue of the
security implications of climate change to the Council
(see S/PV.5663). Since then, nothing has changed
for SIDS. SIDS continue to face the brunt of climate
change, and the situation has worsened.

Against that backdrop, Solomon Islands does
not think that this debate is about increasing the
Council's understanding of the security implications
of climate change; we have already established that.
SIDS vulnerability and special situation are also well
documented in the 21-year-old Barbados Programme
of Action, the 10-year-old Mauritius Strategy for its
implementation and, more recently, the 2014 SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway.

Solomon Islands believes that the Council has
built up sufficient knowledge over time, and is now-
well placed to take a more proactive in giving more
prominence to climate change, as it has done with
regard to other non-traditional security issues, such
HIV, back in 1983, and Ebola, just last year. Such
challenges are breaking down social structures and, in
the case of SIDS, exposing populations to face greater
security threats and risks. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to make five specific proposals to
the Council.

First, the Council should institutionalize the threat
of climate change on its agenda.

Secondly, the Council should play a much more
proactive role in mobilizing multilateral action to
deliver as one on this issue. That also means the Council
exploring new avenues to enhance the country presence
of the United Nations, especially in least developed
SIDS. Too many opportunities have been missed over
the decades. The one-size-fits-all approach of over-
regionalizing United Nations SIDS programmes has
made SIDS orphans multilaterally.

Thirdly, SIDS need a new international partnership
that is able to transform our lives and build resilient
societies. At the moment, our hydro, geothermal and
wind potential are not the subject of sufficient global
partnerships, in spite of the huge amount of multilateral
funds spent within SIDS. Hopefully, the post-2015
agenda will change that dynamic.

Fourthly, the Council's work needs to be guided
by science. The structured expert dialogue under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change this year established and confirmed the fact
that stabilizing global temperature at or below 20
Celsius is too much of a risk for SIDS and LDCs. The
agreement to be reached at Paris must deliver in order
to establish that level at well below 1.5° Celsius. SIDS
cannot pay the price of the excessive consumption and
care-free lives of some at the expense of their survival
and viability.

Fifthly, with regard to the reform of the Council, we
seek an expanded Council that includes a seat for SIDS
so that our challenges are meaningfully addressed in
the Council.

In conclusion, Solomon Islands believes that
preventive diplomacy is the central work of the Council.
SIDS issues cannot be addressed by the Council alone,
but with the Council and the entire United Nations
system working in a systematic and coherent manner. If
we fail the 37 SIDS Members of the United Nations, we
will also fail in upholding our Charter responsibilities,
as well as the multilateral system.
