Mr. Sylvain-Goma (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting me to be here. I would
also like to acknowledge the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General.

At the heart of a continent in which instances of
fratricidal war are the subject of the international
community's concern, Central Africa has been a major
source of crises for the past 15 years. Of the
10 countries that comprise the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), seven are in post-
conflict situations today, while the other three have not
been spared the upheavals of political violence and
runaway criminality. In that regard, the scourge of
small arms and light weapons is a major factor in the
proliferation and chaotic circulation of such weapons.

Because the source of such weapons cannot be
verified, and because they are easy to use and can be
easily transported, as Kofi Annan has said, those
engines of untold suffering are everywhere. They can
be found within families and States and along borders.
They destabilize family relations, ruin people's lives,
undermine good-neighbourly relations between States
and drain momentum from regional integration efforts.
That is the dire picture that I wish to share with the
Council of the problem of small arms and light
weapons in our subregion.

In order to illustrate the scope of this
phenomenon, people point to the fact that threats to the
internal and national security of the States of the region
far exceed the capacities of our countries and
Community to eradicate them. Given their scale,
gravity and widespread nature, the crises being
experienced by the subregion have a cumulative effect.
That includes the rise and growth of armed rebellion
and criminal organizations, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, drug trafficking, massive
displacements of peoples, the deterioration in
educational and health systems, poverty and
promiscuity.

At the level of global security, Central Africa is
home to six lawless regions, all of which are part of
triangular borders: Chad-Central African Republic-
Sudan, Chad-Cameroon-Central African Republic,
Cameroon-Equatorial Guinea-Nigeria, Angola-Congo-
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central-African
Republic-Congo-Democratic Republic of the
Congo/Congo River, and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo-Burundi-Rwanda/Great Lakes region. A
closer look reveals that the porous nature of the
borders is conducive to allowing rebel movements to
fall back and regroup. That is a structural element of
the chaotic circulation of small arms and light
weapons. Moreover, such lawless areas remain infested
by nascent rebellion movements and host to entire
roaming armies following the end of a conflict.

The technical characteristics of those weapons
reveal that nearly 80 per cent of them come from either
China or the countries of the former Warsaw Pact.
Traffickers exploit the ease of using and maintaining
such weapons, which means that there are endless
sources of them. There are also numerous stockpiles of
such weapons - of the armies and defence forces of
States in crisis, those who support rebel movements
and international arms dealers. Recently,
fundamentalist religious movements in the Cameroon-
Nigeria-Equatorial Guinea and Chad-Sudan-Central
African Republic triangles have also been the source of
small arms and light weapons.

All sectors of society possess these weapons.
Worse yet, that includes women and children. This is
leading to a new social conflict involving the
traditional family structure. That alarming development
has prompted the organs of the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa (COPAX) and the
institutions of the international community to take
action to reduce the phenomenon.

With regard to actions taken at the regional level,
the heads of States of Central Africa have, through the
Yaounde process, turned to the United Nations for
assistance in order to prevent, control and settle
conflicts in the subregion. That led to establishment of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in 1992.
Subsequently, as a result of the Committee's work, an
historic decision was taken in Yaounde in July 1999 to
establish the Council for Peace and Security in Central
Africa, which was set up in February 2000, in Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea.

With regard to the matters being debated, the
Protocol on COPAX includes the following issues in its
article 6: combating cross-border crime, international
terrorism, the uncontrolled proliferation and illicit
trafficking of arms, ammunition, explosives and all
other related materials. Since then, at the instigation of
the former Organization of African Unity, the
Economic Community of Central African States has
been acting with a double view: responsible support to
international community initiatives, and taking
subregional initiatives.

With regard to supporting initiatives of the
international community, the Central African States
adopted, as part of Africa's contribution to the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, the Bamako Declaration of
2000. They established, in 2003, the programme on
Central Africa's priority activities to implement the
United Nations Programme.

Concerning subregional initiatives, I will note
that, on the basis of that Programme, the ECCAS
secretariat, with the support of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa, held a seminar in Bangui, in August
2002, on raising awareness of the implementation of
the United Nations Programme in the ECCAS region.
Then, from 12 to 14 May 2003, the implementation
seminar was organized in Brazzaville.

The results of that seminar led to adoption of a
body of recommendations that the States have
committed themselves to implement. I shall refer to
eight of them: establishing in each State a national
commission on small arms and light weapons;
collecting and openly destroying small arms and light
weapons used by rebels and other armed groups;
strengthening and harmonizing national legislation and
procedures on small arms and light weapons;
enhancing the capacity of national security institutions
to control small arms and light weapons; promoting
traceability by creating registers and databanks;
promoting the role of civil society in combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons;
implementing a regional policy of cross-border
cooperation to combat proliferation of small arms and
light weapons; and lastly, establishing an entity on
small arms and light weapons within the secretariat of
the Economic Community of Central African States.

At the level of the global collective security
strategy of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, actions have been taken to address
threats in the lawless areas I noted earlier, starting with
the cooperation agreement on police that was signed in
April 1999 in Yaounde' among member States of the
Committee of Police Chiefs of Central Africa. To
complete that system, the 2007 Sao Tome and Principe
initiative mobilized the Economic Community of
Central African States to create a legal instrument for
the community to combat the proliferation of and illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, which will be
adopted in the near future.

That approach, which aligns legal instruments
with an operational approach, sees the secretariat of the
Economic Community of Central African States in the
central role in controlling the circulation of small arms
and light weapons in the subregion, along with the
United Nations and the African Union, of course. The
approach not only fosters harmonization and
strengthening of regulations and institutions, but also
insures the promotion of exchange of information for
greater effectiveness of the actors in the field.

Here it is appropriate to emphasize the
encouraging results attained, in barely six months, in a
test of the implementation of the strategy to secure the
Vital interests of the member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States in the Gulf of
Guinea.

As the Council is aware, for many years the
triangle of Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria
has been the target of many acts of maritime piracy
that have led to fears of the phenomenon of "Somali-
ization" of this zone, which is strategic to the global
supply of energy and to international trade. During
joint patrols at sea and along the coast, hundreds of
arms and considerable quantities of ivory, drugs and
the proceeds of illegal fishing and other illicit products
have been seized.

Moreover, in most States in post-conflict
situations, national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes have been
implemented as part of strategies to emerge from
conflict. Reducing the circulation of small arms and
light weapons and controlling acquisitions and existing
stockpiles have thus become a major part of the
process to collect arms and to demobilize and
reintegrate ex-combatants. But the DDR process is still
far from satisfying our expectations, as it has not yet
addressed the matter of criminal organizations, which
are becoming more and more organized.

It is important to emphasize that after the
conflicts in Angola, Burundi, the Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it has not been
possible to recover all of the arms used in those
conflicts. Taking all those countries together, one may
estimate - and this is only an estimate - that about
7million small arms and light weapons, including
those manufactured and acquired, have been in
circulation in Central Africa over the past 15 years.
Only 45 per cent of them have come under effective
monitoring or have been destroyed.

That means that a majority of the arms remain
hidden for various reasons, including the possibility of
a return to confrontations; illicit trafficking for
commercial purposes; armed banditry, which often
involves rape, hijacking, poaching, drug trafficking,
pillaging of minerals and forest resources in the Congo
Basin, crimes of passion and maritime piracy. I could
continue. They are also used for poaching for the
Wildlife trade and in illegal fishing activities, where
explosives are often used.

That is why disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and programmes to combat

small arms and light weapons, usually carried out with
the aid of the United Nations Development Programme
and the European Union, are now closely linked to the
problem of security sector reform and involve
cooperation among State and non-State actors at the
local and subregional levels. The policy of reforming
the security sectors of Central African States requires
their security and defence forces to commit to strict
control of the weapons they own. Furthermore, under
the aegis of the African Union Border Programme, a
ECCAS border programme was adopted in May 2009.
The third pillar of this programme seeks to ensure
cross-border security and the fight against the
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which are
a factor undermining neighbourly relations
destabilizing economic development.

After a period of latency, during which the
subregion was profoundly affected by its numerous
conflicts, ECCAS, relaunched in 1999, now has as its
primary mandate the task of re-establishing stability,
peace and security. To that end, the goal of combating
and eliminating the proliferation and uncontrolled
circulation of small arms and light weapons is now
ensconced on our agenda.

Looking to the future, the community's efforts in
this area will be focused on finalizing the legal
instrument and its adoption by member States; boosting
the active participation of national commissions on
small arms and light weapons; implementing the border
programme, especially in the area of cross-border
security; drawing up and implementing a police
cooperation mechanism to address the issue of the six
lawless zones; operationalizing the Gulf of Guinea
securitization strategy in coordination with the
Economic Community of West African States and, of
course, with our international partners; implementing
the policy of security sector reform in order to ensure
that State armaments are traceable; providing support
of all types to ensure the success of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes at rates of
around 90 per cent by 2015; and strengthening civil
society organizations with regard to information,
awareness-raising and social networking. In order to
achieve this ambitious project, our community is
appealing to our international partners for their
valuable assistance.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that
ECCAS believes that combating the proliferation and
illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons is

part and parcel of the comprehensive collective
security strategy of the subregion. In that regard, we
need to examine the chain linking the production and
import of such weapons through to their use for
criminal ends. Gaining the capacity to trace and control
small arms and light weapons is thus an important part
of our approach. Furthermore, a policy of crisis
prevention, management and settlement, along with
subregional and international police cooperation, will
furnish the basic means of dealing with these problems.
We therefore need to deploy all our human ingenuity
by working to prevent problems early in the chain and
through concrete action on the ground on the legal,
political and technological levels.

If, however, we abandon the social and economic
dimension, which fuels asymmetrical conflicts, all such
efforts will be in vain. That is why our subregion
believes that combating small arms and light weapons
is one of the major pillars of the Millennium
Development Goals.

