Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased
to see you, Sir, preside over the Council this month.
We would like to thank you, as the representative of
Singapore, a close neighbour, at this early stage of your
presidency for convening this urgent meeting of the
Council to consider the grave situation in Palestine. We
also wish to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Lavrov of the Russian Federation for the outstanding
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council
last month.

Malaysia continues to be deeply concerned at the
grave situation in Palestine. Israel's relentless military
operations against the Palestinians have exacerbated
further the plight of the people of Palestine. As they
live under occupation, their misery - especially
during the past several weeks of the Israeli siege - is
unimaginable. Israel has disregarded Council
resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and,
most recently, 1405 (2002). In spite of those
resolutions, it has continued to occupy Palestinian
territory, obstructed Palestinian access to humanitarian
assistance and continued to keep President Arafat
confined to his headquarters in Ramallah, surrounded
by Israeli tanks for more than a month, despite its
repeated assurances that he would be freed.

It is gratifying to hear that the siege of President
Arafat's headquarters is finally over and that he is now
free to travel. However, unless the tanks are
permanently withdrawn from Ramallah and other
Palestinian towns - not just moved to their
outskirts - they could be redeployed at a moment's
notice, thereby precipitating another round of crisis.

Israel's attempts to block the dispatch of the fact-
finding mission to Jenin, established pursuant to
resolution 1405 (2002), is the latest manifestation of its
recalcitrance with respect to the decisions of the
Council. Despite its assurances of cooperation, Israel
has reneged on its agreement to allow the fact-finding
mission to go to Jenin. That attitude only strengthens
the widely held suspicion that Israel intends to conceal
from the international community the truth of what
really happened in Jenin.

The reasons that Israel has given for its refusal to
allow the entry of the international fact-finding mission
are spurious and unreasonable, and they should have
been totally rejected by the Council. What is at issue is
not whether the United Nations is biased against
Israel- as alleged by the Israeli Government -
which cannot be true, since Israel has many friends in
the United Nations. The question is whether Israel is a
responsible and law-abiding member of the United
Nations and whether it is responsive to the repeated
calls of the international community to desist from
pursuing its current repressive and inhumane policies
and practices. If the United Nations is indeed "biased"
against Israel, even when Israel has many friends
within it, then there must be something very wrong
with Israel, not with the United Nations.

Malaysia commended and strongly supported the
Secretary-General's energetic efforts to carry out this
fact-finding mission. It is therefore a matter of deep
regret and disappointment to my delegation that the
mission is now being disbanded because of Israel's
refusal to cooperate with it. We had hoped that every
effort would have been made by the Secretary-General
and the Council, collectively and individually, to
ensure that the mission would be able to proceed to
Jenin and to undertake the tasks that it had been
assigned.

The failure to carry out the mission will do a
great disservice to the efforts of the Secretary-General
and undermine his credibility, as well as the credibility
and authority of the Council. It demonstrates that, for
some countries, the Council's decisions are not
necessarily binding; they can be resisted, manipulated
and even ignored with impunity. The message is clear
to all: Israel gets off scot-free even when it repeatedly
defies the Council, while others will pay the price
should they dare go against the Council's decisions.
That is an unfortunate message indeed to be sent out to
the world at a time when the prestige of the Council is
at a low level. Therefore, in spite of the current
setback, the Council must support Palestine's request
for a full and thorough investigation of the facts
pertaining to Jenin - now or later, but the sooner the
better. If Israel is indeed without guilt in what
happened in Jenin, it should not be afraid of an
independent international investigation. Let the facts
tell the story. Let the international community pass
judgement on the basis of the facts. The facts alone -
not specious or false argumentation concocted by
Israel - can exonerate Israel.

Despite resolution 1405 (2002), which also
sought to address the humanitarian situation on the
ground, conditions remain appalling for the
Palestinians. United Nations aid agencies have reported
that Israeli checkpoints and blockades are effectively
hampering the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
the occupied Palestinian territories, which are facing
acute shortages of food and medical services. In the
West Bank, Bethlehem is under a curfew, lifted every
five or six days, confining the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and other United Nations agencies to those
windows of opportunity to deliver food and medical
supplies. Other Palestinian cities are subject to the
same conditions. Security restrictions have prevented
the World Food Programme from reaching many
Palestinians, and it has to negotiate with Israeli
authorities for access to the Palestinian territories to
distribute food. Such hampering of humanitarian aid is
totally unacceptable. This cannot be the conduct of a
nation that prides itself on being civilized. This, and
the ruthless military onslaught against the Palestinian
people, cannot have been sanctioned by a man of
peace.

It is in the interest of the Council to ensure that it
fully and effectively exerts its authority and to demand
that Israel immediately and fully comply with
resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403 (2002) and
1405 (2002). Israel's blatant defiance of the Council
cannot go unchallenged without undermining the
authority and credibility of the Council. My delegation
reiterates its call for appropriate penalties to be taken
against Israel, as provided for in the Charter, should it
continue to defy the Council. Continued inaction by the
Council in the face of an open challenge to its authority
would be a terrible blow to its prestige, to say the least.
It would be tantamount to condoning Israel's inhumane
and repressive policies and practices and to allowing
the situation to slide into a wider regional conflict, with
all its ramifications.

We welcome the efforts of the United States and
Saudi Arabia to break the deadlock in the Middle East
crisis and encourage them in their quest to resume the
peace process. Such efforts must be sustained by those
two countries and others in the face of the clear
intention of the Israeli Government to seek a military
rather than a political solution. It has obstructed and
continues to obstruct every effort to bring the parties to
the negotiating table. Malaysia continues to believe
strongly that what is urgently needed to stop the
violence and pave the way for the resumption of
negotiations is for the Council to authorize the dispatch
of a United Nations or international peacekeeping force
to the occupied territories.

In that regard, we are heartened to learn that the
recent discussions of the "quartet" touched on the issue
of the multinational force that the Secretary-General
had proposed earlier for the Middle East. In our view,
that is the only recourse to bring about a modicum of
calm in a situation in which the two sides are locked in
deep mistrust and antipathy. It is our earnest hope that
the Council will now give serious consideration to that
course of action as the only effective means to end the
bloodshed. However, if it is to succeed, it is important
that the Council not retreat at the first blush of Israeli
resistance.

