Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for her briefing. She has Germany's full support, as
does the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). Germany also continues to stand by the
Iraqi Government and the Iraqi people.

Since 2014, Germany has contributed more than
€l.7 billion, and we remain committed to supporting
Iraq. As the Special Representative pointed out, a lot
has been done and much has been achieved but, at the
same time, it is true that stabilization, recovery and
reconstruction can succeed only if all actors - including
the Government of Iraq, of course - intensify their
efforts and extend their financial support. In that context,
we very much welcome the signing of a cost-sharing
agreement by the Government of Iraq so as to ensure
it contributes its share to the funding requirements, as
mentioned by the Special Representative in her briefing.

We also welcome the fact that the formation of the
Government has almost been achieved. We trust that
Iraq's political leaders will use the momentum that has
now emerged in order to fill the remaining vacancy. As
we heard today from the Special Representative, at the
federal level, not a single woman has been appointed
to a leadership position yet. We would encourage
the Iraqi Government to appoint women to senior
decision-making positions, too.

Given the near completion of its formation, the
Iraqi Government can now focus on its main task of
implementing the necessary reforms, reconciliation,
enhancing the provision of public services, addressing
the basic needs of all its citizens and improving the
lives of all Iraqis. Germany welcomes the steps taken
by the Iraqi Government and the Parliament so far, and
in the fight against corruption in particular. We urge
all relevant parties to continue their efforts in the fight
against corruption, which is crucial to building viable
and responsive State institutions and reviving trust
on the side of the public, as well as potential foreign
investors. We also welcome the decision taken to
strengthen State control over all armed forces and call
for the implementation of those decisions.

With regard to the relationship between the capital
and the Kurdistan Regional Government, we also
welcome the formation of the Kurdistan Regional
Government and the positive developments regarding
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We call upon both
sides to further improve relations between the Federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
in order to find sustainable solutions for the outstanding
unresolved issues, in particular with regard to oil and
revenue-sharing.

Accountability is a prerequisite for reconciliation
and for the return of the almost 2 million remaining
internally displaced persons in Iraq. There can be no
sustainable peace or successful post-conflict recovery
without justice. That includes accountability for sexual
and gender-based violence and a survivor-centred
approach in line with resolution 2467 (2019).

Let me also reiterate our full support for the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and its Special Adviser, Mr. Karim
Khan. The work to be undertaken by the Investigative
Team will be vital for the effective prosecution of
ISIL crimes. It is crucial that all judicial proceedings
be fully in line with standards of due process and fair
trial guarantees in accordance with Iraq's international
human rights obligations. That includes the fair
treatment of alleged ISIL defendants and their families.

Regarding the regional aspects mentioned by the
Special Representative, and on a more general note, we
need to avoid further regional escalation. It is essential to
conduct further work on de-escalation and the reduction
of regional tensions. We need to maintain dialogue, in
particular among regional partners. Such dialogue and
de-escalation are also crucial for Iraq's own stability.
Therefore, we commend the Iraqi Government for its
active engagement and constructive role in that regard.

Before concluding, let me say a final word on the
issue of climate and security. Iraq is one ofthe countries
in the Middle East that is most prone to climate
change-related security risks, such as those triggered by
prolonged heat waves, increased rainfall variability and
extended periods of drought. Since May, 40,000 acres
of farmland have been on fire, causing the death of 13
civilians. Those fires were mostly caused by extreme
hot and dry weather conditions. We would therefore
encourage UNAMI to focus its regional dialogue not
only on energy, the environment, water and refugees,
but also on the adverse effects of climate change on the
ecology and, consequently, the stability of the region.

