Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Costa Rica attaches the greatest importance to
the holding of this formal meeting, in which the Security
Council will express its position regarding the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, in the context of
resolutions 986 (1995), 1111 (1997), 1129 (1997) and
1143 (1997) and in the light of the important report
submitted by the Secretary-General on 1 February.

From our point of view, the fact that the Security
Council is meeting today to address this matter takes on
special relevance in view of the current grave situation
and the vital peace mission that Secretary-General Kofi
Annan is conducting in Baghdad with the full support of
the Security Council and in keeping with the powers and
obligations established for the Secretariat in the United
Nations Charter.

Costa Rica believes that, in the present
circumstances, the fact that the Security Council is
debating and is to adopt a draft resolution concerning the
difficult humanitarian situation suffered by the Iraqi
people is a clear demonstration of its political sensitivity
and its willingness to assume a broad and constructive
role in solidarity with the inhabitants of that country, who
are in no way responsible for the actions, omissions or
decisions of their rulers.

 

The draft resolution before us is an important
contribution by the Security Council to avoid a further
worsening of the difficult humanitarian situation of the
people of Iraq. The fact that we agree on the increase in the
amount of exports of Iraqi petroleum and petroleum
products should lead to a substantial increase in the amount
of tangible humanitarian resources available to attend to the
urgent needs of the inhabitants of that country. This is a
significant improvement over the situation at the end of
1997, and my country expresses its satisfaction with the
unanimity of the Security Council.

This will of course require enhanced capacity,
efficiency and management on the part of the United
Nations so that it can appropriately and without undue
delay attend to matters such as the approval of contracts
and the follow-up on the ground to verify and ensure that
the goods obtained are distributed, and distributed equitably
to all of the Iraqi population. My country is fully aware of
the responsibility and enormous magnitude of this
humanitarian programme and what it means to the United
Nations.

We of course understand that the draft we have before
us is far from perfect. My delegation would have preferred
greater flexibility and scope in some of its provisions with
a view to guaranteeing its humanitarian character. However,
we understand the present complicated political conditions
under which it has been negotiated, and we therefore
express our appreciation to the sponsors for their great
effort to harmonize positions. The final point to emphasize
is that this decision of the Security Council expresses
clearly the unanimous desire of the 15 members to make a
positive contribution, from a humanitarian point of View, to
resolving the current crisis in Iraq.

On the basis of what I have just stated, Costa Rica
reiterates the position of principle that it has maintained
since last year and expresses its full support for the draft
resolution before us. At the same time, my delegation is
extremely pleased that this decision is to be taken precisely
on the day of the Secretary-General's arrival in Baghdad to
negotiate a peaceful diplomatic solution to the crisis with
Iraq.

