Mr. Mehlis: The United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission (UNIIIC),
which was created pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1595 (2005), has been through two mandate
renewals. It issued its first report (8/2005/662) on
19 October and submitted its latest report to the
Secretary-General on Sunday, 11 December, prior to
the end of its mandate on 15 December.

The report reflects the outcome of the work the
Commission has carried out since its last extension
seven weeks ago. Security Council resolution 1636
(2005), which was adopted on 31 October, has been
instrumental in helping our work. Indeed, if resolution
1595 (2005) gave executive authority to the
Commission, resolution 1636 (2005) built on it, giving
it further authority so as to enable it to move forward
with the investigation on all its tracks and to attain its
main objective: to help identify the perpetrators,
sponsors, organizers and accomplices in the terrorist
attack that killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and 22 others on 14 February 2005, in Beirut.

In conformity with those resolutions, the
Commission has pursued both existing and new lines
of inquiry. It remained guided by the same principles
of cooperation and information-sharing with the
Lebanese security and judicial authorities. In that
sense, one cannot but underscore the importance of the
ever-closer links between the Commission and the
Lebanese authorities in order to stay the course, with a
steady pace in the investigation.

To date, the Commission has interviewed over
500 witnesses and has established, together with the
Lebanese authorities, a list of 19 suspects. It has
followed traces and leads developed since its inception
and has focused on a number of promising tracks.

In the course of the investigation, it has become
evident that the Commission is working mainly on two
tracks: one Lebanese and one Syrian. On the Lebanese
track, the Commission has been able to resolve most
impediments, thanks to the cooperation of the
Lebanese authorities and their willingness to help and
facilitate the Commission's work in all ways possible.
It is the Commission's View that the convergence of
many factors - such as the overhaul of the security
apparatus; the arrest of four former security officials,
among others; the expanded authority granted to the
Commission through resolution 1636 (2005); and the
ensuing interviews of Syrian suspects - has boosted
the confidence and resolve of the Lebanese people and
Government.

Despite the widespread apprehension that
preceded the issuance of the Commission's October
report and the anxieties that lingered afterwards, the
security situation remained calm until yesterday's
incident. In this respect, on behalf of the Commission,
I would like to pay tribute to the memory of the victims
of yesterday's bombing attack in Beirut. I would like to
express my sincere condolences and my deepest
sympathy to their families and friends. I met with
Mr. Gebrane Tueni in order to interview him as a
witness in the Hariri case, and it is very sad that he left
us under such horrendous circumstances.

In parallel to the Lebanese track, the Commission
has been trying hard to make headway on the Syrian
track. The Commission's relations with the Syrian
authorities have been marked by conflicting signals. It
was not clear at all times who from the Syrian side is
the privileged interlocutor of the Commission. This has
caused confusion and delays.

I was here seven weeks ago in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.5292), suggesting to the Syrian authorities
that they carry out their own investigation into the
assassination of Mr. Hariri. Resolution 1636 (2005),
particularly its section III, set out a clear and
unambiguous framework for Syria's work with the
Commission, calling for full and unconditional
cooperation. Yet, it has been after much hesitation and
procrastination that the Syrian authorities finally
agreed to move on the request to interview five Syrian
officials whom the Commission considers as suspects,
in Vienna and on conditions determined by the
Commission. This took place only a week ago. At this
rate, the investigation may take another year or two.
Cooperation and good faith should be diligent and
timely.

Yet the Syrian authorities did indeed make the
five Syrian suspects available for questioning under
conditions set out by the Commission. This latest
development is undoubtedly an important stage in the
investigation. The Commission has recorded the
extensive interviews of the Syrian suspects, the
statements have to be assessed, and new evidence has
to be reviewed before leading to the questioning of
new witnesses or suspects. Consequently, this might be
the starting point of the much-sought-after cooperation
of the Syrian authorities with the Commission. It
remains to be seen whether Syrian cooperation will be
in full and without any conditions.

In his letter dated 14 October 2005 (S/2005/651, annex), the Prime Minister of Lebanon requested, on
behalf of the Lebanese Government, an extension of
UNIIIC's mandate for another six months. The
Commission supports that request and recommends
such an extension, as set out in resolution 1636 (2005).
However, the Commission cannot prejudge the actual
length of the investigation it has been carrying out at
the behest of the Lebanese Government. Many factors
are to be taken into account. This has been and will
remain, first and foremost, a Lebanese investigation.

The Commission should pursue its work as long
as its assistance is needed and sought. Moreover, it
cannot be overemphasized that the Syrian authorities
are also responsible for the pace of the investigation,
because this depends on the extent of their full and
unconditional cooperation.

In conclusion, I wish to express my heartfelt
thanks to all the parties, and particularly to the
Secretary-General, for the enduring efforts they have
exerted in order to help the Commission move ahead.

It is with regret that I shall be leaving the
Commission as soon as a successor is appointed. I will,
however, of course, remain available to help and assist
whenever the need arises.

