Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Japan appreciates
the dedication shown by the Secretary-General in
promoting the Middle East peace process.

The briefing by the Secretary-General today was
a sad reminder that we have been unable to deal with
the persisting issues blocking peace and the two-State
solution in the region for the past 10 years. Japan's
position is that it will not recognize any unilateral change
by either party that may prejudice the final resolution.
In that regard, Japan reiterates that settlement activities
are in violation of international law and urges Israel
to completely freeze such activities. We are deeply
concerned about the recent advancement of legislation
that would allow for the retroactive legalization of
illegal Israeli outposts located on private Palestinian
land.

We firmly believe that the issues surrounding the
peace process should, first and foremost, be resolved
through direct negotiations. We are deeply disturbed
by the continuing violence between the two sides.
Although the degree of violence has been relatively low
in the past few weeks, its root causes have not been
addressed. The persisting acts of violence from both
parties are fundamentally incompatible with a peaceful
solution. It is important that leaders on both sides take
steps to prevent violence and incitements to violence,
and show credible commitment to the peace process.

There is broad agreement within the Council
on the urgent need to save the prospects of a two-
State solution. Japan supports initiatives that benefit
the Middle East peace process. Japan appreciates
the efforts made by the various parties and is ready
to constructively engage in those initiatives. The
Secretary-General noted that the Council has adopted
only two resolutions concerning the Middle East peace
process over the past 10 years. It is disappointing to be
reminded that we are still addressing the same issues
that those resolutions aimed to deal with. It is important
for the Council to send a united message to the parties to
reaffirm the commitment to peace. Japan believes that
the message to be sent should be effective, unequivocal
and meaningful, and contribute to promoting the peace
process together with other initiatives. Japan stands
ready to work with other Council members to that end.

