Mr. Tadesse (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
open debate on water, peace and security. I would also
like to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Chair of the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Christine
Beerli, Vice-President of the International Committee
ofthe Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar, President
of Strategic Foresight Group, for their briefings this
morning. The concept note (S/2016/969, annex) is also
helpful, but we would like to share some ideas about the
kind of narrative that should be crafted for focusing on
this topic.

The discussion on water, peace and security has
essentially been framed in terms of the threats posed
by water scarcity and the potential for water-related
disputes. The concept note is also anchored in the
premise that "water has always been considered as a
driver of conflict". Of course, one cannot rule out
the possibility of a dispute or disagreement over the
utilization of shared water resources. That is only
natural, but conflict and Violence are not necessarily
inevitable. The lessons of history show that water can
indeed be a source of cooperation rather than conflict.
That is even more relevant to transboundary water
resources, which provide an opportunity for cooperation
in ensuring effective water management at the national
and regional levels. It is that spirit that I believe should
guide our discussion of the topic today.

For centuries, States have been striving to address
water management challenges through cooperation and
mutual understanding. Contrary to the arguments of
those who ring the alarm bells about water security, it
is a matter of record that no States have gone to war
specifically over water resources. In fact, thousands of
treaties have been signed in the past to manage shared
water resources. That is why we in Ethiopia strongly
believe that cooperation on water is indeed possible
and is the only rational way forward for ensuring
sustained development benefits for all States, based on
the principle of the equitable and reasonable utilization
of transboundary water resources.

It is in that context that Ethiopia has been
participating in the Nile Basin Initiative and its
Cooperative Framework Agreement, which was
negotiated over a decade and has now been signed by six
riparian States and ratified by three of them. Once the
remaining three riparian States ratify it, a permanent
river basin commission will be established. This kind
of regional mechanisms is critical not only to reduce
the risks of potential conflict but also to ensure that
transboundary water resources are equitably shared
among riparian States on a basis ofwin-win cooperation.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
also recognizes critical role of water in inclusive and
sustainable development, as articulated in Sustainable
Development Goal 6 and in the water-related targets.
The 2030 Agenda emphasizes the importance of water
resource management at all levels, including through
transboundary cooperation.

We, the States Members of the United Nations,
have also agreed, under the 2030 Agenda, to expand
international cooperation and capacity-building for
developing countries in water-related programmes.
In addition, as the United Nations World Water
Development Report 2016 illustrates, sustainable water
management, water infrastructure and access to safe,
reliable and affordable water supplies are fundamental
to eradicating poverty and ensuring sustainable peace
and development for all countries. Though the adoption
of those universal Goals and indicators is a step in
the right direction, their implementation requires
sustained political commitment, determination, long-
term vision and effort on the part of all Governments
and stakeholders. The promotion of cooperation also
demands frank and constructive discussions among
States and regional cooperation frameworks.

The discourse on water security has been dominated
by inflammatory rhetoric, which tends to unnecessarily
politicize the issue and does not foster constructive
dialogue. What will help us address the challenge of
water management in an equitable and sustainable
manner is dialogue and collaboration conducted in a
spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation. We
very much hope that the outcome of our deliberations
today will be geared towards that objective.

