Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Today
marks a planned and important point of transition in Haiti's
journey from tyranny to democracy. The Multinational
Force authorized by the Council last July has fulfilled its
mission. Planning for the transfer of responsibility to a
United Nations force is well under way. Today's vote
verifies that the transition will occur by the end of March.

The men and women of the Multinational Force
deserve our recognition and gratitude. They have performed
difficult tasks with consummate skill. To the family of
Sergeant First Class Gregory Dale Cardott, we acknowledge
a special debt. Our hearts and prayers are with them.

My Government is pleased to have led the
Multinational Force, and we thank warmly the other nations
that have contributed to it. We note with satisfaction the
strong bond that has developed between the forces and the
Haitian people. We thank also the members of this Council,
the Friends of Haiti and the Secretary-General and his staff
for their commitment to respond dynamically and creatively
to the Haitian crisis. Together, we have served well the
United Nations Charter's pledge to pursue
"social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom".

Over the past four months, because of our efforts,
those of the Organization of American States, the wisdom
of Haiti's leaders and the resilience of the Haitian people,
welcome changes have been achieved. Once-dormant
markets are now Vibrant with life. Neighbourhoods once
shadowed by terror echo now with laughter and renewed
hope. Mothers no longer fear that their sons will be shot
or their daughters raped by the keepers of official order.
Police stations are used now for training, not torture.
Boats are built for fishing, not flight. And political
activity has resumed. The threads of economic life have
been identified and now must be rewoven.

Last July, the Security Council responded to the
unique circumstances in Haiti with a strategy in two parts.
In the first phase, the Multinational Force was to create
a secure and stable environment within which democratic
institutions could begin to function. The Multinational
Force has achieved that purpose. The illegal leaders
departed peacefully. President Aristide and the
legitimately elected Government have returned to power.
More than 21,000 weapons have been purchased or
seized. A new police force is being recruited, and the
Haitian army is being reduced and reformed.

We are approaching now the second phase. Today,
we have authorized the Secretary-General to recruit and
deploy up to 6,000 military personnel and 900 civilian
police to continue the tasks thus far so well advanced.
The United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) will work
with Haiti's Government and other donors to build a new
civilian police force. It will assist the Government of
Haiti in assuring public order. It will help establish an
environment conducive to free and fair elections, and it
will complete its assigned tasks by February 1996.

My Government has worked hard with the
Multinational Force and the Secretariat staff to ensure a
seamless transfer of responsibility - a transition without
marked change. More than half of the military personnel
and about one third of the civilians in UNMIH will be
veterans of the Multinational Force. Overall, there will be
no dramatic alteration in mission size, troop capabilities
or quality of command. The United Nations troops will
have the right to use force to defend themselves,
including the right to oppose forcible attempts to impede
the discharge of their functions.

 
As the Secretary-General noted in his most recent
report to the Council,

"there is a feeling of liberty and a sense of security [in
Haiti] which did not exist previously." (S/1995/46, para. 13)

The organized and semi-organized bands of thugs operating
under official protection have been disbanded. But Haiti is
by no means a tranquil land. The greedy, the embittered
and the desperate retain the capacity for violence. Criminal
forces may see this transition and the upcoming election
campaign as an opportunity for bolder action. But let no
one doubt: if this United Nations force is pushed, it has the
leadership, the mandate, the fire-power and the will to push
back.

The economic reconstruction of Haiti is not part of the
United Nations peace-keeping mission, but efforts to that
end are complementary. My Government joins with the
Secretary-General in calling upon nations, development
agencies, the United Nations system and regional and
non-governmental organizations to work together with the
Haitian Government to implement the emergency economic
recovery programme. The door to private investment must
be open. There is no better answer to inequality, corruption
and strife than freedom, jobs, basic education and food on
the table.

As the resolution we have approved today recognizes,
the future of Haiti rests, as it must, in Haitian hands.
Democratic institutions cannot be imposed upon a society;
they must be nurtured from within. The road ahead remains
an uphill road, but the international community can be
satisfied that those with the commitment to build a free
Haiti now have that opportunity. By allowing that chance,
this Council has kept faith with the people of Haiti, with
the cause of freedom and with the Charter of this great
institution.

