Ms. Rasi (Finland): Finland fully associates itself
with the statement made by Italy on behalf of the
European Union. We thank the United Kingdom
presidency for introducing justice and the rule of the
law to the Security Council agenda. Finland gives
special importance to the issue and has been actively
participating in the discussions on how to make it a
more integral part of the work of the United Nations.

The importance of the rule of law has been early
and widely accepted in Finland. Legal thinking is
historically deep-rooted in Finnish society as a means
to foster national autonomy. Finland's commitment to
strengthening the rule of law within States and in
international relations enjoys broad national support.
Participation in international cooperation to promote
peace and human rights has been inscribed in the
Finnish Constitution.

Establishing functioning rule-of-law structures
contributes to the rebuilding of conflict-torn societies.
The central role of the rule of law in United Nations
peacekeeping was recognized in the Brahimi report.
Launching the Task Force of the Executive Committee
on Peace and Security was an important step forward.
Its final report introduced practical recommendations
on how to further improve the ability of the United
Nations to respond to the challenges of
multidimensional peacekeeping in the post-conflict
phase. Those recommendations must be effectively
implemented.

Rule-of-law aspects should be mainstreamed into
the work of the United Nations. That presupposes
enhancing the capacity of the Secretariat. At the
moment, there is one judicial and one corrections staff
member in the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), although the Secretary-General has
recommended a more substantial number of posts. The
focal-point network consisting of representatives of
other United Nations and related departments provides
important information and support, but it is not in a
position to carry out the substantive day-to-day work of
the Unit. Increasing the capacity of the Criminal Law
and Judicial Advisory Unit in conformity with the
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel would enable it
to meet the needs of the DPKO and of peacekeeping
operations. However, the success of the rule-of-law
strategy requires a coordinated approach by all United
Nations agencies. No single unit has the experience,
expertise, resources and mandate to secure the
successful implementation of the principles of the rule
of law in the peace-building process.

Rule-of-law aspects should be included in the
mandates of current and future multidimensional
peacekeeping operations. Rule-of-law experts should
participate actively in planning new operations, as
happened in the lead-up to the newly established
United Nations Mission in Liberia. A comprehensive
approach should be taken in which not only police but
also judicial and corrections aspects are included in
plans when appropriate. When the mandate of an
existing operation is reviewed, a multidisciplinary
internal United Nations working group should be
formed to analyse whether rule-of-law aspects have
been effectively addressed in the existing mandate. If
that is not the case, steps should be taken to improve
the situation.

For successful implementation, necessary funding
needs to be secured. As compared to military and
policing costs, considerable improvements can be
achieved in judicial and corrections institutions with
minimal resources. The failure to provide them with
the necessary resources can, however, significantly
reduce the effectiveness of the funding spent on the
military and police aspects.

It must also be remembered that any
improvements made will remain superficial unless they
enjoy the support of local populations.
Multidimensional peace operations should place
special emphasis on strengthening national rule-of-law
institutions. After all, they will be responsible for
upholding and implementing the principles of the rule
of law after an international presence comes to an end.
The relationship between the United Nations and local
institutions must be based on partnership. In non-
executive missions mentoring, training and monitoring
could enhance the capacities of national institutions.

National reconciliation is crucial in countries
emerging from conflict. Dealing with past crimes
becomes a core issue in the process of establishing
trust in the judicial system. In that connection, Finland
gives its full support to the functioning of the
International Criminal Court and ad-hoc tribunals.
Finland believes that there should be no impunity for
serious crimes such as genocide and crimes against
humanity.

Finally, Finland hopes that the two Security
Council meetings that have been held on the subject of
justice and the rule of law will mark the beginning of a
process that makes the issue an established part of the
work of the Council and of the wider United Nations
system. We appreciate the proposals made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan at the ministerial-level
meeting of the Council that took place on 24
September, and we look forward to the report that is
being prepared. Finland would like to reaffirm its
commitment to the process of taking the rule of law
further in the United Nations. Finland is dedicated to
continue its efforts to that end.

