Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me thank today's
briefers for their very informative interventions. Allow
me also to express our sincere condolences to the
families of the soldiers of the Niger killed in a barbaric
attack last week. That tragic event clearly shows us the
importance and timeliness of today's briefing.

West Africa remains plagued by severe
transnational challenges, from climate change, poverty
and worsening youth unemployment to irregular
migration and human, weapon and drug trafficking, as
well as a wave of violent extremism and terrorism. It is
necessary to reinforce the resilience of those countries
to emerging threats, including those on ethnic and
religious grounds.

To that end, at the community level, several formal
and informal institutions play critical roles. Religious
institutions are of particular importance. Religious
leaders, traditionally involved in the life of their
communities, may however be unable to play their part,
especially when internal governance mechanisms are
weak or not in place.

It is equally important to support and strengthen
the capacity of local governments in preventing
inter-tribal conflicts and fighting against disseminated
stereotypes, whose aim may be to marginalize certain
social and political groups and to destabilize the
situation in the region.

Communities that are marginalized from
political processes and suffer from the effects of
underdevelopment, poor service delivery and high
levels of unemployment are extremely vulnerable to
the influence of violent extremist groups. Empowering
them can be a vital part of the solution and a force
for change.

Gender inequality is another worrisome issue.
There is a need to invest in women's capacity to prevent
violent extremism in their communities. Radicalization
and the dynamics of violent extremism affect men and
women in different ways. While young men appear
to be more prone to joining such groups, women, as
mothers, wives and friends of those radicalized are
more often either targeted or chosen to serve as direct
and indirect sources of support for those violent groups.

In conclusion, addressing all of the aforementioned
challenges requires a sustained and holistic approach
on the part of all stakeholders, including through
the implementation of the stabilization strategy for
countries affected by Boko Haram, the Group of Five
for the Sahel priority investment plan, the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. Therefore,
we call on national, regional and international partners
to intensify efforts to address the root causes of
insecurity and instability in the region, including
poverty and inequality, exclusion and marginalization,
the lack of access to social services and economic
opportunities, human rights violations and the impact
of climate change.

It goes without saying that responsibility for
combating terrorism cannot be entrusted to national,
subregional and regional stakeholders only. Terrorist
attacks are a global problem, which is why violence
in West Africa and the Sahel should be combated with
joint efforts, and Poland stands ready to pay its share in
the global combat against terrorism.

