Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): As we
come together in today's open debate, my delegation
once again would like to express its conviction
regarding the need and importance of continuing to
support all actions that could lead to the establishment
ofjustice, peace and stability and an end to violence in
the Middle East.

The Middle East region is witnessing a widespread
transformational thunderstorm that struck across the
region. The region is currently witnessing drastic
changes and people are aspiring to democracy and
opposing dictators, supported by some Powers in the
West. At the same time, the situation in the Middle
East is growing ever more complex. There are more
and more threats of terrorism, extremism and foreign
intervention, which are all impediments to the growth,
development and stability of the region. In this situation,
any miscalculation, poor decision-making or fueling of
the fire will affect the whole region and harm many
people, as well as all stakeholders. For that reason,
one cannot overstate the risks of overemphasizing one
situation and closing one's eyes to another, similar
situation. That is too risky when, in a given situation,
there is a deliberate attempt to change the realities on
the ground through force, armed conflict and creating
a fait accompli.

It is clear that there has been an inexorable
radicalization of approaches that could lead to an
ever-growing spiral of violence. For the Middle East,
there are still many pieces of the puzzle to be put together
in order to gain a clear and comprehensive picture of it,
and many themes should be considered in the broader
context. We should see a trend in democratization,
development, economic relations and the energy
market. At the same time, we should be concerned
about extremism, terrorism and ethnic vendettas. What
is needed are revised approaches to the developments
in the Middle East. The West must revise its approach
vis-a-vis the Middle East. There seems to be only one
path ahead of us that could bring peace, stability and
prosperity. That is the path of cooperation rather than
confrontation and genuinely responding to the desires
of the people rather than forcing them to accept what
seems to be an artificial and superficial solution.

On the issue of Palestine, the Security Council and
the world community must spare no effort to prevent the
escalation of tension and confrontation in the occupied
lands of Palestine. The desecration of Muslim holy
places and the expansion of illegal settlements continue
on an unprecedented scale. The Israeli occupying forces
have continued to carry out missile air attacks and
artillery bombardments of civilian areas in the Gaza
Strip, in grave violation of international law, including
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. The occupying Power
continues to deliberately target and kill Palestinian
civilians, continuing its policy of extrajudicial
executions. Moreover, no place in Gaza is safe from
Israel's relentless aggression, with even playgrounds
now becoming targets for Israeli warplanes.

In that connection, the Islamic Republic of Iran
supports the action taken by the Non-Aligned Movement
to request Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, to reconvene, at
the earliest opportunity, a conference of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
for the purpose of upholding the obligations and
responsibilities incumbent upon the high contracting
parties in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

Regarding the situation in Syria, it is clear that
violence continues on various fronts. We believe that
the current crisis should only be resolved through
national dialogue and reconciliation and in a peaceful
manner. About two weeks, ago Mr. Kofi Annan
visited Iran for the second time and met Iranian senior
officials. Our officials assured the Joint Special Envoy
of Iran's support for his mission and expressed Iran's
deep concern over the regional consequences of any
violation of Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We reiterated our readiness to host talks between the
Syrian Government and opposition parties.

There are numerous efforts by certain States to
further complicate the situation in Syria by providing
financial assistance and arms to armed groups.
Sabotage, terror and violence against innocent people
must be brought to an end. The countries of the region
should cooperate with one another to resolve the Syrian
crisis so that the final result would be to the benefit
of the Syrian people, the region and the international
community.

Finally, I hate to respond over and over again to the
accusations by the representative of the Israeli regime,
but I have to. Today the representative of the Zionist
criminal regime levelled baseless allegations against
my country on the issue of the recent terrorist attack
in Bulgaria, as well as impugning the peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear activities. It is amazing that, only a
few minutes after the terrorist attack, Israeli officials
announced that Iran was responsible.

While condemning any terrorist attack in whatever
form or manifestation, with regard to the terrorist
attack in Bulgaria I should make it clear that we have
never engaged in and will not engage in such despicable
acts. Such a terrorist operation could only be planned
and carried out by the same regime whose short history
is full of State terrorism operations and assassinations
aimed at implicating others for narrow political gains.
I could provide the Council many examples showing
that that regime has killed its own citizens and innocent
Jewish people during the past couple of decades. As is
well known, Iran is a victim of such operations by the
Israeli regime, and the assassinations of Iran's nuclear
scientists are fresh cases in our mind.

On the nuclear issue I should say that the Israeli
regime's clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads and a
nuclear weapons arsenal is the unique threat to the
region, as well as being a threat to international peace
and security. Unless United Nations organs, including
the Security Council, take meaningful steps to deal
with such criminal policies and practices, hope for
peace and stability in the Middle East will remain a
dream to come true.

