Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): I welcome today's
debate in the Council, designed to promote effective
action against the challenges that peacekeeping
operations are dealing with in the form of asymmetric
threats. One ofthose challenges, as the Council is aware,
is the ties that exist between terrorists and criminal
networks in many parts of the world. In Afghanistan,
drug traffickers pay the Taliban for protection. In the
Middle East, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
profits from trading and illicit trafficking in cultural
goods and oil and from kidnappings for ransom.
Criminals in West Africa pay terrorists' travel expenses
in order to secure routes used for human trafficking
and for smuggling migrants, arms, drugs and tobacco
through the Sahel and the Sahara to Europe. In Nigeria,
Boko Haram directs a network of highly profitable
criminal activities, while in Somalia, Al-Shabaab has
received tens of millions of dollars from illegal exports
of charcoal and piracy. Because of this, peacekeeping
missions dealing with terrorists and violent extremists
can find themselves in dangerous situations.

I commend the Secretary-General for his
establishment in late October of the High-level Action
Group on Preventing Violent Extremism, which
has been working on a plan of action to counter that
threat. Based on that approach, the Working Group
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) has identified 12 recommendations for
implementation by the United Nations, with the goal
of preventing Violent extremism, sharing best practices
and supporting Member States' efforts.

The efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) are aimed at implementing
several capacity-building projects designed to improve
criminal justice systems and promote the rule of law.
There are 20 projects within the framework of the CTITF
plan for preventing Violent extremism that UNODC is
working on with its partners, and a large number of
those are related to strengthening good governance
and the rule of law. UNODC efforts seek to strengthen
criminal justice preventive measures, including
preventing radicalization and prison violence; reinforce
approaches based on maintaining human rights and
the rule of law in combating terrorism; prevent the
recruitment of terrorists, especially foreign terrorist
fighters, including through the Internet; support
policies and programmes for victims of terrorism; and
help to develop national and regional action plans for
preventing violent extremism.

Many of those efforts are happening in Africa,
particularly in the Sahel and countries in West,
North and East Africa. UNODC is partnering with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
in order to deal more effectively with such threats.
All UNODC activity in Africa is supported by our
field office network, working according to priorities,
established by Member States and African regional
organizations, that are central to the three new regional
programmes launched this year for West Africa, North
Africa, the Middle East and East Africa. In West Africa,
our regional programme is aligned with the action plan
of the Economic Community of West African States
and the priorities of the countries in the region. In that
context, our Sahel programme is helping to strengthen
national criminal justice systems' capacity to combat
drug- and arms-smuggling, organized crime, terrorism,
money laundering and corruption, and represents
UNODC's contribution to the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. In that regard, we
are cooperating closely with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the
Group of Five for the Sahel. We are also working with
the UNOWAS Department of Political Affairs, DPKO
and INTERPOL, our partners in the implementation
of the West Africa Coast Initiative, which has led in
particular to the creation of anti-transnational-crime
units that have enabled major drug seizures and their
effective prosecution.

UNODC and its partners will continue to combat
the threats of terrorism, violent extremism and all the
challenges surrounding them. We will continue to
support peacekeeping operations and Member States
and to promote equitable criminal justice systems and
the rule of law in the context of peaceful and inclusive
societies, in support of Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

