Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): In View of the fact
that Ambassador Jean-David Levitte referred to some
of my points, I just wanted to clarify the situation for
the record.

First, Ambassador Levitte said that we liked to
debate for the sake of debate. On this issue, we were
not really trying to debate, but we were very puzzled
by our difficulties in the informal consultations in
endorsing a very reasonable report of the Secretary-
General. We did not know how to alert the non-
members of the Council that we were having these
difficulties. But in some ways Ambassador Levitte has
done it for us.

Secondly, I heard Ambassador Levitte say that he
completely agreed with the remarks made by Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, and so do we. I think that puts
us in substantial agreement on the core issues.

Thirdly - and we were very puzzled by this -
Ambassador Levitte referred to the fact that France's
contribution is much more than Singapore's on East
Timor. We do not have the figures here, nor do we have
the time to research them - but we will research them.
But it is a fact that under the formula whereby
contributions are made to peacekeeping operations
permanent members do pay a certain premium because
of their permanent membership. I think it is generally
acknowledged within the United Nations community
that with privilege comes responsibility. That is an
agreed principle. Indeed, many Members are prepared
to become permanent members even if they have to pay
a bit more.
Fourthly - and I think this is a very important
point that Ambassador Levitte made - is that we
should be sensitive to the Views of the General
Assembly. I completely agree with him, and I hope that
in the course of today's debate we will listen very
carefully to the views of the non-members and also
hear a very key point that they always make in the
discussions in the Security Council, which is that they
hope that the Security Council will be accountable to
the members of the General Assembly. If we do that, I
think we will be making a very positive contribution.

