Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we welcome the invitation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, acting in its capacity
as President ofthe Security Council, to participate in this

important open debate on "Post-conflict peacebuilding:
review of the peacebuilding architecture". We also
welcome the statements made by Mr. Macharia
Kamau, Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden and former Chair
of the Commission, and Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Chair
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, whose efforts in the
process we value and warmly acknowledge. It is a great
pleasure to see Mr. Rosenthal again.

My country welcomes the report of the Advisory
Group of Experts (see S/2015/490) in that it has
highlighted a number of the outstanding challenges we
see for peacebuilding today, more than a decade after
the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Ten years after its establishment, we have a unique
opportunity to make a difference. We must not waste it.

In these 10 years we have learned various lessons
and found excessive fragmentation in the actions
of the Organization, dispersion of efforts and some
inconsistency in the strategies. Coordination among the
principal organs of the United Nations that proposed
establishing the Commission is today far from being
effective, which is why we must analyse the deficiencies
of the system and bring about its repair through concrete
measures that bolster integration.

The Commission has the potential to be a bridge
between the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as
between Headquarters in New York and field activities,
bringing together all other relevant stakeholders in
peacebuilding, including at the national, subregional
and regional levels. Reaching systemic coherence in
peacebuilding strategies should be our main objective.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture
and the parallel reviews of United Nations peace
operations and of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, are focused on prevention.
The preventive approach currently favoured by the
Organization is linked to the concept of "sustaining
peace" understood as an ongoing process that involves
the peacebuilding system not only at the post-conflict
stage but also before and during conflicts. It is based
on a comprehensive approach that takes into account
the need to address the root causes of conflict through,
inter alia, strengthening the rule of law, the promotion
of sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty
eradication, social development, the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights.

The aforementioned preventive approach includes,
in a necessary and decisive manner, inclusive national
ownership in the peacebuilding process, that is, a
fundamental involvement of Governments and of the
various political and social stakeholders in the Member
States involved in these processes. As the report
notes, such inclusive national ownership should be
encouraged, since the United Nations and international
actors can support and facilitate this process, but not
lead it.

In this context, we understand the need to
systemically address the processes of peacebuilding, as
has been done through the incorporation of a gender
perspective and, perhaps with greater flexibility,
reflecting on how it could work beyond the format of
country configurations. Peacebuilding activities are
carried out in the field, not at agency headquarters,
given that domestic realities must take precedence. For
this, it is necessary to have flexible approaches, since
there is no single approach that will work in every case.

(spoke in English)
There is no "one size fits all" in peacebuilding.
(spoke in Spanish)

The lack of attention devoted to peacebuilding is
reflected mainly in the meagre allocation of resources
to the development of related activities. In that regard,
we stress the need for predictable and sustainable
funding for peacebuilding activities. And in that vein,
we agree with the recommendation by the Advisory
Group to allocate $100 million to the Peacebuilding
Fund annually or, if the figure were greater, an amount
equivalent to 1 per cent of the total budget of the United
Nations for peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, in the framework of contributions
established for the budget of the Organization.

Another important point raised both in the report
of the Advisory Group and in your concept note
(S/2016/104, annex), Mr. President, is the need to
review the time frames on which the processes and
programmes towards the achievement of sustainable
peace are structured. They must necessarily be longer
as they refer to stages of development. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), which we approved in September 2015,
proposes the promotion of fair, peaceful and inclusive
societies, thereby linking the sustainment of peace and
development. Peacebuilding architecture that aspires
to sustain a stable international order cannot neglect
these three interrelated dimensions: development
challenges, financing and time frames consistent with
the objectives to be achieved.

Lastly, I would like to emphasize that regional
and subregional organizations are also essential to
partnerships that are conducive to peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, in the Americas, consideration
should be given to the role that could be played by the
Organization of American States or other subregional
organizations such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Union of South
American Nations and the South American Common
Market.

Argentina welcomes the fact that the issue of
peacebuilding has been brought to the attention
of Member States and trusts that the review of
its architecture, which began with the report of
the Advisory Group, will help to strengthen the
Organization, giving it more effective tools to foster
peace and the development of peoples.

