It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam. At the outset, we would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Francois Lounceny Fall, for his briefing. This meeting has been convened at a very critical moment, while most countries in the region are in the middle of their electoral cycles. The years 2020 and 2021 are pivotal for the upcoming period in the Central African region. We welcome the steps taken by countries of the region to preserve peace and security, promote national dialogue among different political actors, settle border disputes, as well as improve relations among countries. However, it is still worrisome to see that the region remains shrouded in persistent insecurity and instability. The activities of cross-border armed groups, the illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources, the spread of deadly diseases, internal displacement, the adverse effects of climate change, among others, undermine the above-mentioned positive efforts. We strongly condemn the continued attacks carried out by Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army in the region and would like to take this opportunity to express our deepest sympathy to the affected population. At present, with the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the situation has become even more precarious and demands special attention. We support the call for an immediate ceasefire by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission in order to facilitate the fight against COVID-19, as well as to further consolidate peacemaking efforts. Against that backdrop, Indonesia and Viet Nam would like to emphasize the following points. First, we would like to highlight the critical importance of addressing the root causes of instability in the region. To that end, there should be a comprehensive and collective set of sustainable measures, which could include supporting ongoing diplomatic and political efforts, enhancing the reconciliation process at the national and regional levels, addressing threats caused by armed groups, strengthening the governance of natural resources, providing development opportunities for countries and ensuring equitable and sustainable development for all. As electoral processes are under way, we share the view of the Secretary- General about the need for stronger partnership between Governments and various political and social actors in order to ensure successful elections. Trust and confidence are indispensable and could go a long way in consolidating a strong foundation for sustained stability and development for the people of Central Africa. Secondly, as two South-East Asian nations, Indonesia and Viet Nam fully understand the importance of regional and subregional cooperation. Achieving the motto of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) - "One Vision, One Identity, One Community" - is the result of sustained efforts of all countries in our region over several decades. With shared goals and responsibility to our peoples, we can and will achieve a lot together, including ensuring regional peace, security, stability and prosperity. We strongly believe in the potential of Central Africa and its peoples. We see the leading and integral role played by the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). We welcome the adoption by ECCAS of an institutional reform package in December 2019 that enhances the capacity of Central African countries to better address their peace and security challenges. We also welcome the efforts to improve relations and cooperation among Member States, especially those of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ease tension between Rwanda and Uganda and the swift action by Member States to control the spread of COVID-19. The strong political will of Central African countries should be coupled with greater coordination within the framework of the African Peace and Security Architecture and with support from United Nations entities and other international partners. Thirdly, we call on all international partners to strengthen their technical and financial support to countries in the region through bilateral and multilateral frameworks. We would also like to stress the obligation of the Security Council to continue providing support to countries in the region in accordance with its mandate. To conclude, we highly commend the sustained efforts to contribute to the maintenance of peace and security in the region made by the Special Representative and by all United Nations personnel across the various missions, including over 1,600 uniformed personnel from ASEAN countries, namely, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Viet Nam. We all aspire to peace, stability, prosperity and development for the people of Central Africa.
