Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank Council
members for giving me this opportunity to briefthem on
the strategic review of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), a task that the Council entrusted
me with pursuant to resolution 2147 (2014) and that has
taken quite a lot of time over the past months.

I would like to start by expressing my appreciation for
the support and assistance provided by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo throughout
this important exercise. This was demonstrated by
the time accorded to us while our delegation was
in Kinshasa by several Congolese ministers, led
by Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo. There were several meetings, each
one lasting several hours, which is a testament to how
seriously the Government has taken the review. I would
add that I myself had many meetings with the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, the Secretary-General spoke with
President Kabila Kabange over the phone and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler
had a long meeting with President Kabila Kabange over
the past weekend.

Throughout all those meetings, we had an
opportunity to discuss with the Congolese authorities
a wide range of issues, including the political situation,
security challenges and the upcoming elections.
We agreed that over the past years much has been
accomplished: the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
the reunification of the country, the establishment of
the transitional Government and two national elections.
And yet challenges remain. In spite of our military
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars at the end of 2013,
armed groups - both Congolese and foreign ~ remain,
in particular the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR) and the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). Those armed groups continue to pose a threat
to the civilian population and the overall stability and
development of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to the Great Lakes region in general.
First, allow me to mention what happened in the past
few days with regard to the troubling incidents related
to the electoral process in Kinshasa, Goma, Bukavu and
Lubumbashi. I would like to express our deep concern
about the violence that occurred during those events and
to deplore the loss of lives, the destruction of property
and the acts of looting. The Congolese have the right
to express their opinions and demonstrate peacefully.
Clearly, the use of violence is unacceptable. Of course,
demonstrators and their leaders must be urged to pursue
political objectives by non-violent means. However,
we are concerned by reports of security forces using
force against peaceful, unarmed demonstrators and by
reports of arbitrary arrests. It is the responsibility of the
Government to maintain a political space and allow for
the peaceful expression of opinions. The Government
must also ensure that the response to such violent
protests is proportionate. Furthermore, the fact that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
ordered Internet sites, text messaging services and
radio stations to shut down is a source of concern, as the
freedom of expression and communication are essential
rights in a democracy and should not be curtailed.

Throughout the discussions I mentioned earlier that
we had with the Congolese authorities, we discussed at
length the threats facing the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We discussed the role of MONUSCO and
the size of its military and police components. Overall,
our assessment was that MONUSCO continues to play
an important role in stabilizing the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in supporting the
Government in neutralizing armed groups. However, it
is true that have heard some criticism about how the
Mission is implementing certain aspects of its mandate,
specifically the performance of some of its contingents.
We take those criticisms seriously, and the report before
the Council contains a number of recommendations
aimed at ensuring that MONUSCO becomes more
effective in implementing its mandate and achieves
more tangible results. It should be noted that this
also includes a recommendation by the Secretary-
General for MONUSCO to intensify dialogue with the
Government on a number of key policy issues.

With regard to the military component, at
the meeting held yesterday with the troop- and
police-contributing countries, I conveyed a very clear
message: that the changes necessary to more effectively
implement MONUSCO's mandate will not happen
merely through a transformation of the MONUSCO
force. What is necessary beyond that is a change in the
behaviour of the troop-contributing countries deployed
on the ground. All of the contingents must be ready and
willing to use armed force against those who continue to
pose a threat to the civilian population, and this resolve
must be translated into action in a more proactive
manner. Of course, it is clear that the protection of
civilians cannot be limited to military action only.

The Secretary-General has therefore recommended
a reduction in MONUSCO military personnel by
2,000 troops and the replacement of the two formed
police units that were deployed to South Sudan early
last year. His recommendation is based on the relative
improvement in the security situation in some parts of
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the military defeat of the M-23. It is also based on the
fact that there has been an improvement in the capacity
of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) to address the threat posed by
armed groups. It is also based on a number of concrete
measures that were taken to make the Force more
mobile and more flexible.

It is true that President Kabila and his Government
are advocating for deeper personnel cuts. Their view is
that maintaining the numbers proposed by the Secretary-
General, that is, a cut of 2,000 personnel, would send a
negative signal. But, as I explained to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, that
recommendation by the Secretary-General is based
on an in-depth military capability study and troop-
to-task analysis. Considering the numerous political
and security challenges that remain, we think that any
reduction beyond the recommended figure would have
negative implications for the ability of the Force to
implement its mandate.

The protection of civilians remains MONUSCO'S
core mandated task. That requires a strong military
component that is able to flexibly and effectively
undertake the military aspects of a protection-of-
civilians strategy, until the Government forces have the
capacity to take over the tasks that have been entrusted
to MONUSCO. MONUSCO also has, as the Council is
aware, the mandate to neutralize armed groups, which
is now more than ever our key priority. To implement
that unique mandate, we need adequate capacity
and specialized capabilities, in particular in View of
operations against the FDLR and the ADF. I reiterate
that military operations against the FDLR must start
now. We must also recognize that achieving tangible
results in the fight against the FDLR will require both
resources and time, considering the dispersed nature
of the armed group and its immersion within the local
population, so, again, it will take time. We will also
have to be careful to avoid any repetition of what
happened in 2009, when the FARDC had undertaken
military operations against that group, which led to
devastating humanitarian consequences.

This, however, does not mean that MONUSCO
should stay in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
indefinitely. We are ready to hold discussions with
the Government to develop jointly a plan that would
make it possible for the Government to progressively
take over the tasks that we are currently performing.
MONUSCO's exit strategy must be progressive and tied
to specific criteria and targets jointly developed with
the Government. Over the past 15 years we have made
considerable investments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I think that it is in our collective interest
to ensure a gradual withdrawal, without reversing the
hard-won gains achieved thus far. Neither the United
Nations nor the Government can do this in isolation.
The Secretary- General has therefore recommended that
MONUSCO and the Government enter into a strategic-
level dialogue to develop an exit strategy and road map
in the coming months.

We would be happy to work with the Government
in order to enable it to implement a strategy that could
be accelerated, provided that conditions allow it.
Ultimately, the solution to the problem is in the hands
of the Government. MONUSCO'S drawdown will
depend on the Government's commitment and ability to
make tangible progress on neutralizing armed groups,
in particular the FDLR and the ADF; on building the
capacity of the army and the police in a sustainable
manner; and its capacity and resolve to hold credible
elections that would contribute to consolidating
stability in accordance with the Constitution.

Let me conclude by underscoring that we have come
a long way and that a great deal has been achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular since
the signing almost two years ago in Addis Ababa of
the Framework for Peace, Security and Cooperation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We are on the right path, but more efforts are needed
from all ofus to achieve what is in our common interest
and our common goal: durable peace and stability in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. That will require translating the political
commitments agreed at Addis Ababa two years ago into
concrete action, now more than ever, in particular with
regard to the neutralization of armed groups.

