Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening

this special debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2009/304) on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict - a report that
confirms the critical role of the United Nations in
addressing the many gaps in the international response
to conflict situations.

The report rightly focuses on the critical period
immediately after conflict, when virtuous cycles must
be set in motion to lay foundations for lasting peace.
So often, however, we have failed in that, with nearly
30 per cent of all conflicts that ended in negotiated
settlement resuming within five years.

Time is of the essence in the immediate post-
conflict period. A fragile peace can quickly unravel if
peace dividends are not quickly apparent. The
availability of expert teams that can deploy and begin
work at very short notice is an essential bridge to a
fuller and more coordinated response.

The pace of deployment to missions such as the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, where less than 35 per cent of international
civilian posts had been filled a year after its
establishment, and the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad, which had first-
year vacancies of 91 per cent, is of great concern.
Those are stark and depressing numbers. They help
make the case for civilian stand-by capacity and for
United Nations human resources management reform.

We were pleased that the report also
acknowledges that the United Nations must improve its
coordination, both internally and with national and
international actors. The delivering as one philosophy
must underpin United Nations peacebuilding efforts,
just as it must in any other area. United Nations
country leaders - the people on the ground - need
greater powers and support from Headquarters to
achieve their most immediate, and invariably urgent,
objectives. Competent appointees, with well-defined
delegations given the freedom to act quickly and
decisively, could save lives, save time and save
infrastructure and institutions essential to the
peacebuilding process.

The report also recognizes the need for rapid
assessments to determine both existing capacity and
the most immediate demands for external support.
Capacity development, where it is needed, should not
be part of an exit strategy; it should begin straight
away.

New Zealand follows the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission with considerable interest.
Its composition, objectives and working methods offer
significant promise. But, despite that, we have yet to
see concrete results. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General's consideration of how it might
better realize its potential, including channelling its
resources and promoting greater coherence.

New Zealand favours an integrated approach to
addressing the underlying causes of conflict, with the
participation of security, diplomatic, development and
local actors. We commend the report for emphasizing
the importance of local context in developing a
peacebuilding strategy.

New Zealand has been a significant contributor to
peacebuilding activities that have made a tangible
difference on the ground. The Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands promotes long-term
stability, security and prosperity by supporting
improved rule of law, more effective, accountable and
democratic government, economic growth and
enhanced public-service delivery. We also adopt an
integrated whole-of-government approach to our
contributions in Timor-Leste and Afghanistan.

The image of the Blue Beret interposed between
previously warring parties has become one of the
Organization's successes. But the benefits of
peacekeeping, ceasefires and truces can be quickly lost
without the next stage, namely, that of peacebuilding,
which makes short-term peace sustainable by fostering
democracy, leadership, justice, reconciliation, human
rights and economic and social development.

New Zealand is committed to working with the
United Nations and others to ensure more durable
solutions to preventing future conflict. The United
Nations must remain as committed to peacebuilding as
it is to peacekeeping. One is immediately important to
end conflict and save lives; the other is absolutely
necessary to prevent the resumption of conflict and to
rebuild lives and societies. History will judge not only
how we achieved the first, but also how we sustained
the second.

