Ms. Uwiringiyimana: I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to speak today. My name
is Sandra Uwiringiyimana. I am 20 years old, and I
am from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My
ancestors are from Rwanda; for many generations, my
family lived in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
where I was born. Still, many Congolese considered my
people, the Banyamulenge, to be Rwandans because of
the language we speak and the way we look.

We were born into war. These are some of my
earliest memories. I remember seeing Congolese
soldiers marching in the streets with the heads of the
Banyamulenge on sticks. I remember spending nights
in bushes, hiding from attacks. I got used to dropping
out of school and fleeing every time a new war broke
out. One day in 2004, my father showed up at school and
said we had to leave immediately. We fled to Burundi.
We were robbed and beaten before we could make it to
the border. They took everything. We finally made it
to a United Nations camp in Burundi called Gatumba,
where we lived in a large tent with other families. I was
about 10 years old.

We had been there for a few months when it
happened. I remember it vividly. It is night time, and I
am woken up by what sounds like popcorn popping. My
mother is frantically telling me to wake up. I open my
eyes and see fear in her face. Then I see my aunt next
to her, blood running down her arm like a stream and
gushing onto my leg. I start screaming, and my screams
wake up my six-year-old sister. My mother tells us to be
quiet and to find sheets to wrap around my aunt's arm.
I try, but all I see is blood everywhere. My mother tells
my older cousin to take my sister and me through a hole
that has been ripped in the side of our tent. People are
rushing to escape, but right after my cousin runs out,
gunshots ring out. My mother pulls us back and shoves
us under a thin mattress. We wait until it is quiet. Then
we hear a voice saying, "Is there anyone there? We
are here to help. Please come out." My mother shouts,
"Are you really here to help?" They say they are the
good guys. We come out and walk towards the door.
My mother carries my two little cousins with my little
sister on her back. My aunt is crawling.

Just then, I see two armed men in the doorway
and something tells me there is danger. I start running
in the other direction. Then the shooting starts. As I
look back, I see sparks going through my mother and
everyone around her. I go back to my hiding place under
the thin mattress. I shut my eyes and start to pray. Then
I feel something hot drop on my leg. I open my eyes
and the whole tent is on fire. Everything around me is
melting. I throw off the mattress and start to run, but a
man with a gun grabs me. He looks about 20 years old.
I say, "Forgive me," and I do not know ifI am speaking
to him or to God. I lost my younger sister and many
of my childhood friends that night. I am nothing. That
is what he thought, this man who had just killed my
family. He kicks me and releases his grip. To this day
I will never know why he let me go. Then I am crying
and running, as quick as I can. I stumble and fall, but I
get up and keep running.

That is my story. I will tell it to anyone who will
listen. Not because it is easy. Every time I tell it 1 am
back in Gatumba, a lO-year-old burning in a tent. But
as long as the criminal who admitted to leading that
massacre continues to walk freely in the streets of
Burundi, I have no choice. I must keep telling it until
the international community proves that my words are
worthy not only of empathy but also of accountability.
Until leaders like those here and the countries they
represent show me that my family and all others are
not disposable. The only way to do that is by bringing
people like Agathon Rwasa to justice. Only then will
war criminals know that their crimes are wrong and will
not go unpunished. Only then will millions of survivors
like me hear loud and clear that our lives have value.

My life is very different now. In 2007, my family
was resettled in the United States through a United
Nations programme. I am studying at Houghton
College. My older sisters and I have set up a foundation
to help survivors like us, called Foundation of Hope.
Resettlement is important. So is treatment for the
horrors we have been through. The survivors' travelling
exhibit that my brother and I photograph serves as a
learning tool for many college communities, and, of
course, as an aid to healing for myself and my family.

But healing and peace will not come until there
is justice. Until there is justice, the comfortable new
home and safe community I live in may as well be that
tent in Gatumba, Until there is justice, the nightmares
will never stop. The Security Council has the reports; it
knows the criminals. Acknowledgement is not enough.
It must take action.

