Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Alexander Zouev for his briefing. I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting one year after the adoption of resolution 2365
(2017) on an important topic that deserves our attention
and mobilization.

Unfortunately, my first comment is to recall that
the state of affairs is indisputable. Anti-personnel
mines, explosive remnants of war and cluster munitions
remain a major threat to our security. To that, we must
add the challenge of improvised explosive device
(IEDs), which are most frequently used by terrorists,
and the very nature of the IEDs. The fact that they are
homemade, using components that are freely available,
makes this issue all the more difficult to address in
international bodies. Since we renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) only
yesterday (see S/PV.8298), I am thinking specifically
of the case of Mali, where the Blue Helmets have
already paid a heavy price. I am also thinking of the
Rohingya woman amputee who was the victim of an
anti-personnel mine whom we met during the Council's
visit to Bangladesh and Burma, and of the photos of
shredded limbs and bodies that we were shown there.
What these weapons have in common is that they
blindly mow down adults and children, civilians and
military, without distinction. They are actually one of
the leading causes of civilian casualties in conflict and
post-conflict areas, from Afghanistan to Colombia.
That speaks to the breadth of this threat and the risks
it brings nowadays, and France considers it a serious
cause for concern that should continue to force us to act
with more determination than ever.

Considering how serious these challenges are, in
my second point I would like to echo the Secretary-
General's call for strengthening our action to save
lives. Needless to say, our action should be adapted
each specific situation, because we are dealing with a
complex range of weapons, with major consequences
both for stabilization in general and post-conflict
reconstruction, and they require targeted measures,
which the international community should take action
on on two levels.

First, we have to supply the means needed to work
with the stakeholders on the ground, whether they are
troops or specialized non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), to fight this threat. They need operational
means adapted to particularly tricky security conditions.
In that regard, France would like to commend the
outstanding work being done by the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS), in cooperation with
other United Nations agencies. UNMAS, which is
headed by my compatriot Agnes Marcaillou, is putting
its unparalleled know-how at the service of the world's
most vulnerable populations with a great deal of
courage. I want to express our special gratitude to the
responders on the front lines of this effort, the civilian
and military deminers, for their tireless devotion at the
risk of their own lives. It is their action that creates the
security conditions that enable Blue Helmets to deploy,
humanitarian personnel to reach the people in need and
the people themselves to resume normal life.

It is also essential to assist States and their
specialized agencies through various training and
awareness-raising activities. The countries exposed
to these threats must be able to develop their own
expertise so that they are no longer dependent on
assistance locally from foreign and international teams.
Among other things, we should focus on educating
local populations about the risks.

My third point has to do with France's efforts to
combat the problem of mines. We focus particularly
on backing efforts to reform the security apparatus of
a number of partner States, train national bodies and
support partners deployed in the countries concerned.
Following the example of Handicap International,
these NGOs are doing an admirable job. With a
view to achieving stabilization, France is supporting
specialized training in a mainly humanitarian context
in a number of countries emerging from crisis. In
close partnership with the relevant stakeholders, we
are supporting demining programmes, particularly in
the Middle East and Africa, for example through such
regional initiatives as the Humanitarian Demining
Training Centre in Benin.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that it is only
through united action and better cooperation that we
will succeed in effectively combating the threat posed
by mines. It is our responsibility to intensify our efforts
and strengthen their coherence in order to minimize the
bleeding that these deadly devices cause. The complexity
of the threat demands that multiple actors come up with
a coordinated response based on the diverse kinds of
expertise and resources of each. The example of the
Mine Action Support Group should inspire us in that
regard. Increasing our cooperation also means working
to universalize and fully implement the legal tools at
our disposal, especially the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons, the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention, which is our basic instrument in the fight
against anti-personnel mines, and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions. Many countries share the objectives
ofthese Conventions even ifthey are not yet signatories
to them, and France encourages all who have not yet
done so to accede to them. Together with the European
Union, we stand ready to give them concrete support in
that process.

I would like to end by congratulating Russia for its
effective presidency of the Security Council this month.

