Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to express my pleasure that Mr. Lloyd

 

Axworthy, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, has
come here yet again to preside personally over this
important meeting of the Security Council. I also wish to
welcome the participation in this debate of Mr. Joao
Bernardo de Miranda, the Minister of External Affairs of
Angola.

About one month ago, the Security Council met
openly to consider the report of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999) to investigate
violations of sanctions imposed against UNITA. In the
course of its statement, the delegation of Togo decried the
fact that the report had been released first to the media, to
the detriment of the States Members of the United Nations,
particularly those that it implicated. At the same time, we
deplored the frivolous and entirely unprofessional method
followed by the Experts, as well as the lack of consistency
of the allegations raised against Togo.

Nevertheless, and in order to make an in-depth study
of the substance of these allegations, the Government of
Togo decided on 22 March to establish an interministerial
commission of inquiry composed of six members, who
were later joined by the President of the Constitutional
Court, the First Vice-President of the National Assembly
and the President of the Supreme Court of Togo. Yesterday,
I sent the report drafted by the commission to the President
of the Security Council and we expect that it will soon be
published as an official document of the Council.

As I stressed in my letter of 24 March 2000, contained
in document S/2000/256, it goes without saying that certain
allegations can be verified by members of the national
commission of inquiry only on the basis of the detailed
information requested by my Government. This includes
details concerning the type and registration of the aircraft
alleged to be involved in the violations of sanctions, as well
as the dates and places connected with their refueling in
Togo. It is in this context that I would like to reaffirm the
willingness of the Government of Togo to cooperate closely
with the sanctions Committee.

My delegation is also gratified that the draft resolution
soon to be voted on by the members of the Council
provides for setting up a monitoring mechanism composed
of up to five experts entrusted with the follow-up of the
work carried out by the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999). My delegation truly
hopes that the observations and comments made during the
examination of the report of the Panel of Experts will be
taken into consideration, particularly those regarding the
working methods followed by the Panel of Experts.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of the Government of Togo to respect
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly those
imposing sanctions on UNITA. I would like to emphasize
my Government's determination to shed full light on the
allegations contained in the report of the Panel of Experts
and, more generally, to contribute to efforts to improve
the effectiveness of embargo measures.

It is in this context that the Government of Togo is
planning to establish a body to follow up and monitor the
rigorous implementation of various Security Council
resolutions on sanctions against UN ITA. We have already
decided to invite to Togo the United Nations experts
whose previous mission did not lead to a constructive
dialogue.

