Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing to the Security Council. I also welcome the
Ministers present in the Chamber today.

Poland supported the request made by the United
States and other countries for today's briefing because
we believe that the scale of Venezuelan migration
and the humanitarian crisis - both resulting from
the oppressive regime of Nicolas Maduro - have an
undeniable impact and tremendous consequences on
the situation in neighbouring Latin American countries.
That situation de facto poses a threat to the stability
and security of the region. We remain in solidarity with
those affected.

Poland aligns itself with the common European
Union approach to the recent events in Venezuela.

We consider the National Assembly to be the only
legitimate power that has a democratic mandate in
Venezuela, won in free and fair elections, in line with
the Venezuelan Constitution. We also recognize its
constitutional prerogatives, its members and its leaders.
We repeat the call that civil rights freedoms and the
safety of all National Assembly members, including
its President, need to be observed and respected.
We fully support the democratic aspirations of the
Venezuelan people, expressed during the most recent
mass demonstrations.

Furthermore, we recognize Juan Guaido as the
legitimate, democratic voice and leader that may
initiate the transition process in Venezuela. We join
him in calling for the urgent holding of free, transparent
and credible presidential elections, in accordance with
international, democratic standards and the Venezuelan
constitutional order. Finally, it should be heard by
the Venezuelan authorities that, in the absence of an
announcement on the organization of fresh elections
with the necessary guarantees over the coming days,
Poland will take further action, including on the issue
of recognition of the country's leadership, in line with
article 233 of the Venezuelan Constitution.

There are certain challenges ahead. The main
objective is to guarantee - together with the relevant
regional organizations, their member States and
the support of the European Union - the peaceful
character of the transition process taking place in
Venezuela. We call for respect for democracy, the rule
of law and fundamental rights and freedoms, including
the freedom of assembly and expression, and above all
for parties to refrain from violence. We condemn the
indiscriminate use of force, which has already led to
an increasing death toll, injuries, arbitrary detentions
and other forms of repression. Furthermore, we call
for the immediate release of all political prisoners and
detainees. There have been at least 26 people killed and
more than 340 detained in recent days. That situation
is unacceptable.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
demands of civil society cannot be left unanswered.
People have amassed and called for democracy; their
voices should not be ignored.

