Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate our Austrian
colleague for the way in which he presided over the
Council in November. I would also like to convey to
you, Mr. President, our best wishes for your presidency
for the month of December. We know that you will
carry out these functions with the necessary firmness
and effectiveness. 1 would like to add that the fact that
your presidency is being conducted in French will only
lend more clarity, logic and elegance to our work. I see
that my statement has earned unanimous approval
around the table.

I would like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their presentation of
their reports. France endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

The briefings we have heard confirm that the
deadlines set in the completion strategies for the
Tribunals will be missed and that their work will
continue beyond 2010. The Security Council must
consider the consequences of this. The first thing to do
is to give the Tribunals the means to complete their
trials and appeals as soon as possible, in full
compliance with the rules of fairness and justice. The
mandate of the appeal judges must be immediately
extended to 31 December 2011. The Tribunals must be
able to exceed the authorized tenure for ad litem judges
by one more year. We hope that, in these decisions, the
Security Council will make clear its resolve to ensure
that the Tribunals will be able to bring their work to a
successful conclusion. Nevertheless, the delay in
implementing the Tribunals' completion strategies
remains of concern, and we ask the Tribunals to
redouble their efforts to step up the effectiveness and
pace of the work of the Trial and Appeal Chambers.

The work of the Prosecutors is particularly
essential to tracking fugitives, whose arrest and
transfer to the Tribunals is a priority. The fact that
some accused remain at large is one of the major areas
of uncertainty hindering the completion strategies. The
mission of the Tribunals will not be accomplished so
long as these individuals have not been arrested and
tried.

In this regard, the Serbian authorities' arrest of
Mr. Karadzie was a major step forward for the ICTY.
We now await the arrests of Mr. Mladic' and
Mr. Hadzie. Serbia must continue on the path that its
Government has recently taken. Full cooperation with
the ICTY, be it in tracking fugitives or bringing them to
justice, is an essential element of the stabilization and
association strategy being pursued by the European
Union for all countries in the region of the former
Yugoslavia. We trust in the efforts of Croatia to resolve
pending issues.

With respect to the ICTR, we commend the arrest
and transfer of two fugitives to Arusha in the period
under review. Eleven of the accused, including three of
highest rank, remain at large. We call on all concerned
States to provide Prosecutor Jallow with the necessary
cooperation. We reiterate our request to Kenya to fulfil
its obligations with respect to the arrest and transfer of
Felicien Kabuga to the ICTR. We welcome Rwanda's
efforts to overcome legal obstacles to the referral of
cases to its jurisdiction, allowing it to try lower-rank
fugitives. Ensuring the protection of witnesses remains
critical.

I would recall that, if the problem of fugitives is
not resolved quickly, it will have to be addressed in the
context of the legacy of the Tribunals. Indeed, it would
be unacceptable for the Tribunals' closure to entail
impunity for those who are at large. This function will
fall to the residual mechanism carrying out essential
functions once the Tribunals are closed. The Security
Council Informal Working Group on international
tribunals has continued to work on this subject under
the effective leadership of Austria, for which we are
grateful.

An examination of the Secretary-General's report
on this subject (S/2009/258) will allow the Group to
consider the topic more deeply. The report contains a
number of recommendations addressed to the Tribunals
on immediate preparations for the transition to the
residual mechanism. My country, eager to ensure that
the Council adopts a timely decision on preserving the
integrity of the Tribunals' legacy, is participating in
that work. The solution must meet the criteria of
simplicity, modesty and economy. It must avoid all
duplication and, indeed, should make use of services
provided by other institutions.

