Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you personally, Mr. President, and
your country, Togo, for having organized under your
presidency today's important debate on the challenges
of the fight against terrorism in Africa in the context of
maintaining international peace and security. I firmly
believe that your statement is an important contribution,
with respect both to its analytical portion and the ways
to confront the scourge of terrorism that you have set out
here. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Director General of the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money Laundering in West
Africa for their enlightening briefings.

Today's debate is timely. We are indeed concerned
in two regards - first, because terrorism remains one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security and, secondly, because terrorism has become,
evermore markedly in recent years, a threat to peace
and stability in a number of regions on the African
continent.

The crisis in Mali and its ramifications throughout
the Sahel and beyond illustrate in many ways the
evermore complex challenges that the United Nations
and its States Members have to face. The situation
challenges all of us and makes us realize that the fight
against terrorism is a long-term fight that will require
the mobilization of considerable means, in terms
of both security and development cooperation. The
implementation of a global strategy is a necessity.
At the level of the United Nations, the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy has expanded the framework of the
fight against terrorism. Besides repressive and security
measures, it comprises measures to ensure respect for
international law, notably humanitarian law and human
rights, as well as measures to avoid the creation of
fertile ground for the propagation of terrorist ideology.
The Strategy has the merit of combining security, rule
of law, socioeconomic development, and protection and
promotion of human rights aspects. It is now critical to
comprehensively implement it at the regional level in
Africa.

To counter the threat of Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in West Africa, in particular in the Sahel region, the
Security Council has adapted its response by sharpening
the tools at its disposal, in particular sanctions, through
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011). After the listing of Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb in 2001, we welcome the
extension of the Al-Qaida sanctions to the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in West Africa in 2012 and to
Ansar Dine in 2013. We also have great expectations
for the cooperation between the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, established by
resolution 2100 (2013) on 25 April.

Given the vast scale of the terrorist threat, we
must support African countries in strengthening their
capacities. In that regard, we welcome the special
meeting being organized this year by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee under the chairmanship of
Morocco on cooperation and technical assistance to
States in the Sahel region, so as to strengthen their
capacities in the fight against terrorism. In its national
capacity, Luxembourg is working to contribute to
African capacity-building in the fight against the
financing of terrorism. We have therefore supported
training implemented by the National Financial
Intelligence Processing Unit in Senegal.

In the Sahel region, terrorism is a transnational
phenomenon. It has been able to grow stronger through
alliances with criminal networks in the region that are
prospering thanks to the money made from human
trafficking and the illicit trade in arms and drugs, as
the President mentioned. That transnational threat
requires a coordinated response at the international,
regional and national levels. It is therefore important
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and subregional organizations and
to make effective use of the mechanisms developed by
African regional and subregional organizations.
To strengthen that cooperation, it is essential to
establish regional strategies. Given the situation on the
ground, Luxembourg believes it is more urgent than ever
to finalize and implement the United Nations integrated
regional strategy on the Sahel, which encompasses
security, governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues. In July 2012, the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to develop and
implement that strategy in consultation with regional
organizations. It should provide the Security Council
and stakeholders in the region with a full array of tools
for preventive action, including in the field of counter-
terrorism. It must be finalized as soon as possible.

The terrorist threat cannot be eradicated by military
means. It is therefore important to reinforce the civilian
security dimension and better equip law enforcement
agencies and justice institutions in dealing with
terrorism. In parallel, it is necessary to work resolutely
for socioeconomic development in order to remove the

sources of frustration and exclusion that feed terrorism
and its recruiting agents.

For two decades, Luxembourg has been developing
a cooperation partnership with a number of countries
in the West Africa region, in particular, Senegal, Mali,
Burkina Faso and the Niger. In the context of that
partnership, we are pursuing an integrated regional
approach, which we hope will contribute to tackling
the fundamental causes of conflicts and the roots of
terrorism by focusing on the fight against poverty and
on access to basic services, while striving to give hope
to the younger generations by enabling them to find
decent jobs.

The Horn of Africa is another region where we are
seeking to contribute to the efforts to fight terrorism.
Last week, I participated in the London Conference on
Somalia, which is a country that has made considerable
progress during the past year, but remains confronted
by the formidable terrorist threat of Al-Shabaab. We are
encouraged by the efforts undertaken and the results
achieved in State-building and in the political process
in Somalia. The security situation is improving, but
the Somali authorities require our support in order
to build and strengthen their State institutions in that
field. To that end, Luxembourg took the opportunity
of the London Conference to announce a new financial
contribution of €500,000 for security sector reform in
Somalia.

My country's commitment to Africa reflects
our conviction that it is necessary to adopt a holistic
approach that recognizes the intrinsic link between
security and development, two objectives that can only
be achieved through the respect for and protection
of human rights and the rule of law, to echo a great
African, Mr. Kofi Annan. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/5) prepared for today's debate reflects
the need to adopt such an integrated approach in the
fight against terrorism on the African continent.
For that reason, Luxembourg fully supports it. May
today's debate inspire us all to break the momentum of
terrorism in Africa once and for all.

