I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. I would also like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. He has the full support of Turkey in his efforts to advance the political process. We all agree, I believe, that a political settlement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), remains the only way forward in Syria. A serious political process requires, above all, the seriousness of the Al-Assad regime and its backers in the efforts towards the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Today, despite sporadic violations, the ceasefire is holding in Idlib. Turkey continues its efforts to stabilize the situation on the ground. Joint patrols have been carried out with Russia on the M4 motorway since 15 March. Over 140,000 internally displaced persons have returned to their homes. Our aim is to ensure a lasting ceasefire in Idlib. This is essential to improving the humanitarian situation, facilitating the return of displaced people and advancing the political process. However, we are witnessing a continuous military build-up by the regime in Idlib. Taking into account the track record of the regime, this development threatens the lives of millions of Syrians, mostly women and children. We cannot allow the regime to interpret the ceasefire as an opportunity to regroup for its next offensive. Turkey is committed to protecting the civilians in Idlib and reserves its right of self- defence to respond to any attack. We have emphasized the importance of reaching a ceasefire for reviving the political track, and the ceasefire in Idlib has certainly helped with that. We are pleased that there is now an agreement on the agenda of the third round. The next round of Constitutional Committee meetings should be held without delay, once it is possible to convene in person. But we have to make sure that the Committee's meetings are conducted seriously. These meetings must deliver concrete outcomes. The Security Council has the responsibility to support the Committee's work and not to allow the regime to water it down again. It is also ironic and shameless that the Al-Assad regime, which deliberately targeted and tortured doctors and nurses for a decade and obliterated the medical infrastructure of its country by systematically attacking hospitals, is now calling for a lifting of sanctions under the pretext of fighting the coronavirus disease pandemic. Last month, almost all members of the Council expressed their sympathies for the victims of the terrorist attack that took place in Afrin on 28 April. Let me recall that this barbaric attack was perpetrated by the Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG), and was followed by another, in Al-Bab, on 9 May. In these two attacks, the PKK/YPG killed more than 50 civilians, including babies. Since mid-March, the PKK/Y PG has carried out more than 30 terrorist attacks throughout northern Syria. These indiscriminate attacks include suicide bombings. All these attacks have taken place at a time when the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces have pretended to support the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. It is no secret that these terrorist groups have been using such occasions to gain legitimacy. We all have the duty not to fall into this trap and to demonstrate a united front against terrorism by condemning the PKK/YPG's terrorist attacks, without hesitation. Attempts to include the PKK/YPG in the political process through so-called reconciliation talks are both unjustified and unacceptable. A terrorist entity with a separatist agenda for Syria, in contradiction with all relevant Security Council resolutions, has no place within this process. Let me briefly touch upon the use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime. Turkey welcomes the report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The Team's report, in addition to the reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, provides indisputable evidence that the Syrian regime is in non-compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. These are war crimes and crimes against humanity, and those responsible for these crimes must be held accountable and brought to justice. Turkey will continue to support all efforts, including the steps to be taken by the OPCW and the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, towards ensuring full accountability in Syria. This remains crucial for a credible political process. By way of massacring thousands of innocent civilians, the Syrian regime has gained control over some parts of Syria. Yet it has no legitimacy in the eyes of the Syrians. There are millions who cannot go back to their homeland for the simple reason that their most fundamental right - the right to life - is under threat. These millions of people are not represented in Damascus or here in New York, but their voices need to be heard. Their grievances need to be addressed. That can be achieved only through an election, as described by the Permanent Representative of France, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In the tenth year of the civil war in Syria, we need to do more, not less. And it is our collective duty to make sure that these Council meetings have a meaningful outcome beyond words. As usual, I will not honour the delusional state of mind of the previous speaker with a response. He does not represent the Syrian people. I will provide an answer, on behalf of my country and the nearly 9 million Syrians whom we protect, once there is a legitimate representative behind the name plate of the Syrian Arab Republic.
