Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): I will focus, Mr. President,
on your question of additional instruments for the
Council, in particular on the arms embargoes in Africa.
My point is that the Security Council must be much more
serious about ensuring that there are efficient mechanisms
to implement these arms embargoes. Anyone who has
travelled in an embargoed country, or who has sat on a
sanctions Committee, knows how wide is the gap between
what is said in Council resolutions and what is actually
going on on the ground, including in these African States.
That discrepancy is undermining the authority of this
Council, and we have to deal with that also. As you
yourself, Mr. President, said this morning, now it is time
to make sanctions bite. The question is "how?" I will
present three ideas.

First, individual Member States have clear
responsibility to prevent exports from and to prevent
transfers through, their own countries. That common
responsibility can in many cases be much better
respected.

Secondly, the sanctions Committees must be more
active. Ambassador Fowler has shown clearly how these
Committees can do much more than they have done
before. Council members have given the Committees the
very important task of monitoring and implementing arms
embargoes, and they must be much better equipped to
carry out that task, to improve information gathering, to
get the best intelligence available, to follow every lead
when breaches are reported and to act forcefully when
breaches are confirmed. Only then, I think, will their

 

actions be enough of a deterrent to help halt illegal arms
transfers.
Thirdly, the monitoring capacity on the ground must
improve. That can be achieved through better cooperation,
perhaps, with the regional organizations. United Nations
peacekeepers themselves could probably also be more
operational. And perhaps, in addition to regular
peacekeepers, a case could be made for the deployment of
personnel who could assist neighbouring States in the
regular patrolling and checking of border crossings.

Making a serious effort to implement arms embargoes
will involve both political will and additional resources.
Some will truly ask "Can the United Nations afford more
expenses?" My answer is that if one can stop a war that
takes the lives of thousands of people, primarily innocent
civilians, by being better at implementing arms embargoes,
that is a price well worth paying.

