Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
This year, the report of the Council to the General
Assembly has a new format: it is more focused and
shorter. The cost of production has thus been reduced.
That is in line with the desire and aspirations of the
wider membership. It is also a result of cooperation and
efforts on the part of Council members. In this respect,
I would like to mention the leadership of Singapore and
the contribution made by the Secretariat.

The past year saw improvements in the working
methods of the Council that led to increased
transparency and effectiveness. Maintaining the
Council's authority and striving for consensus have
increasingly become our shared goal, and we hope that
such positive momentum can be sustained. As the main
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council has, in the past
year, considered important issues in a timely manner
and taken rapid action to deal with them.

In particular, following the 11 September terrorist
attacks, the Council swiftly adopted resolution 1373
(2001) and established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which has played an indispensable role in
coordinating the international fight against terrorism.
At the critical moment when the Afghan situation took
a dramatic turn, a united Council, through its swift
decision, played a major role in pushing for
comprehensive implementation of the Bonn Agreement
and elimination of the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The
Council focused its attention on various hot spots in
Africa, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Angola and Sierra Leone. It also dispatched special
missions to gather specific information on the ground.

Thanks to the efforts of the Council and of all
parties concerned, there have been positive
developments in African conflicts. However, there is
still a gap between the work of the Council and the
expectations of African countries. Therefore, the
Council should seize the opportunity to redouble its
efforts and to actively support the work of regional
organizations such as the African Union so that its
efforts to resolve African conflicts can bear fruit.

It is also worth noting that the Council's role
concerning the Middle East-Palestinian question has
fallen short of expectations. Despite the statements of
the Council and the resolutions it has adopted, the
Middle East situation has yet to improve. In addition,
the Council still faces the question of how to deal with
the Afghan situation: how to help the Afghan Interim
Authority to improve the situation throughout its
territory and to create favourable conditions for
rebuilding the country. In short, how to fulfil, in a
timely manner, the responsibility entrusted to it by the
Charter, and how to play its role when problems arise
that threaten international peace and security, is still a
great challenge for the Council, which still faces many
obstacles and real problems. That is a question that
deserves our continued reflection and exploration.

