Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to personally thank the Secretary-General for
being here a second day in a row, but, more important,
for his comments on Syria. I think that it is time for
us to realize that we cannot continue to look away.
I very much appreciate him taking the time to make
that personal plea. I think it is important for all of
us to know. It is certainly an honour to have former
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon with us today. We
welcome him back home and are happy to see him.

I thank Kuwait's presidency of the Security Council
for convening today's meeting. It is important that we
pause for a moment every so often to reflect why it is
we are here and what guides our work. We should start
by being honest. There is a lot of lip service paid to
the Charter of the United Nations. Everyone claims to
be motivated by it and to be acting in accordance with
its principles. But all too often Member States invoke
the United Nations Charter not to inspire us to act,
but to excuse their lack of action. And so we see the
Security Council frequently failing to act at the times
it is most important to defend the principles of the
Charter. However, the United Nations is not simply a
collection of nations. The United Nations Charter gives
this organ an identity and a meaning of its own. The
Charter commits all Members to the pursuit of peace
and security based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination. It calls on Members to
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all. In practice, however, the United Nations has all too
often fallen short of that ideal.

Sovereignty is critically important. The United
States will never forfeit its sovereign right to govern
itself and determine its future. All Member States
share that right, but they also struggle to balance their
sovereign interests with the need to work cooperatively
with other nations. In the United States our Constitution
and democratic system of Government bind us to act
in the interests of our people. I am accountable to the
American people in what I say and do. Governments
that are not accountable to their people are less
constrained. They often point to sovereignty to justify
bad behaviour and claim the Council has no business
meddling in their affairs. But sovereignty gives no
country the right to trample on the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of others.

Human rights are the Security Council's business.
That is so because the United Nations Charter calls on
all Members to respect those rights, and also because
violations of human dignity inevitably lead to threats
to peace and security. Sovereignty is no excuse for a
Government to use violence and rape to expel a minority
group to a neighbouring country, as the Burmese
security forces have done. Sovereignty is no excuse for
the Council to do nothing. Sovereignty is no excuse for
a regime to gas its own people, as the Al-Assad regime
is doing in Syria, or for the Council to do nothing.
Sovereignty is no excuse for any dictatorship to abuse
its people, spark violence, foment regional conflict and
then get off scot-free.

If that were true there would be no reason for us to
be here. For the words of the Charter to have meaning
all Member States must be accountable and abide by
them. For the words of the Charter to have meaning, the
Security Council must be willing to act when Member
States violate them. The Security Council has done an
admirable work to address the threat of North Korea, but
too many Member States have failed to abide by their
Charter obligation to enforce the sanctions the Council
has imposed. In the meantime Pyongyang continues to
develop its nuclear arsenal, threaten its neighbours and
categorically refuse to discuss denuclearization. We
must do better.

For far too long the Council has watched Iran play
a deeply destabilizing role in the Middle East, without
addressing the urgent regional threat it poses. In
Ukraine Russia remains an occupying force in Crimea
and a destabilizing force in eastern Ukraine. Let me
repeat: the sovereign rights of nations are fundamental.
But when we do not uphold the principle of sovereignty
by allowing the Kim, Al-Assad and Putin regimes
to act with impunity, just the opposite is true. When
the Security Council provides accountability for
nations that violate the United Nations Charter, we
protect sovereignty. Such was the case in 1990, when
Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait. After the invasion,
Saddam proceeded to ignore 11 resolutions calling for
him to withdraw. On 29 November 1990 the Security
Council rightly invoked Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. It gave Saddam Hussein one last
chance to do what was right. In January 1991, after he
refused to comply, a coalition of 34 countries, led by
the United States, began the fight to liberate Kuwait.
That coalition's efforts were successful. The proof is
in the Chamber today. The sovereign nation of Kuwait
presides as President of the Security Council.

I once again thank our Kuwaiti friends for calling
today's important meeting. It is a great reminder of the
purposes of this body. And I congratulate the entire
nation of Kuwait for being a living reminder of what
this institution can accomplish when it lives up to the
principles of the Charter.

