Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to start by
again congratulating Guatemala on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. Under your able
leadership, Mr. President, I believe that the Council will
enjoy a productive, helpful and useful discussion of the
issues relating to international peace and stability.

On this occasion, I would like to speak very briefly
on the crisis in Syria and to express our appreciation
for the position that the Security Council took over the
shelling on 3 October of the Turkish town of Akcakale
by Syrian armed forces, which led to the loss of five
Turkish citizens. The statement underscored that this
incident highlighted the grave impact that the crisis in
Syria is having on the security of its neighbours and on
regional peace and stability, and demanded that such
violations of international law stop immediately and
not be repeated. While the number of Syrians seeking
shelter in Turkey has surpassed 100,000, the Turkish
Government continues to extend its helping hand to
those in need.

Since I was not able to address the Security Council
in September, I would also like to offer our sincere
condolences to our American colleagues here and the
American nation in general on the demise of Chris
Stevens, the late Ambassador of the United States to
Libya. As a country that has lost many of its diplomats
to acts of terror, Turkey shares their grief and condemn
this terrorist attack in the strongest terms. Turkey has
consistently emphasized that terror has no religion
or nationality and is a crime against humanity. We
continue to believe that fighting terrorism effectively
demands the unity and solidarity of the international
community.

I would now like to express our views on the
latest developments relating to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Unfortunately, nothing has changed in a
positive direction since the Council's last open debate
on this issue (S/PV.6706). We have witnessed increasing
violence directed at Palestinians by settlers during the
olive harvest season; extremist attacks on Muslim and
Christian sacred sites have continued; and the church
of Saint George and the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem
have recently been targeted. We share the concerns
voiced on 6 October by the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, when he warned
against escalation.

During the past three months, Israeli operations
again claimed Palestinian lives, and the suffering of
Palestinian prisoners under inhumane conditions in
Israeli prisons continued. We strongly condemn the
decision to issue tenders for the construction of 130
additional units in the settlements of Har Homa in East
Jerusalem, further increasing the settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories. All settlement
activities in the occupied territories constitute a
violation of international law. The recent elevation
of Ariel College to university status has introduced
education elements into the illegal settlement activities.
Such policies undermine the possibility of revitalizing
the peace process and seriously endanger the vision of
a two-State solution. We denounce the wave of recent
attacks in the West Bank. A resort to violence in
response to existing disputes on the part of any party
cannot be tolerated.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians recently held
a meeting in New York prior to the high-level segment
of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
to address the dire circumstances of the Palestinian
economy. In that context, the imaginary boundaries
imposed on Palestinian fishermen, the continuing
occupation of Palestinian lands, and the illegal blockade

around Gaza are the main determinants of the economic
situation in Palestine.

As a recent briefing of the Special Coordinator on
the Middle East highlighted, private-sector growth in
Palestine is affected by the obstacles posed to Palestinian
movement in the West Bank (see S/PV.6835). Area C
is essential to a viable Palestinian State. On that note,
I would like to call on the international community
to continue and even enhance its support for the
Palestinian people, especially for the efforts of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In these circumstances, the
Israeli Government has declared early parliamentary
elections. The only expectation of the international
community for this process is peace.

We supported Palestine's bid for membership of
the United Nations in 2011, and we will continue to
support any initiative within the General Assembly that
would elevate Palestine's status in the Organization.
Let us be clear - the Palestinian application to the
United Nations is not a declaration of statehood. The
Palestinian leadership declared itselfa State in 1988, and
a total of 133 Members under this roof have recognized
the State of Palestine since then. Palestine aims to
take its rightful seat among us. A united Palestinian
front will certainly draw even wider support from the
international community.

Allow me to conclude with remarks from the draft
report of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine, which
met in New York on 6 and 7 October. The Tribunal's
draft report appeals to the international community
as a whole, but primarily calls on the United Nations
to implement its Charter, uphold its value system and
implement the rule of law in the case of Palestine,
and criticizes it for its unethical performance on that
matter. It argues that such performance is undermining
the credibility of the United Nations system as a whole
and the trust of the international community.

We will continue to support the efforts of the
United Nations to achieve a solution based on the
established parameters of Madrid, Oslo and the Arab
Peace Initiative. In our view, the United Nations has
yet to fulfil its promise made in General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 1947, which forsees the coming
into existence of independent Israeli and Arab States.
Now is the time for the United Nations to live up to its
decisions and take corrective action, despite a delay of
65 years. Turkey will continue to support the two-State
solution, based on the 1967 borders, whereby Israel and
Palestine shall live side by side in peace and tranquillity,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine.

