The President: I thank Ms. Pearl for her statement
and for her presence at this meeting.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/375, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Poland, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America.

I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2222 (2015).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

Let me start by expressing my sincere appreciation
to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Christophe Deloire for their briefings and valuable
insights and to Mariane Pearl for sharing her very
personal and deeply moving perspective with us today.
What we just heard reaffirms my conviction that this
debate on the protection of journalists in conflict
situations is very timely.

We rely more and more on real-time information
in our decision-making. It is especially important
in situations of armed conflict, where our ability to
mobilize international response and assistance depends
on knowing the facts as they happen. Journalists are
our eyes and ears on the ground. Sadly, our being
informed comes increasingly at the cost of their lives.
Since 1992, 1,129 journalists have been killed.

It is journalists and media workers who often
expose violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights by warring parties, abuses by military and
security forces, and the tyranny of repressive regimes.
By doing so, they serve as early warning mechanisms,
because, as we know so well, human rights abuses often
predict conflicts and humanitarian catastrophes to
come. The deliberate targeting of journalists and media
workers is often used as a tactic of intimidation and
revenge by parties to the conflict who do not want their
criminal actions exposed.

For reporters, being in the midst of action is part of
thejob. They have to brave armed attacks, cross enemy
lines, move with the displaced or persecuted minorities.
They go to places others seek to escape. They constantly
push the limits of their own safety and security.

The spread of radical extremism and terrorism
adds another highly dangerous dimension to the
threats journalists and media workers are facing.
The beheadings of Daniel Pearl, James Foley, Steven
Sotloff, Kenji Goto and others are testimony to the rabid
brutality of terrorists who target journalists not only to
instil fear among those eager to expose their barbarity,
but also to make news, to advertise themselves, in fact.

Local journalists, especially women journalists,
as has been mentioned today, and freelancers, are
particularly exposed. According to the Committee for
the Protection of Journalists, roughly 90 per cent of
those killed in conflict situations are local journalists.
In September 2014, Daesh captured and beheaded
cameraman Raad al-Azzawi in the Tikrit area. Earlier
this month, Daesh killed a Mosul journalist Firas
al-Bahri because he refused to pledge allegiance to the
terrorist group. In most cases, however, the deaths of
local journalists and media workers pass unnoticed by
the international community.

Syria continues to be the deadliest place for
journalists. At least 80 journalists have been killed in
Syria since the conflict there began in 2011. The second
and third places in the number of journalist deaths
are Iraq and now Ukraine, because of the ongoing
war against the country's sovereignty sponsored and
supported by Russia.

Koichiro Matsuura, former Director-General of
UNESCO, once said:

"Every aggression against a journalist is an attack
on our most fundamental freedoms. Press freedom
and freedom of expression cannot be enjoyed
without basic security."

I could not agree with that more.

Even if the legal framework for the protection of
journalists has greatly evolved over the last decade,
there is a need to reinforce existing international norms
related to the protection of journalists by clarifying,
reinforcing and amending existing the international
framework. There is also an urgent need to reinforce
the implementation of legal norms and provisions,
including the accountability gap. Fewer than 5 per cent
of the perpetrators of crimes against journalists have
been prosecuted. In the majority of cases, the killers
have never been found and no investigation has even
been initiated.
It is the responsibility of all States to comply
with their obligations to end impunity. Strengthening
national legislation and tackling impunity for attacks
against journalists would be an important contribution
to their protection. The requirement to investigate,
prosecute and punish unlawful arrests and attacks
againstjournalists as well as the criminalization of any
such unlawful behaviour should be an integral part of
the fight against impunity.

Employer responsibility should also be strengthened,
including with regard to local freelance staff, in order to
improve the environment in which journalists operate
today. Media agencies should contribute to the common
goal of the protection of journalists by elaborating and
implementing more stringent and more inclusive safety
provisions for journalists and media workers covering
stories, in conflict areas in particular.

It is notjust traditionaljournalists who face threats.
The rapid evolution of information technologies allows
individuals to disseminate information freely and
directly by using the Internet and social media. Such
individuals, bloggers and independent reporters are
increasingly targeted and their safety concerns need to
be properly addressed.

Although we understand that dangers and threats
can never be completely prevented or eradicated,
and that journalists will still be targeted, not least
because of the influence that their stories and objective
reporting can have on the transformation of conflicts
and societies, this awareness cannot justify inaction.
Attacks on journalists are, like all attacks on civilians,
attacks, first and foremost, on humankind. They are
also attacks on the international community's ability
to understand and respond effectively to conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. Truth need
not be the first casualty of war. Journalists need not
be and should not be casualties of conflict. It is for
this reason that Lithuania submitted a draft resolution
on the protection ofjournalists. We thank all Council
delegations for their cooperation and all the co-sponsors
supporting our initiative.

The media is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is our duty and
responsibility to protect those who risk their lives in
order to disclose and disseminate the truth. Today,
however, wars are fought not only by means of
equipment and weaponry, but also through deliberate
disinformation, propaganda and media restrictions.
As warfare becomes increasingly asymmetrical, and
targeted propaganda becomes just another weapon
of war, there is a clear need for more comprehensive
measures to ensure the independence of the free media.
To quote the French philosopher Helvetius:

"To limit the press is to insult a nation; to prohibit
reading of certain books is to declare the inhabitants
to be either fools or slaves."

The fundamental freedoms of expression and
information, part and parcel of fundamental human
rights, are at the core of the freedom and prosperity
of our societies. By protecting journalists and media
workers, we help to protect our freedom.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.


