Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): First,
Mr. President, I would like to welcome you and extend
to you my delegation's thanks for choosing this topic,
which is important in every respect, and thank you for
the preparation of the basic document. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
which shows how urgent it is for our Organization to
rethink the role and functioning of peacekeeping
operations in this time of new challenges.

Until recently, peacekeeping operations were
confined to tasks linked to monitoring respect for
ceasefire agreements, assisting with troop withdrawal,
the delimitation of buffer zones and help with the
implementation of conflict settlements. Today,
peacekeeping operations have become complex and
multidimensional, since the Security Council now has
before it issues that reflect difficult conflicts,
developing from conflict management itself through
the establishment of a climate of confidence to peace-
building after a conflict.

Our debate should take a long-term approach and
should thus take into account those elements that might
ensure logistic, financial and political support
appropriate for peacekeeping operations, especially
since in the months to come thousands of military and
police will have to be deployed, especially in Africa.

For the United Nations to face efficiently and
with respect for the principles of the Charter these
challenges linked to one the major missions of the
Organization - the maintenance of international peace
and security - it must scrupulously respect the pre-
established criteria to ensure the correct functioning of
peacekeeping operation. These criteria are the consent
of the parties, the principle of impartiality and the non-
use of force except for self-defence, as well as a clear
definition of the mission's mandate, supported by solid
financing.

The implementation of certain recommendations
of the Brahimi report has enabled the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, on the recommendation of
the General Assembly, to restructure itself and to
enhance its operational capacities so as to be better
prepared to respond rapidly and in a more adequate
manner to the many requests made of it and to enable
peacekeeping missions to carry out their tasks in the
most effective manner.

With regard to the creation of peacekeeping
operations, we feel it is necessary that the Security
Council take care to see that mandates are as clear and
as rigorous as possible and are in accordance with the
resources and objectives assigned to each operation. To
maintain and consolidate peace in an area of conflict,
and because of the increasingly multidimensional
nature of current conflicts, peacekeeping operations
must be designed not only to establish peace but also to
deal with the root causes of conflict. This means that
henceforth, when we create a mandate, we must take
into account very diversified needs, be they political,
social or economic in nature. From this standpoint it is
important that the human rights dimension, including
the protection of women and children, be adequately
taken into account in any peacekeeping mission.

In order to ensure the success of peacekeeping
operations, Member States have to show a political will
that would establish a solid financial basis for each
operation. As the budgetary aspect is the exclusive
responsibility of the General Assembly, in accordance
with the Charter, it is important in cases of complex
peacekeeping operations for the international
community to mobilize the necessary resources in
order to manage the demobilization and reinsertion
programmes.

To assemble the necessary staff, the Council, for
its part, should encourage the Secretary-General to
identify and consult those Member States that might be
prepared to provide contingents to ensure the
establishment of a mission.

It is important that the military or civilian staff
deployed have the necessary training and expertise in
order to carry out their mission well, in optimum
conditions of security and effectiveness and with
respect for the norms of international humanitarian law
and human rights. The conduct of staff, especially in
their relationship with the civilian population -
women and children in particular - should in every
regard be irreproachable. The management of security
for mission staff during the establishment of the rules
of engagement should conform to the principles of
international law.

When the deployment of a mission has been
decided on by the Security Council, it should take
place as soon as possible. The provision by States of
contingents, and of the police officers very much in
demand today, with provision for their own needs and
benefiting from support and international commitments
would guarantee rapid deployment.

Once established, any change or modification in
the mandate of a peacekeeping operation should take
place only in accordance with a well-thought-out,
transparent process with the full involvement of the
Security Council, whereby the imperatives for the
success of the operation, on the one hand, and staff
security and its environment, on the other, would be
thought out at great length. The concerns of troop-
contributing countries should also be taken into
account.

In that connection, if since the adoption of
resolution 1353 (2001) briefings are now being
organized regularly between the Council and troop-
contributing countries every time a mission mandate is
renewed, more should be done to take into account the
concerns of those countries and involve them in the
decision-making process to define or change the
mandate of an operation to which their military units
are committed.

The withdrawal of a mission, once the mandate
has been duly and completely accomplished, should
finally be based on an exit strategy that ensures the
consolidation of the peace achieved while avoiding any
brutal disruptions in the local economic and security
situation. It should be gradual, primarily in order to
leave the countries concerned the time to take over.

The Security Council's other partners are the
regional organizations, which can contribute to the
peacekeeping effort within the framework of
operations authorized by the Council. In our View,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in this regard is of crucial importance,
particularly in those regions affected by recurrent
tensions and conflicts. We note with satisfaction the
development of cooperation, especially between the
United Nations and the African Union through the joint
efforts of those two organizations to prevent conflicts
in Africa and to create optimum conditions for the
success of peacekeeping operations deployed there.

The Security Council cannot act in isolation. Its
organic relations with the General Assembly are of
major importance. The Assembly, because of its status
as the body that approves the finance of operations and
elects the non-permanent members of the Council, thus
involves a maximum number of States in peacekeeping
policy. By creating special advisory groups to study the
situations of countries emerging from conflict, the
Economic and Social Council, for its part, lends
important support to peace. International financial
institutions and agencies play an important role in
peace consolidation. Finally, non-governmental
organizations can play a very positive role in ensuring
a smooth transition from a peacekeeping operation to
peace-building after a conflict.

