The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2005/810, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1649 (2005).

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

the

"The Security Council commends the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the successful holding of the referendum on
the draft Constitution. The large number of voters
demonstrated a genuine aspiration for peace and
national reconciliation.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
work of the Independent Electoral Commission,
which was able, with an unprecedented and
outstanding logistical support from MONUC (the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo) and with the
assistance of the international community, to take
up this challenge.

"The Security Council recalls its support for
the holding of elections in the coming months,
which have to take place before the end of the
transitional period on 30 June 2006. It urges the
Government of National Unity and Transition to
live up to the expectations of the Congolese
people and to do its utmost to ensure that the next
polls are held in accordance with the timetable of
the Independent Electoral Commission."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/66.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

