Ms. Amos: The situation in Syria is a humanitarian
catastrophe, with ordinary people paying a price for the
failure to end the conflict. The parties to the conflict
have become increasingly entrenched in the rhetoric
and reality of war, with total disregard for the impact on
people's lives. This body has been unable to reach the
consensus necessary to support a political resolution to
the crisis.

The destruction of essential infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, the devaluation of
the currency, rising food prices, a shortage of fuel and
electricity and a lack of water has had an impact on the
majority of Syrians. The needs are growing rapidly and
are most severe in the conflict and opposition-controlled
areas. The latest figures show 6.8 million people in
need, 4.25 million people internally displaced and
an additional 1.3 million who have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries. The economic collapse has
led to a consequential collapse in people's coping
mechanisms. At the same time that needs are growing
dramatically, so, too, are the constraints inhibiting our
ability to scale up the humanitarian response.
Therefore, the question facing all of us around this
table is: when is not enough too little, and when does
continuing to do too little become part of the problem?

Syria's main cities have been devastated by the
conflict. Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Homs and Idlib have
been reduced to rubble. A United Nations inter-agency
convoy that crossed the front lines in Aleppo last week
witnessed the extraordinary destruction in the city.
Large parts do not have running water because there
is no electricity. Waste is piling up, raising fears that
diseases will multiply as the summer heat approaches.
There are growing concerns about outbreaks of
diarrhoea and, potentially, even cholera if the most
basic of services cannot be urgently restored. The group
visited a hospital in Aleppo, where more than 3,500 war-
wounded patients had reportedly been treated. There is
no blood bank, and doctors are performing surgery at
times without anaesthetics or even suture thread. The
hospital and its staff are regularly hit during fighting.

However, our descriptions cannot begin to give the
Council the real picture of the horrors being meted out
every day. We have heard testimonies of houses burned
with families inside and of people being bombed and
killed while queuing for a piece of bread. That is the
reality of Syria today.

Children are among the ones who suffer most. More
than 3 million have already been affected, including
2 million displaced. Children have been murdered,
tortured and subjected to sexual violence. Many
do not have enough food to eat. Millions have been
traumatized by the horrors they have witnessed. The
brutal conflict is not only shattering Syria's present, it
is also destroying its future.

The High Commissioner for Refugees will briefthe
Council on the situation of the more than 1.3 million
Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries. I share
his concern about the growing impact of the refugee
crisis on neighbouring countries, particularly Lebanon,
Jordan and Turkey. We urgently need to increase our
support to those countries and give them the help they
need to continue to keep their borders open.

I visited Syria four times in the past year. My most
recent visit was in January, and I was able to report to
the Council areas of improvement in our relationship
with the Syrian Government, including their agreement

that United Nations humanitarian agencies and our
partners could access all areas of Syria and their
agreement to fast-track administrative procedures to
facilitate an effective humanitarian response.
I regret to inform the Council that, since my visit
in January, bureaucratic obstacles have grown and are
inhibiting our ability to respond. Twenty-one visas
are pending, many for more than two months. All aid
convoys require 72 hours' notice, with as many as
10 notes verbale being exchanged to gain approval for
a single convoy. The approved list of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) has recently been reduced, from
110 to 29. Only four additional international NGOs have
been approved this year and, given the bureaucratic
hurdles, only one is operational.

The approval to open United Nations hubs in six
key cities was issued more than a year ago, yet this
has only been operationalized recently for two cities,
with a commitment to continue discussions on two
more. Notwithstanding the fact that NGOs are cleared
to accept United Nations funding, every project is
considered in detail by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
with the result that projects designed in February for
funding under the Central Emergency Response Fund
are still awaiting final approval in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.

Twenty-two armoured vehicles, which are so
vital for staff security, are still pending approval for
import. In the past 24 hours, we have been informed
that every truck needs a permit signed by two ministers
to enable clearance through Government checkpoints.
When I tell the Council that a convoy from Damascus
to Aleppo goes through 50 checkpoints, half of them
Government-controlled, members will appreciate the
impossibility of that request. We cannot do business
that way.

The continued conflict and the proliferation of
armed groups has made Syria a highly unpredictable and
insecure environment, jeopardizing aid organizations'
operations. In the past two months, access to those in
the most severe need has diminished. Homs is a good
example. In February and March, 276,000 people in
the most severe need were effectively cut off from
assistance, as the Government had closed down Syrian
Arab Red Crescent cross-line operations. We have
similar restrictions in Rif Damascus, Aleppo, Dar'a
and elsewhere. They have all been the target of United
Nations-led cross-line missions, but, due to access
restrictions, the scale of aid delivered falls far short of
the needs.

In the case of Aleppo, it is important to highlight
that, contrary to some widely held perceptions, aid flows
across the Turkish border have significantly declined in
the past two months. The main crossing point at Kilis,
through which 50 per cent of aid reportedly flows, has
recorded a reduction to approximately 20 trucks per day,
down from between 50 and 80 trucks two months ago.
The assistance coordination unit, the humanitarian arm
of the Syrian coalition, has limited capacity and access.
We are therefore not reaching those most urgently
in need of our help, that is, the 2.5 million people in
Aleppo and north of the city. The strengthening of the
assistance coordination unit should not come at the
expense of Syrian Arab Red Crescent.

The data available to us shows that the people in the
opposition-held areas are in the most urgent need. We
have a duty and a responsibility to try to reach them.
During my recent visit to Turkey, I was horrified to hear
accounts of children dying of hunger in those areas.
We need to get aid into those hard-to-reach areas. It is
difficult to do that cross-line because of bureaucratic
constraints.

The Council needs to consider alternative forms
of aid delivery, including cross-border operations,
because too many lives are being lost. When I tell the
Council that the journey from Damascus to Aleppo is
310 kilometres, with the 50 checkpoints that I mentioned,
members should remember what I said about the need
for ministers now to sign off each truck - the journey
from Kilis to Aleppo is just 56 kilometres.

Across the country, humanitarian convoys are
regularly attacked or shot at and their personnel are
intimidated or kidnapped. As an example, on 21 March,
a World Health Organization (WHO) convoy carrying
medical assistance for 80,000 people was hijacked by
an armed group on its way from Tartus to Aleppo, and
all the supplies were stolen. Yet, despite the threat,
humanitarian workers continue their critical work.

I want to pay particular tribute to the work of the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers. They have shown
incredible dedication, impartiality and courage since
the beginning of the conflict. Many of them do not
hesitate to risk their lives every day to bring assistance
to the people in need, whether they live in Government-
or opposition-controlled areas. Eighteen have been
killed in the course of their humanitarian work. Given

its network across the country and its capacity to
negotiate access to almost all the affected areas, the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent is an invaluable partner
to the United Nations and the other humanitarian
organizations in Syria. They proved it again during the
mission to Aleppo last weekend, when its volunteers
were welcomed on both sides of the line. We all need to
support the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. Syria needs it.
There has been a qualitative and quantitative
step-change in the United Nations agency presence
and response in Syria, including the establishment of
a hub in Homs. The deployment of a senior resident
humanitarian coordinator to oversee the response
has finally been agreed with the Government and is
expected in the coming weeks. In March, World Food
Programme food assistance reached close to 2 million
people across the country, many of whom are in areas
under opposition control. UNICEF and partners have
reached more than 5 million people with safe drinking
water, and they aim to reach an additional 5 million in
the coming months through the chlorination and repair
of urban and rural water supply systems. The provision
of primary and secondary health-care services to
approximately 2.7 million Syrians has been supported
by the WHO and its partners. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East continues to assist the 400,000 Palestinian
refugees, many of whom face future displacement.

I can also report some improvement in the funding
situation since my last briefing to the Council. About
half of the $1.5 billion required to cover Syria's
humanitarian needs until June has been received,
with the recent allocation of the $300 million pledged
by the Kuwaiti Government in January - a welcome
and timely disbursement by the Amir of Kuwait. I ask
those Member States that have not yet converted their
conference pledges to cash to do so urgently.

I cannot overstate the seriousness of the current
situation in Syria. I do not have an answer for those
Syrians to whom I have spoken who ask me why the
world has abandoned them. While the humanitarian
situation on the ground is becoming increasingly
disastrous every day, the limitations on the ground have
forced us into being precariously close to suspending
some critical humanitarian operations.

We are approaching the point of no return. Members

of the international community, particularly members of
the Council, must urgently come together in support of
the Syrian people. As a matter of priority, the Security
Council must find ways to reduce the level of violence
and to stop the bloodshed. Parties must be reminded
of their obligation to protect civilians and to abide by
international humanitarian law. The consequences of
violating those rules must be made clear to all. The
protection of medical facilities, staff and patients, in
particular, must be ensured at all times. Parties must
demilitarize hospitals and, in the conduct of hostilities,
must take all precautionary measures to avoid hitting
medical facilities or staff.
The Council must also request the parties to ensure
the safe and unimpeded access of aid organizations to
those in need in all areas of Syria. It is not acceptable
that humanitarian workers continue to be targeted while
bringing relief to people. If some routes are not safe, it
is the responsibility ofthe parties to identify alternative
routes, including across international borders.

We all look to the Council to guarantee the peace
and security of the people of our world. My appeal is on
behalf of not only the Syrian people but also all those
seeking to assist them. We are losing hope. We cannot
do our jobs properly. We look to the Council to take the
action necessary to end the brutal conflict.

