Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): I thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing today's open debate. I wish
also to commend you for following the example set by
your predecessor, Singapore, and circulating a
background document for today's debate. I hope that
such a procedure will be endorsed as a common
practice by future Presidents ofthe Council.

I found the document helpful, but most of all
enticing, as it spelled out clearly the twofold objectives
of today's debate: to reaffirm the political will of the
international community and to make progress towards
defining a common approach to peace-building.

It has been proved time and again, by the
recurrence of conflicts in Asia, Africa and Europe, that
the costs of not engaging in a timely and
comprehensive manner in peace-building can quickly
outpace the costs of investments in peace. Relatedly,
engaging only in a selective few peace-building
activities or in a discontinuous fashion can also be
proved to outweigh the costs of devising and executing
a comprehensive and sustained effort in peace-
building. Finally, in terms of cost bearers, in the era of
the globalization of markets in goods, services and,
increasingly, labour, one can argue that costs of non-
intervention in peace-building are borne by both the
post-conflict society and the international community.
The costs involved in managing the refugee outflows,
their temporary or permanent resettlement and the
spread of crime, infectious diseases and other maladies
are just some examples that come to mind from the
perspective of the international community. In addition
to these, the host societies often have to grapple with a
number of other difficulties, usually on shoestring
budgets.

Post-conflict societies exhibit all the
characteristics of weak societies, regardless of whether
they have a weak or strong State. Their infrastructure is
destroyed or damaged, they suffer from depopulation
or overpopulation in certain regions, the people are
needy, resources are scarce; human rights are not
efficiently protected and painful memories are still
fresh. Unfortunately, we know of these ills first-hand.
Croatia is still grappling with some of them while
trying to help others that are much worse off in the
region. In this regard, we sincerely hope that we can all
heed the call issued by the Secretary-General in his
report "Renewing the United Nations: a programme for
reform" (A/51/950). In that report the Secretary-
General obliquely stated that successful peace-building
requires a mutually reinforcing political strategy and
assistance programme, incorporating human rights
considerations and humanitarian and development
programmes. The importance to peace-building of the
mutual reaffirmation of these two approaches cannot be
overemphasized.

The post-war reconstruction and reconciliation in
Croatia are processes that necessarily take time, but
can be accelerated through international support. Many
displaced persons and refugees have returned, even
though the economic and social situation in war-
affected areas remains difficult, with soaring
unemployment rates. There is a significant shortage of
capital for new investment, job creation and specific
projects, in particular demining. Over a million mines
are still scattered on Croatian soil. Therefore, the
already invested political, human and financial
resources of the international community in Croatia
should be coupled with development assistance if the
desired results are to be achieved. Investment in peace,
followed by investment in development, is part of the
same continuum.

The establishment of truth about a conflict and
the punishment of perpetrators of conflict-related grave
breaches of humanitarian law are other prerequisites
for the re-establishment of peace and security. On the
global level, the establishment of the International
Criminal Court should serve to aid and expedite the
healing and reconciliation process.

In closing, I would like to make a few
observations and suggestions regarding a need for a
shared comprehensive strategy for peace-building for
the Security Council to ponder. First, I commend the
Council for incorporating disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration components in several past and
ongoing peace operations. This is useful and should
become a standard bracket in each applicable
peacekeeping mandate, as early on as possible.
Likewise, the provisions regarding refugees and
displaced persons, demining and other stimuli for
effective economic recovery, as well as provisions on
strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, must be anticipated and mandated by the
Council in a timely fashion. This of course rests upon
three important pillars: cooperation of the post-conflict
society, sustainable political will on the part of the
international community and an adequate bureaucratic
capacity of the United Nations in general and the
Secretariat in particular.

The United Nations system has a proven record of
cooperation in peace-building activities with
intergovernmental regional organizations, as well as
non-governmental organizations. This is certainly
fertile ground for future expansion of cooperation, and
the Security Council can play an important role in this
effort. However, we must recognize that the United
Nations Secretariat needs capacity to coordinate these
efforts with its partners, as well as among its own
agencies. In some areas of expertise the Secretariat
lacks the minimum standing capacity. If we ask the
Secretariat to anticipate and respond to peace-building
needs in a well-orchestrated, timely and, therefore,
efficient manner, we must provide it with the capacity
to do so.

Besides its role as an advocate for and guarantor
of peace-building implementation, the Council can
actively reach out to other principal United Nations
bodies. In this regard, the role of the Economic and
Social Council complements that of the Security
Council. Indeed, the Economic and Social Council,
with its broad agenda concerning the eradication of
poverty and economic and social development, remains
best equipped both to identify in a timely manner and
to act pre-emptively upon these very causes of new or
recurrent conflicts.

Therefore, I see great value in a potential joint
follow-up meeting of the two councils on this or
related matters in the near future. We must make an
effort to build closer ties in order to address the
converging agendas of world peace and world
development.

