Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
reports and briefings. I pay a warm tribute to Judge
Meron, who leaves us an International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals that is fully
autonomous, capable of effectively carrying out its
mandate and of adapting its procedures and working
methods, giving due consideration to the diversity
of legal systems and multilateralism, as called for by
the Council in resolution 1966 (2010). Judge Meron's
contribution to international criminal justice and to the
work of the Security Council is indisputable and ongoing.
France thanks him for his commitment as Judge and
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the Mechanism,and wishes
every success to the future President of the Mechanism.

With regard to the judicial activities of the
Mechanism during the reporting period, we note that
five accused were arrested in the new Turinabo et at.
contempt case and that those accused were brought
before the court immediately two days after their
transfer from Kigali to Arusha. We welcome the
cooperation of the Rwandan authorities in that matter
and will continue to follow the latest developments.

We take note of the change in schedule for
the Karadzie case, and we are counting on the
professionalism of all to complete all trials in progress
within the planned deadlines. France also recalls that
States are required to cooperate with the Mechanism
in the search and arrest of eight fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The
arrest warrants will not go away and their crimes will
not go unpunished.

France welcomes the assistance provided by
the Mechanism to national courts responsible for
prosecuting perpetrators of international crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
and in the territory of Rwanda. The two cases referred
by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda to
the French courts evolved during the reporting period.
On 21 June, the Paris Court of Appeals confirmed the
dismissal order issued in 2015 in the Munyeshyaka
case. The case is now before the Court of Cassation.

In the Bucyibaruta case, the prosecution requested
a partial discharge and a transfer to the Court of
Cassation. The investigating judge has communicated
the procedure to the Public Prosecutor, who must file
his final submission in this procedure. France will
continue to deal with these cases with all due diligence
and rigour.

We take note of the Prosecutor's comments
regarding the cooperation provided to his Office by the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and his assessment
of regional judicial cooperation as being "at its lowest
level in years" (S/2018/1033, annex, 11, para. 55). For
France and the European Union, which closely follow
the Prosecutor's reports, the full cooperation of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia with the Mechanism
and the fight against impunity for crimes committed
in the former Yugoslavia are inseparable and essential.

I would also like to echo the concern once again
expressed by Prosecutor Brammertz in his report
(S/2018/1033, annex II) and his briefing regarding the
denial of crimes and responsibility by some individuals
or political leaders. Judicial rulings relating to war
crimes, crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are
based on facts and responsibilities that have been
rigorously established. Those rulings are binding on all.

We note the resolve of the President and the
Prosecutor to take into account resolution 2422
(2018) on the issue of early release. We encourage the
Mechanism to continue discussions and considerations
in order to endow itself with an early release mechanism
with clear conditions, which will enhance international
criminal jurisprudence.

Finally, I welcome the implementation of the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services to continue to uphold the principles of
restraint, effectiveness and exemplariness, which must
also apply to the entire United Nations.

