Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/722, annex) and for his dedication. I thank
Ms. Liu and Mr. Maurer for their respective briefings.

I have listened with the utmost attention to Ms. Liu
and have taken on board her proposal that the Secretary-
General assign a Special Representative to deal with
these issues. I have also listened attentively to my
good friend Mr. Maurer regarding his four proposals
on legislation, data collection, accountability and the
adoption of contingency plans. Above all, I thank
them for the outstanding work they are doing for the
enormous number of people around the world who are
working to save the lives of others, often sacrificing
their own lives in the process.

Spain was one ofthe sponsors ofresolution 2286 (2016).
When did the idea crop up? The idea arose at a meeting
on the humanitarian crisis in Syria at the beginning of
the year between Spain, New Zealand and Medecins
Sans Frontieres (MSF). That is why today I wished to
exercise some self-criticism on the basis of the report
of the Secretary-General in order to analyse the role
that Security Council members should play and the
response that the Council should give as a collective
body with regard to attacks on doctors and hospitals.

I would like to begin by expressing our full support
for the recommendations of the Secretary-General,
which show us the path we should follow to comply with
resolution 2286 (2016). Some ofthose recommendations
could have immediate effect on the ground, of which
I shall cite two examples. The first is reforming the
rules of engagement to prohibit a military presence and
the stockpiling of military materiel in the vicinity of
hospitals and other medical facilities. The second is
the use of new technologies to prevent attacks and, if
necessary, to document incidents. We would call upon
all Member States to put those measures into practice
as a matter of urgency.

Furthermore, I would like to address the role of
members of the Council. It is obvious that we have the
responsibility to be realistic; we have to accept that
attacks on health-care workers during armed conflicts
cannot be curbed by a simple resolution. Nevertheless,
resolution 2286 (2016) can serve as a basis for a change
of culture within the Security Council. Accordingly,
members of the Council, particularly those that
sponsored the initiative, are especially responsible in
this area.

We must bear in mind the need to protect doctors
and hospitals in all decisions made by the Council, from
the mandates for peacekeeping operations - which
we are constantly revising - to the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the dialogues that we have with the Special Envoys of
the Secretary-General.

This change of culture also implies maintaining
more regular contact with specialized organizations
in order to benefit from the exchange of information
and to find solutions. As far as Spain is concerned, we
are following up on all our activities with the aim of
producing a best practices guide for future members of
the Security Council. This will be the legacy we leave
in this area.

Our first impression during the five months since
resolution 2286 (2016) was adopted is that much still
remains to be done. We are also part of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 2286 (2016), which is already
under way in Geneva, and Spain would like to convene
a meeting of this Group at least once a year here in
New York.

I shall now briefly address the response that should
be given by the Security Council regarding the attacks
on doctors and hospitals. This is the most important part
of what I have to say, and the great unresolved issue of
resolution 2286 (2016): we must recognize that we are
failing. We are failing the doctors in Aleppo, as we have
done this week. We are failing the MSF clinics that had
to close down in Yemen last summer, something we
have not forgotten. We are failing the patients of the
hospitals that have been bombed in South Sudan. We
owe them all an answer.

Once again, the Council has the necessary tools at
its disposal. What is lacking in the Council is simple,
namley, the political will to take action. The report of
the Secretary-General refers to various measures - for
example, the use of sanctions and referring certain
cases to the International Criminal Court. I would like
to state clearly that Spain supports those measures,
but we also have other, simpler options within our
reach. For example, the Council could, if it had the
political will, agree to demand a swift, independent,
impartial and effective investigation in response to the
most serious attacks, as established in resolution 2286
(2016). I am referring to the attack of 19 September and
to the attacks that apparently took place this morning
in Aleppo. Spain is prepared to contribute human and
material resources so that such investigations can be
carried out. However, we need the consensus of all 15
members of the Council. This is where we would ask
for special efforts from those that are directly involved
in armed conflicts.

Our commitment to resolution 2286 (2016) is
devalued every time we fail to act. As Ms. Liu urged
the Council on 3 May (see S/PV.7685), let us use this
resolution as a tool to save lives, rather than continuing
to devalue the work of the Security Council.

