Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): We, too,
would like to thank Ms. Del Ponte for the briefing she has
just given. France had occasion earlier to pay tribute to the
work done by the previous Prosecutor, Mrs. Arbour. We
would like to reaffirm today our full confidence in Ms. De]
Ponte and to wish her every success in her task, which is
daunting indeed. I would also like to recall that Ms. Del
Ponte's nomination was welcomed by France.

We are all aware of the scope and complexity of the
task of the Prosecutor of the two International Criminal
Tribunals. In creating these two Tribunals, the United
Nations has established the foundations for a genuine,
international criminal system. The Tribunals, in which
Ms. Del Ponte now has an essential role, clearly have a
decisive part to play in eliminating the impunity of those
who perpetrate the most serious of offences. But the
Tribunals must reconcile various difficult requirements: the
independence of the judiciary, the need to punish those
found guilty and the protection of the rights of victims. The
Tribunals must therefore always bear in mind as they carry
out their work an awareness of what is at stake with respect
to the re-establishment of peace, national reconciliation and
the rebuilding of a State of law. These are certainly
demands and requirements that are not always easy to
reconcile. The work of the Prosecutor is therefore very
difficult, but also very noble. The task is made all the more
difficult by virtue of the fact that it is being carried out in
two different theatres of operations - the prosecution of
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia, on the one
hand, and the prosecution of crimes committed in Rwanda,
on the other.

The work of the Tribunal in the former Yugoslavia is
rather innovative. In the case of Kosovo work began so
soon after the commission of crimes that it was, in a
manner of speaking, in real time, or current. With the
adoption of resolution 1160 (1998) on 31 March 1998 -
just after the beginning of Violence on the ground - the
Security Council in effect charged the Office of the
Prosecutor with starting the collection of information about
criminal activities in Kosovo that might fall within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. We have followed up those
efforts and, like other members of the Council, France has
also lent every possible assistance to the Tribunal by
making forensic teams available to it. Ms. Del Ponte has
just given us a very exact and thorough account of the work
she is doing on the ground in Kosovo and of the very tragic
situations that she is in the process of addressing.

The work of the Rwanda Tribunal is equally important
and difficult. We therefore appreciate Ms. Del Ponte's
intention to go to Rwanda very soon. We have no doubt
that her presence on the ground there will help settle
many problems that have arisen and that she will give
new impetus to the activities of that Tribunal, as she did
in the case of Kosovo.

We would like to reiterate France's support for the
work of the Prosecutor in connection with the Rwanda
Tribunal. We have tried to demonstrate our support in
material terms by providing audio-visual equipment for
two hearing rooms. This material support is important
because the work of the Prosecutor depends in part upon
the resources that are placed at her disposal. In this
connection, we would like to know how the Prosecutor
feels about the material, financial and human
requirements of her Office.

As the representative of Argentina has said, the
success of the Prosecutor and of the Tribunals basically
depends upon the cooperation of Member States. The
remarks made by Ms. Del Ponte about the attitude of
some States is a matter of serious concern to the Security
Council as a whole. We must all be aware that the
cooperation of States with the Tribunals is a legal
obligation of every Member State of the United Nations.
States do not have the luxury of suspending their
cooperation with the Tribunals or refusing to cooperate in
one case or another. These are legal obligations, a point
recalled by Ms. Del Ponte and one that the Security
Council must, and indeed does, recall regularly.

Finally, the success of the Tribunals and of the
Prosecutor also depends upon the soundness of the legal
framework within which they carry out their missions. In
this connection, we are pleased at the effort made by the
Tribunals, at the urging of the Prosecutor, to improve
procedures by drawing from various legal systems for
inspiration. I think it is a good idea to seek to base
Tribunal actions on existing legal systems and to make
use of the most effective aspects of the various major
legal systems of the world today.

