Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil):
I should like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over this open debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Coordinating the aims and activities of regional
and international actors reinforces multilateralism and
increases the prospects for sustainable peace. It can play

a decisive role in preserving stability and preventing
the escalation of crises. Indeed the potential for
regional arrangements to confront challenges to global
security should not be restricted to or mainly focused
on peacekeeping. Article 52 of the Charter emphasizes
the crucial role that regional arrangements play in
the pacific settlement of local disputes. Initiatives in
the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and post-
conflict peacebuilding, as well as measures to foster
sustainable and inclusive patterns of development are
also vital to achieve durable peace.

Regional and subregional organizations have
achieved different levels of institutional development.
While some of these institutions have comprehensive
mandates, which include developing and implementing
their own security and defence policies, others are much
more limited in scope and ambition. Today's debate
should reflect this institutional diversity. It is important
that the United Nations be attentive to and respectful of
the specificities of each regional arrangement, avoiding
the simple replication of practices.

In the Americas, the purpose of the Organization
of American States is to guarantee continental peace
and security. That is to be fulfilled through peaceful
processes. In extreme cases, this could lead to the
suspension of a member State whose Government has
been overthrown by force. This means resorting to
political pressure but not to arms. In South America,
the Union of South American Nations has built an
institutional architecture to contribute to the promotion
of stability in the region. The South American Defence
Council has established an innovative mechanism for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in matters of peace and security. In parallel,
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
has proclaimed Latin America and the Caribbean as a
zone of peace and recommitted to promoting nuclear
disarmament and the proscription of weapons of mass
destruction globally.

Brazil recognizes, in line with the report of the
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) that African regional and subregional
organizations are main players in combating security
challenges in their respective jurisdictions. We praise
the stabilization efforts by the African Union with
the support of subregional organizations in Somali,
the Central African Republic, and West Africa. We
also commend the constructive role played by the
East African Community and the African Union in
mediating Burundi's electoral crisis.

While welcoming a more active engagement of
regional organizations in Africa or elsewhere, Brazil
reiterates that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security should be strengthened, not hindered, by the
action of those organizations. The Council's authority
should not be outsourced to or superseded by these
entities. The tenets of Chapter VIII of the Charter are
of paramount importance in this regard.

Brazil also believes that contemporary challenges
to global security will be better tackled if regional
and subregional organizations are more involved in
and focused on issues in their respective areas of
jurisdiction. Moreover, financial constraints should
not drive policy. We disagree with the tacit reasoning
that regional entities should be more engaged in facing
contemporary security challenges as a means of
achieving budget savings for the United Nations.

Finally, let us not forget that regional involvement is
not a panacea. There will be cases in which differences
regarding a certain situation will exist within the region.
Overframing a certain challenge as a regional question
may further aggravate the situation. The results of
the efforts of regional and subregional organizations
to tackle contemporary security challenges will be
elusive if unaccompanied by real political will at the
global level to face those challenges. No administrative
arrangement between global and local institutions can
replace political consensus building. Brazil reiterates
its readiness to contribute to the task of forging
convergence among different entities and promoting an
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations.

Last but not least, Brazil is convinced of the urgent
need for a reform of the Security Council that includes
new permanent and non-permanent seats. Such reform
would render the Council more representative and
would truly enhance the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations in matters
of international peace and security.

