Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: It is an
honour to have the opportunity to address the Council
today.

It was in late 1999 that the protection of civilians
from direct threats was specifically mentioned in the
mandate for Sierra Leone. Peacekeeping missions'
mandated tasks, based on Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, have been pragmatically
reflected in Security Council resolutions. But even with
the incorporation of details and specific tasks, there
is room for interpretation. Furthermore, executing a
protection-of-civilians mandate in a demanding and
rapidly changing complex environment requires some
necessary changes in structure, mindset and operational
behaviour on the ground.

The protection of civilians is the most important
task of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is far more than a task in a mandate: it is a moral
obligation.

The importance of protecting civilians is not in
question. The question is, how to protect them in a
more effective way. I am absolutely convinced that the
best way to protect civilians is by being proactive rather
than reactive. As an example, identifying and taking
action against the threats represented by armed groups
and militias, which are the main perpetrators of direct
acts of violence such as pillage, rape, killings and other
crimes, would be more effective than waiting for events
to unfold.

The protection of civilians is the effect required
on the ground. The United Nations should not wait
for armed groups to come and terrorize communities;
it should not give them freedom of movement; there
should not be hundreds or thousands of panic-stricken
civilians coming to crowd around or inside a United
Nations base for safety.

Conceptually, troops remain mindful of the United
Nations principles of peacekeeping, namely, the
consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence and defence of the
mandate. Those principles may not always apply against
armed criminal groups in contemporary missions.
Their application could be reviewed and adjusted to
contemporary threats and to the context of violence that
innocent civilians and peacekeeping personnel face in
conflict areas.

Deterrence by presence is not always effective.
Only an active force with a proactive, robust posture can
neutralize and defeat threats to the civilian population.
On the other hand, the simple presence of peacekeepers
for prolonged periods without action while violence is
being committed leads to a weakening of the reputation
of the United Nations, the troop-contributing countries
and the international community. In order to implement
the mandate, troops on the ground must have the
mindset, the will, the leadership and the initiative
required to protect civilians in a robust and effective
manner.

As a contribution to the transformation required to

better protect civilians, I would bring up the following
points for the Council's consideration.

These include the requirement to have a mandate
with the same obligations for all of the components on
the ground; the use of a practical approach on how to
protect civilians; and the need to consider that risk is
inevitable in the armed services and can be effectively
managed and mitigated by well- and appropriately
trained, motivated and equipped soldiers. A robust
posture is indeed safer for all. A mission should be
proactive and responsive. Taking action to protect
civilians does not undermine peacekeeping principles
and is perfectly compatible with international law.

The assumption that military action may create
collateral damage should not prevent us from taking
the necessary action. On the contrary, there are many
examples that prove that action against armed groups
brings huge benefits to the population.

The military components need to be coordinated
with realistic, clear and effective political management.
Hopes and expectations rise when a population sees a
United Nations peacekeeping mission deploying on the
ground, together with the presence of United Nations
agencies, numerous non-governmental organizations
and the international community. What they expect is
action to stop the violence and the delivery of significant
support.

There are examples of failure to protect civilians
due to low-intensity action or poor or inexistent
initiative, but there are very few cases of problems
due to effective action. To protect civilians, a military
force should be robust and dynamic, supported by
an operational administration and complemented by
civilian components, with work that is visible to the
population.

