Allow me to congratulate the Permanent Representative of Estonia, Mr. Sven Jiirgenson, on his leadership as President of the Council for this month of May 2020. The Federal Republic of Somalia reiterates its unwavering commitment to continuing to work closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, alongside the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to help it accomplish its mandate. I therefore extend gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary- General for his briefing and the increased understanding and closer cooperation between my Government and the Mission. On the same note, I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for his briefing. Our security sector reform is in earnest progress. We have virtually completed the verification exercise. We have managed to increase the salaries of the Somali national armed forces by 70 per cent and also ensured timely, accurate and inter-bank payments that are easily verifiable. Our comprehensive security sector reform continues to gain momentum. Having streamlined and standardized the Somali national armed forces, the Government continues to generate and integrate forces, enabling us to continue degrading the terrorist groups and liberate more areas. Through a Somali-led operation, we managed to liberate Janaale, a strategic town that was providing a safe hideout from which Al-Shabaab launched attacks against other parts of the country, including the capital city, Mogadishu. This follows the liberation of a series of other towns and settlements from which Al-Shabaab used to carry out wanton attacks against the Government and international partners. Indeed, it is as a result of these liberations that the Government was able to prevent major terror attacks in the city during the reporting period. The latest operations are in line with the longer-term Somali transition plan, which is meant to hand over the responsibility to protect Somali citizens to the Somali national armed forces as AMISOM peacekeeping troops continue to transit out of the country. The national armed forces are effectively holding areas previously liberated within the same region. Al-Shabaab has resorted to using sleeper cells on a hit-and-run basis, such as the despicable attacks against El-Adde and the United Nations compound. Such heinous acts underpin the significant need to redouble the efforts of the Somali Government and international partners to build on the current progress. In order for the national armed forces to be able to be fully prepared to take over from AMISOM, there is a need to empower and invest more in the advancement, training, mobility and equipment of the Somali National Army (SNA). The arms embargo is greatly hindering the capabilities of the SNA to be able to effectively eradicate terrorist groups from our country. Somalia's economic and financial sector reform initiative has been a priority project whose realization is prerequisite to the success of our other national reforms. The Finance Minister's fiscal forum, which has been chaired by Minister Beileh, has been held four times in different locations since September 2019, including Kismayo, Jubbaland. The forum has been a very successful platform for advancing financial reforms, fiscal federalism and resource-sharing. Formulas for budget support and other resource-sharing have been agreed. The forum also recognizes that a political settlement and increased security in the country rest with reaching agreement on the federal model, particularly fiscal federalism, in the new constitution. We have now fully formalized our engagement with international financial institutions, having also reconstructed and validated our external debts. The recently adopted ninth national development plan provides for an interim poverty reduction strategy that seeks to present sustainable measures to mitigate countrywide poverty challenges. On 26 February, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that it had secured sufficient pledges, to the tune of £334 million in financing from over 100 countries, enabling the Fund to provide comprehensive debt relief to Somalia. This was followed by the World Bank Group's announcement on 27 February that it would re-establish financial relations with Somalia, paving the way for the full resumption of operations via the Bank's International Development Association. Similar re-engagement was announced by the African Development Bank. Our stringent economic and financial sector reforms paid dividends on 25 March, when Somalia attained the debt-relief decision point under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative, thereby effectively re-establishing relations with the IMF and the World Bank. On 5 March, Somalia's arrears with the World Bank and the African Development Bank were cleared through bridge loans that we secured from development partners Norway, the United Kingdom and the European Union (EU). With the reform fatigue associated with implementing IMF and EU benchmarks, such as fiscal discipline and the civil service recruitment cap, additional resources also provide opportunities for Somali citizens to reap the development dividend from the implemented reforms and align it with incentives for further reforms. Enhancing the provision of social services, protecting human rights, guaranteeing the freedom of expression and ensuring political inclusion will all be premised on the aforesaid national reforms. Economic reforms under the IMF debt relief process is not over yet. The IMF staff-monitored programme has been replaced by the Extended Credit Facility (ECF), plus additional completion point triggers. Under ECF and the completion point triggers, we are committing to additional reforms in fiscal federalism, domestic revenue mobilization, financial sector development, private sector development in energy, socioeconomic investment in social protection, fiscal foundations for the extractive industry and the strengthening of anti-corruption measures. Somalia has been grappling with cyclic climate emergencies as the country oscillates between floods and droughts virtually every season. We are now faced with the worst medical crisis in a century. Somalia's weak health infrastructure and limited resources have curtailed our efforts to contain the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic is threatening to derail our reform efforts. COVID-19 poses a serious security challenge to a context that is already marked by fragility. In Somalia, training by partners has been suspended to stall the spread of the disease. There is a high risk that security personnel screening road-users may catch the disease. Protective gear is in short supply. The Government is distributing masks among front-line officers, but this is far from sufficient. The Somali national armed forces are also involved in public-awareness campaigns against the disease. The global shutdown has seen a ban on international and local flights, the imposition of a partial curfew and the waiving of taxes on essential food and non-food items, among other measures. While food prices have skyrocketed, remittances have significantly decreased and trading activities have declined considerably. All these factors have caused a reduction of domestic revenue. Families will need to be supported and small and medium-sized business enterprises cushioned against the negative impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
