Mr. Knudsen (Denmark): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the situation in Iraq, as well as on
the violent extremist forces affecting the wider region
and, indeed, the international community as a whole.

Denmark stands ready to join the Members of
the United Nations in collectively confronting the
growth of extremism embodied in the brutal shape
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), an
organization that is fundamentally opposed to the
values and principles at the core of the United Nations.
ISIL is an organization that, in the most brutal way,
now controls large areas of Iraq and Syria and has the
ambition to go even farther. It is an organization that
has managed to amass hundreds of millions of dollars
through kidnappings, robberies and illegal oil sales, but
it is also an organization that will not be allowed to
achieve its goals if we, the international community, all
stand united.

Like many previous speakers today, Denmark
welcomes the recent formation of a new inclusive
Government in Baghdad, committed to empowering
marginalized groups in the country. Good governance
will be absolutely essential to meet that end, as well
as to overcome the pervasive sense of distrust and
discontent that ISIL has been able to prey upon.
Denmark is committed to supporting Iraq and assisting
its Government in its fight against ISIL. We have
already provided political, military and humanitarian
assistance. A Danish military transport aircraft and a
logistical team have assisted the forces combating ISIL
in Iraq through airlifting military equipment. On the
humanitarian side, so far in 2014 Denmark has provided
assistance totalling $50 million to internally displaced
persons in Syria and Iraq. Politically, we have engaged
with the Iraqi Government, with members of the core
coalition and other partners in the region and beyond to
shape a common strategy to combat ISIL.

However,asrequestedbytheUnited States delegation
at the beginning of this meeting, Denmark stands ready
to do even more. We plan to increase our humanitarian
assistance to the region. We want to establish a strong
partnership with the Iraqi Government to launch long-
term stabilization and development projects that help
eliminate the root causes of radicalization. We will
maintain a close dialogue with the Iraqi Government,
the United States and other partners in the coalition
to jointly consider the optimal contributions Denmark

can make to the ongoing efforts, be they humanitarian,
diplomatic, political or military.

We also find it essential for all States Members
of the United Nations to share best practices and
lessons learned on how to most efficiently prevent
radicalization and groups like ISIL from emerging.
The Danish Foreign Minister, together with the Foreign
Minister of Mali, will therefore co-host an event here
in New York on Tuesday, 23 September, to advance that
common agenda.

To achieve our goal of disabling and dismantling the
threat posed by ISIL, we will need to craft a response
that recognizes at least three principles. First, the world
must recognize that ISIL is a regional and global threat
to our collective peace and security. As such, success
will require us to forge a broad and deep alliance that
can effectively neutralize that heinous and totalitarian
terrorist organization. Secondly, the international
community must be steadfast in its support to moderate
forces, not only in Iraq but also in neighbouring
countries, especially of course in Syria, where the
long-term goal of peace must still be sought. We must
aid groups willing to counter the influence of ISIL and
instead present a more inclusive and peaceful vision for
the future of their societies. Thirdly, we must ensure
that our unity of purpose persists. We must remain
united in our support to Iraq's Government and show
the commitment required to deal with this challenge.

In conclusion, Denmark is firmly resolved to
counter the threat of ISIL. Our common approach must
be both comprehensive and holistic. We know that this
will require patience and stamina. We will need to see
greater collaboration and greater coordination among
key actors in the region. In other words, countries
will need to be prepared to overcome their individual
differences and rivalries. They will instead need to
seek common ground Where there are common interests
to be found.

