Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. I thank you for
giving me the opportunity to again brief the Security
Council on the situation in Burundi. I would also like to
commend all the other members of the Council for their
ongoing commitment to international peace.

On 7 June, following the constitutional referendum
of 17 May, the Head of State of Burundi, President
Pierre Nkurunziza, solemnly promulgated the new
Constitution adopted by more than 73 per cent of
the Burundian people. On the same occasion, he
officially announced the end of his mandate in 2020
and his commitment to giving his full support to the
new President to be elected. In our efforts to help
this brotherly country to definitively settle the crisis,
those are two major acts whose importance we should
underline and which provide us with an opportunity
to move forward in resolving the Burundian situation
once and for all.

In particular, we believe that the Government and
the Burundian political class should jointly take the
opportunity of that new dynamic to work to create a
new political environment conducive to strengthening
national unity and peace. The political leaders'
dialogue workshop, held on 3 August in Kayanza,
in the Republic of Burundi, at the initiative of the
Minister of the Interior, which resulted in the adoption
of a road map for the 2020 elections, is part of that
rationale and deserves our encouragement. Moreover,
the Government should take that initiative into account
in the context of the intra-Burundian dialogue to ensure
the greatest possible participation by all stakeholders.

Since my previous briefing, on 24 May (see S/PV.8268), I visited the subregion as part of my
mandate, in particular to meet the facilitator, President
Benjamin Mkapa, in Dar es Salaam and the mediator,
President Yoweri Museveni, in Kampala. I handed the
mediator a written message from the Secretary-General
and a memorandum containing specific proposals on
both the dialogue process and the initiatives that certain
guarantors of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement should undertake in order to reaffirm the
paramount importance of that historic Agreement,
which, as we know, represents the foundation for peace
in that part of the African continent.

At the end of the discussions, the mediator and
the facilitator reaffirmed to me their full commitment
to relaunching the dialogue as soon as possible. In
particular, the mediator committed to organizing an
extraordinary summit of the East African Community
on the subject. With regard to the same concerns, I am
hoping to visit Burundi in October so as to undertake
a certain number of activities and, of course, to
commence talks with the Burundian authorities to see
how we can pursue the process, alongside the facilitator
and the mediator.

During recent briefings on this issue, the Council
has been informed of the steady improvement of
the security situation in Burundi. The situation has
remained calm since the constitutional referendum,
notwithstanding several challenges on the part of the
opposition. There is therefore reason to commend
the efforts of the Government and encourage it to
remain vigilant.

Similarly, with regard to the humanitarian
situation, we must commend the efforts of Burundi and
Tanzania, which, with the support of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, since
September 2017 have allowed the voluntary repatriation
of approximately 35,000 Burundi refugees. Those
efforts must continue to be pursued in accordance with
the principle of voluntary repatriation, while ensuring
the return and reintegration of returnees in host
communities with respect and dignity.

In terms of bilateral and multilateral cooperation,
a number of high-level delegations from countries
and international organizations have Visited Burundi
recently. I note, among others, the delegations of the
African Parliamentary Union, the African Ombudsman
and Mediators Association, the Forum of Parliaments of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
and the Parliamentary Assembly of the International
Organization of la Francophonie. Today, as we speak,
Bujumbura is welcoming the Women's Forum for Peace
and Security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Subregion, organized under the auspices of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region.

I truly believe that such visits undoubtedly reflect
the will of the Government of Burundi to improve its
relations with the international community. On that
basis, and taking advantage of the de-escalation, it
is to be enthusiastically hoped that Burundi and the
European Union will soon resume talks with a view
to resuming their cooperation. We are encouraging
them ~ I was even going to say that we are pushing
them - to that end, as we believe that sanctions
are not always the ideal solution. I also call on the
Burundian authorities to finalize discussions on the
memorandum of understanding with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Burundi and
finally agree to sign the headquarters agreement to
allow my office in Bujumbura to operate properly and
in better conditions.

My final request is that the Council reiterate its
appeal to all actors in the Burundian crisis to participate
sincerely and in good faith in the upcoming dialogue,
which will be the fifth and probably the last of its kind,
with the mediator, the facilitator and the African Union,
which we are undertaking to convene in the very near
future either in Entebbe or Arusha. Needless to say, the
road map is already in place, the programme has been
laid out and the Council would do well to launch an
appeal so that this time we can make the long-sought
dialogue a success.

