Mr. Ladsous: I shall now read out the statement
of Special Envoy Haile Menkerios.

"I have just returned from several weeks of
consultations with the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan and with the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) in
support of the finalization of the post-
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
negotiations between the Sudan and South Sudan
and of the implementation of the 20 June
agreement on Abyei, and I am happy to brief the
Council today on the state of these negotiations.

"To date, a number of CPA benchmarks and
critical post-CPA arrangements remain,
unfortunately, unresolved and continue to be a
major source of tension between the Sudan and
South Sudan. These crucial matters include the
resolution of the final status of Abyei, the holding
of popular consultations in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile States, the demarcation of the
border and the establishment of border-security
mechanisms, as well as oil revenue-sharing and
related transitional financial arrangements.

"While engagement continues between the
two parties to resolve these pending issues
through dialogue, tensions have continued to be
exacerbated by, first, the eruption of fighting in
the areas bordering Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile States, as well as internal strife within some
areas bordering South Sudan, with each country
accusing the other of supporting its armed
opponents; secondly, delays in the
implementation of the 20 June agreement on an
interim administration and security arrangement
for Abyei; and, thirdly, similar implementation
delays in demilitarizing the common border zone
and starting joint monitoring of the zone, which
the two sides had agreed to do.
11-58922
"In Abyei, the overall dynamics on the
ground have not changed significantly since
20 June, despite the timely deployment of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). UNISFA reports that the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Sudan People's Liberation
Army forces have remained, respectively, in the
areas north and south of the Kiir River, although
the Government of South Sudan has declared its
readiness to withdraw completely should the
North do so unconditionally, consistent with the
stipulations of the agreement.

"The continued presence of troops from
both sides in the Abyei area constitutes a major
obstacle to the enforcement of the 20 June
interim agreement and the implementation of the
mandate of UNISFA. Furthermore, it is creating a
tense security environment, affecting the return of
internally displaced persons and the seasonal
migrations of the Misseriya southward, which
could escalate into conflict.

"The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel recently submitted a
compromise proposal aimed at resolving the
remaining differences between the parties on the
establishment of the Abyei Area administration
institutions, which in turn could lead to troop
withdrawal. The Government of the Sudan
responded favourably to that proposal by
nominating as the Chair of the Legislative
Council a Misseriya from greater Abyei who is
well known to South Sudan as the former Deputy
Administrator of the Abyei Area. The mediation
is still waiting for the official response of the
Government of South Sudan and hopes to achieve
progress on this issue in the coming days.

"The border region continues to be an area
of heightened tensions between the two countries,
owing, among other factors, to the respective
military build-ups by both countries along the
border, accusations of support for the respective
insurgencies by both Governments across the
border, and remaining disputes over border
demarcation. The intensification of the
Government of South Sudan's fighting against the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North
(SPLM-North) in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile, and its spillover across the border in
particular poses, as reports of recent bombings
across the border attest, a dangerous threat that
could draw the two countries into direct clashes.

"The two countries must be strongly
advised to do everything possible to address their
differences and differences with their internal
opponents through political means, not through
military force. As long as wars continue, innocent
civilians will continue to suffer, as we have
witnessed in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile as
well as in the states in South Sudan where
military confrontation with rebel groups has
continued. Needless to say, the two countries
should be strongly urged to refrain from any
encouragement or assistance to each other's
insurgent groups to wage war.

"The establishment of the joint border
monitoring mechanism agreed upon by the parties
on 29 June, including a 20-kilometre-wide
demilitarized border zone, could help to address
existing tensions and restore confidence.
However, progress on the operational
establishment of the border mechanism has been
delayed by remaining disagreements over the
delineation of the border line from which the
border zone can actually be determined.

"The African Union Panel mediation has
prepared and submitted to the parties an
operational map proposing a temporary
redeployment line to resolve this deadlock. Both
Governments are currently assessing that
proposal. The Panel intends to resume
discussions on border security in Addis Ababa on
19 November. Should those discussions result in
a mutually agreed zone and mutually agreed
locations to monitor the border, the conditions
would be right, I believe, for the Council to
consider the expansion of UNISFA's mandate to
include support for the border-monitoring
mechanism as requested by the parties.

"As I mentioned earlier, military
confrontations are still ongoing between the
Sudan Armed Forces and the SPLM-North in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States. It is
increasingly clear that the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM-North are no longer
committed to the 28 June framework agreement,
as both parties are pursuing military options.
Having previously rejected any international
5
mediation, the Government of the Sudan has
agreed to mediation with the SPLM-North under
the auspices of AUHIP, while it concurrently
pursues bilateral discussions with Juba.

"However, both the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM-North have thus far relied
on military means to improve their bargaining
positions, and neither has to date shown a
concrete commitment to a political path, towards
mutual accommodation, that could have led to a
cessation of hostilities. If the conflict continues in
the two areas, and mutual accusations of support
for each other's armed rebellion do not end, I
would like to reiterate that there is a high risk of
the fighting leading to localized confrontations
between the two countries, thereby starting a
dangerous pattern of escalation that could be
costly in terms of human lives. The mediation has
been engaged in discussions with Juba and
Khartoum to de-escalate those tensions.

"The Sudan is currently affected by the
negative economic impact resulting from the
separation of the South. An agreement on oil
revenue-sharing and transitional financial
arrangements with South Sudan is thus the
priority for the Government of the Sudan. Both
parties have now submitted proposals to the
AUHIP on oil revenue-sharing and transitional
financial arrangements, which will be discussed
as an element of a negotiation on all issues that is
tentatively scheduled to start on 19 November.

"The Sudan and South Sudan are engaged
today in negotiations under the auspices of the
AUHIP to address pending issues between them,
which we are actively supporting. This needs to
be encouraged. However, at the same time, a
pattern of escalating mistrust and tension that is
of great concern for the future of peace and
security between and within the two countries is
also apparent, and the Council has to strongly
warn against it. I would like to urge both
countries to de-escalate this tense situation and
continue to build upon both the bilateral dialogue
they started at the highest level, at the summit
between President Al-Bashir and President Salva
Kiir last month in Khartoum, as well as the
ongoing negotiations under the facilitation of the
AUHIP. Both will lose from a confrontation,
which would represent a threat not only to their

respective populations but also to the entire
region."

(spoke in French)

That concludes the statement prepared yesterday
by Special Envoy Haile Menkerios.

