We thank Germany for convening this debate, of which we are pleased to be co-sponsors. The Dominican Republic associates itself with the statement to be submitted by the delegation of Nauru on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security (see annex 21). It is no coincidence that the Security Council has held debates on this issue for three consecutive years, coordinated under the presidencies of Sweden in 2018 (see S/PV.8307), the Dominican Republic in 2019 (see S/PV.8451) and, now, that of Germany. Our meeting in Arria Formula format last April was the fifth on this topic since 2013. This has shown that there is greater awareness of the risks to peace and security that result from climate change or that are aggravated by its effects. For many small island developing States, like the Dominican Republic, climate change poses an existential risk. Its impact on the development and well-being of our peoples is widely recognized. In the Caribbean, the increase in frequency and intensity of extreme natural phenomena leave no doubt as to the vulnerability of our territories and of the people who build their futures in them. But climate change is a multidimensional challenge, and it is becoming increasingly clear that the dangers it unleashes threaten the lives and livelihoods of millions. Thanks to joint efforts, we have seen progress in considering the effects of climate change as one of the risk factors in contexts like the Lake Chad region, Mali, Somalia, West Africa and the Sahel, the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This year, the topic has received attention from the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and in Council products relating to the African Union missions in Somalia and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Furthermore, we have made progress in recognizing the interconnections between the security risks posed by the effects of climate change and the Council's other concerns, such as addressing the conflict from a gender perspective. It is crucial to continue integrating a climate perspective into our analysis of the impacts of conflict on youth, children and other vulnerable populations, such as the elderly, displaced persons and refugees. The available evidence suggests that the effects of climate change will intensify in the coming years. Therefore, that increases the potential for its negative effects to be translated into fundamental causes of conflict. This organ, responsible for ensuring international peace and security, must increase its analytical capacity and integrate the necessary tools to identify, and eventually prevent, drivers of destabilization. How can we ignore the aftermath of natural disasters, droughts and floods, land degradation and rising sea levels and their link with potential and current conflicts, such as poverty and competition for scarce natural and food resources, displacement and social tensions? We appreciate the efforts already made by the Climate Security Mechanism hosted by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme. Their contributions to the design of a conceptual framework for the assessment of risks related to climate change, as well as tools for the development of early-warning strategies and risk prevention and management, are fundamental. We are at a juncture that forces us to continue our reflection on conflict prevention in the face of unconventional threats and to build on the progress already made. We must move from a conjunctural to a comprehensive approach, incorporating climate security risks in our deliberations and by way of a greater flow of systematic, contextualized reporting by the Secretary-General. Incorporating that information requires strengthening the analytical capacities of all the relevant entities of the United Nations system, and therefore increasing the capacity and training of actors in the field to enable the identification and evaluation of risks related to climate change, as how the latter interacts with other risk factors is crucial. Finally, we need to continue working towards the creation of the necessary mandate to ensure that the topic of the effects of climate change on international peace and security figures regularly on the Council's agenda. The Council, in its unique role, must be up to the challenges we have already identified. It is time to unite forces and for the Council to show its political will to take firm action enabling us to give appropriate and coherent responses.
