Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): From
month to month, Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien brings to our attention the daily horror in Syria,
the daily horror that the civilian population faces - the

children, the elderly, the sick. We thank Stephen for his
briefing, a monthly briefing which is always painful
to hear. I would also like to thank Ms. Hoff, the
representative of the World Health Organization in
Syria, for her equally heartfelt briefing.

We continue to bear witness of the worst armed
conflict of the century and the greatest humanitarian
crisis since the Second World War, without being able
to react to such barbarity as the entire world so urgently
requests of us. A few days ago, in the Council, when
referring to other horrific attacks being carried out, that
time in Yemen, we again raised a series of questions,
which I will now paraphrase from that other scenario.

We again return to these questions to ask ourselves:
In the name of what god can one bomb hospitals? In
defence of what principles can one bomb schools? What
cause can be defended by deliberately using snipers to kill
doctors and humanitarian personnel? What overarching
value is being protected by bombing convoys that are
clearly identified as humanitarian convoys? What
morality teaches us that all of them - the hospitals, the
schools, the convoys, the humanitarian personnel - are
terrorists, and therefore legitimate targets for barrel
bombs and so-called bunker-busting, which are so
destructive and that continue causing destruction in
Syria, in Aleppo and across the entire country?

On a similar note, we were horrified by Stephen's
comments with regard to non-State armed groups
indiscriminately bombing schools and residential
areas. I would like to express the hope that in the next
briefing Stephen could change that terminology on
non-State armed groups. A group that bombs schools
and residential neighbourhoods is not a non-State
armed group, but a terrorist group. And it should be
identified as such, because barbarity does not bear a
distinction worthy of excusing it. Whoever does so is
equally a terrorist.

We can make the point that responsibility for the
crisis must be shared by the entire Security Council,
given our inability to find a path towards a solution.
But certainly by far the majority of the responsibility
is with the members of the Organization and of the
Council that participate directly in the bombings and
that contribute to those attacks by way of an unlimited
supply of weapons.

How long can we honestly tolerate that? For
how much longer must the violence continue in this
way - echoing what Stephen had to say about the
horror. It is our belief that there must be an immediate
cessation of hostilities in the entire Syrian territory,
particularly in the currently most affected areas. We
reiterate one more time the seven points mentioned
by Stephen in his recent briefing. It is time to end the
violence and the bloodshed and to offer some hope to
the Syrian population.

