Mr. Fendrick (United States of America): The
United States would also like to associate itself with
the condolences offered to Bangladesh for the loss of
its peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo last week.

We welcome the Secretary-General's latest report
on the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) and Special Representative
Hasegawa's presentation to the Council. We would also
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. J ose Ramos-Horta,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste, for his presence today.

UNMISET has helped Timor-Leste make
substantial progress since its independence almost
three years ago. We fully appreciate the challenges that
Timor-Leste will continue to face as a new State.
Timor-Leste will continue to need concrete support
from its friends, including the United Nations, for
some time to come. Any additional United Nations
assistance should focus on a few key areas: developing
the capacity of judicial and economic institutions;
continued police training, including human rights
sensitivity training; and promoting further political
development by fostering the growth of a diverse
political party system.
Several recent developments shed light on the
need for further institutional and political development.
The United States was particularly concerned about the
dismissal in January of 22 local judges in Timor-Leste,
the resulting short-term loss of judicial capacity and
the long-term implications for the development of a
working judiciary. In addition, the reports of continued
disregard for international human rights standards by
Timorese police warrant the Council's attention.
Furthermore, the postponement by the Government of
Timor-Leste of bilateral negotiations with Indonesia on
their common border until June 2005 creates concern
about the perceived urgency of border delineation.
Finally, we remain committed to achieving credible
accountability for the crimes committed against
humanity in 1999, and we welcome the Secretary-
General's establishment of a commission of experts to
review the current judicial processes and to
recommend next steps.

As one of Timor-Leste's largest bilateral donors,
we have focused our assistance on rehabilitating the
local economy, promoting a free and open economy,
land reform, strengthening democracy, improving the
judicial sector and training the police and military
forces. We will continue to explore ways in which we
can help Timor-Leste bilaterally to fill its needs in the
key areas identified by its Government - border
control, police advisers and civilian advisers - and we
are encouraging other concerned Governments to do
the same. The United States and other friends of
Timor-Leste have police adviser and training
programmes that will fill some of the gap as United
Nations civilian police leave, and we plan to continue
our police training programme in Timor-Leste after
UNMISET concludes its work in May 2005.

It is clear to us that the peacekeeping phase of
Timor-Leste's path to full self-sufficiency can now be
successfully concluded. This transition from
peacekeeping to a sustainable development framework
represents an extremely significant and positive
milestone in Timor-Leste's history. There is no longer a
threat to international peace and security requiring a
peacekeeping mission, and the relations between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia are improving. We believe
that UNMISET should conclude as scheduled in May
this year and that the United Nations and regional and
international partners should look at alternative ways
in which to fill critical institutional gaps. We would be
open to considering for a discrete, limited period a
non-peacekeeping United Nations mission such as a
special political mission focused on Timor-Leste's
most critical needs and structured to transfer skills as
rapidly as possible.

It is important that the Government of Timor-
Leste take increasing responsibility for the nation's
future. Part of the process will be determining
precisely what international assistance is needed in
each of the areas identified by the Government and by
the Secretary-General. Regarding police advisers,
civilian advisers and military liaison officers, more
modest United Nations support in each of those areas
may be sufficient and in keeping with our goal of
turning over more responsibility to the Timor-Leste
Government.

