Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely discussion.
I also would like to thank the briefers for their
participation today.
On this eleventh anniversary of the Canal Hotel
bombing in Baghdad and as we mark the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1994 Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, we honour fallen United Nations personnel
and humanitarian workers. I commend the work of
humanitarian workers around the world, including
national and local staff, and reaffirm our shared
View that attacks on United Nations peacekeepers
and humanitarian workers are a flagrant violation of
international law.

Humanitarian workers are the international
community's emergency life line to vulnerable and
isolated communities. Today, 108 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance, and more
people are displaced by violence worldwide than
ever before. Humanitarian workers are critical to the
Security Council's ability to respond to deteriorating
humanitarian situations caused by threats to peace
and security. Violence against humanitarian workers
has intensified in the past 11 years, with casualties
tripling since the 2003 attack in Baghdad. Last year
alone, there were 251 incidents of major violence
against aid workers in 30 different countries. Against
the backdrop of increasingly challenging conditions for
humanitarians, I would like to stress three priorities
for the United States: ensuring safety and access for
humanitarian workers, facilitating humanitarian
assistance and pursuing accountability.

We are extremely alarmed at the increasing
frequency of attacks against humanitarian workers
and the number of humanitarian workers killed in
2013, especially in Syria, where 109 aid workers have
been killed, detained, kidnapped or held hostage since
the beginning of the civil war. Despite the dangerous
conditions, Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteers have
continued to deliver much-needed aid to people in
Syria.

Such attacks, in the words this morning of the
Deputy Secretary-General, represent a deficit of
humanity. Not only do they rob the world of brave,
committed individuals, but they also deny vulnerable
populations critical, life-saving humanitarian assistance
during dire humanitarian situations. In the interests
of ensuring the safety and security of aid workers,
the United States reaffirms our commitment to the
independence, humanity, neutrality and impartiality of
humanitarian operations.

Humanitarian workers today face a growing threat
from non-State actors. Last November, insurgents
ambushed and killed five Afghans working on a literacy
project managed by a French charity. Just yesterday, the
Council released a press statement (SC/11523) regarding
two United Nations peacekeepers killed in an attack in
northern Mali over the weekend. Earlier this month, a
militia targeted and killed at least five South Sudanese
aid workers.

We stress that the primary responsibility under
international law for the security and protection of
United Nations personnel and humanitarian workers
lies with the Governments hosting United Nations
operations. That leads me to the question of access. The
United States is deeply disturbed by the rising number
of humanitarian crises to which the international
humanitarian community has little access because staff
safety and security cannot be guaranteed. The lack of
access in places like Syria, Iraq, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, South Sudan and Somalia, among
others, has prevented millions of vulnerable citizens
from receiving much-needed food, water, shelter and
medicine.

We call on all parties, States and non-State actors
alike, to facilitate full, immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access. United Nations peacekeeping
missions can play an essential role in creating secure
conditions for humanitarian operations if they are
mandated to do so. We welcome the collaboration,
coordination and cooperation among the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations humanitarian country teams, especially where
mandates include creating the necessary conditions for
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance, as
is the case with the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

Finally, impunity for violence against humanitarian
workers must end. There has been little to no
accountability for humanitarian workers killed in the
line of duty. The United States supports efforts to
strengthen accountability and to bring to justice the
perpetrators of crimes against humanitarian workers.
We encourage the Council to employ commissions of
inquiry, fact-finding missions and sanctions, as well as
to support national authorities in their investigations
and prosecutions. At the same time, we encourage the
Council to develop creative solutions for dealing with
the threat posed by non-State actors to the dedicated
humanitarian workers we honour today. It is time for
the Council to take action.

