Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, allow me to thank you
for quickly responding to the call from Jordan, in
coordination with our Palestinian brothers, to hold this
urgent meeting to discuss the grave developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories, in particular East
Jerusalem.

Jerusalem today faces the dangers posed by
escalation and the intransigence of the Israeli
Government. It is confronted by the intolerance and
the provocations of its legislators, the extremism and
barbarity ofits settlers and a well-designed Israeli policy
that is illegal and aimed at fundamentally changing the
status quo, erasing the religious culture of the Holy
City and changing its demographic composition. Such
Israeli policies, which threaten occupied Jerusalem,
are a reflection of narrow internal tactical objectives
that move Israel much further away from the peace
camp and that promise new, violent cycles of hatred
and violence, with repercussions for the region and the
entire world.

The international community must focus on the
gravity of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, particularly East Jerusalem. In East
Jerusalem, Israel relentlessly continues its settler
expansion. It continues to violate the sanctity of
religious sites. We have shown many times that such acts
are illegitimate and clearly run counter to the norms of
international humanitarian law, particularly The Hague
Convention of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949. Jordan will continue to do its utmost to defend
Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Holy Mosque,
and the Dome of the Rock, and to ensure that they are
not desecrated.

At a time when the world is unanimous on the
need to end unilateral Israeli practices as well as on
the gravity of the increasing tensions in East Jerusalem,
Israeli officials are taking premeditated steps to provoke
millions in the Arab and Islamic world, the latest
being that the head of the West Jerusalem Council, Nir
Barakat, stormed the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque on Tuesday
morning through the Al-Magharba gate, surrounded by
Israeli security forces. Indeed, he went to the very top
of Bab Al-Rahman, in the very first visit by the head of
the West Jerusalem Council to Haram Al-Sharif.

Jordan would warn of the gravity of the debate in the
Israeli Knesset of laws aimed at dividing the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and attempting to impose Israeli sovereignty
on Jerusalem. Such measures not only contravene
international humanitarian law; they also contravene
resolutions 465 (1980) and 478 (1980). And that is not
to mention the continuous incursions by hordes of
settlers and extremists as well as armed soldiers into
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The faithful are prevented from
reaching the mosque. There are direct attacks against
Muslim officials, detentions, and injuries resulting
from the raids. Excavations are continuing in the
Old City of Jerusalem and its surroundings, and the
implementation of repairs inside the Holy Mosque is
being prevented.

The representative of Israel is now telling us of
the freedoms granted by Israel at the holy sites. That
only shows what Israel is currently doing. Israel must
immediately cease all unilateral measures in East
Jerusalem. It has the responsibility not to change the
facts on the ground.

Jordan will continue to confront Israeli violations
in the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque by all means - political,
diplomatic and legal - because the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan has the historic mandate to defend Islamic
and religious holy sites in Al-Quds, Jerusalem. That is
a duty that is being fulfilled by King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, in the light of the special role of Jordan
vis-a-vis Islamic holy sites recognized by Israel under
article 9 of the peace treaty.
It is clear that Israel does not heed its commitments
under international law, including the norms of
international humanitarian law. Israel defies all calls by
the international community to cease settler activities.
As the Council is aware, the Israeli Government agreed
to the building of thousands of new settler units in
East Jerusalem, including through the confiscation of
Palestinian homes and lands and the forcing out of said
Palestinians.

Jordan strongly condemns all such activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We would recall once again that this is a clear
breach of international law as reflected in the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the construction ofa wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273). These
are grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention
and of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

I should like here to stress here the content of the
aforementioned advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, namely that Israel violates the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination through
settler activities, the confiscation ofland, the expulsion
of Palestinians and the removal of people to occupied
Palestinian land. The Court considered Israel's violation
of the right to self-determination as being an obligation
erga omnes. It is a wide-ranging, comprehensive
violation. It is therefore the duty of the international
community, including the Security Council, to act to
put an end to such violations. It must not recognize the
illegitimate status proceeding from such violations.

Jordan calls on the Security Council to shoulder
its legal responsibilities in putting an end to such
violations of the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination. The Security Council must act to end
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land, including
East Jerusalem.

The Israeli practices that we have mentioned today
do not reflect Israel's wish to obtain peace. On the
contrary, they threaten the two-State solution, which
is the only solution to the Palestinian-Israel conflict.
It is a solution that has unanimous support throughout
the world. It is the doorway to a comprehensive peace
in the region based on international terms of reference
and the Arab Peace Initiative in all its elements. The
two-State solution must immediately be brought to life
through serious negotiations, to be resumed, governed
by indicators of achievement and a time table, and
accompanied by a full end to all illegal measures that
could hamper such negotiations or that try to pre-empt
them by attempting to change the facts on the ground or
the legal status of occupied Arab land, including East
Jerusalem.

In conclusion, those who have lost both political and
legal arguments are now invoking history and religion.
We all know full well that all nations have a history
and a religion. They can be used as a pretext whenever
it is convenient. The claims of the representative of
Israel can be countered by many other arguments.
Nevertheless, peace, security and justice cannot be
achieved through historic or religious arguments. If
that were so, States' boundaries would change, not
dozens but hundreds of times. He who wants peace
and security for his country must respect the law and
the fundamental principles and tenets agreed upon by
the entire international community, and is Israel is no
exception.

