Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome the
presence among us earlier today at this important
debate of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, Mr. Murray McCully, We would also like
to congratulate the delegation of New Zealand on
its very able leadership of the Council and all the
work that it has been doing throughout the month of
July while exercising its presidency of the Security
Council. We also are grateful for the briefing made by
the United Nations Special Coordinator and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, on recent events in the Middle East. We have
taken due note of the content of his briefing.

A year ago, we witnessed the beginning of what
turned out to be the latest round of conflict between
Palestinian armed groups and the Israel security forces.
We also saw the launching of Operation Protective
Edge in Gaza by Israel. Those actions led to some ofthe
worst fighting seen in Gaza since 1967. Still today, we
continue to see the aftermath of those acts, particularly
the suffering and pain that they have caused to the
civilian population.

The various reports published by the United Nations
clearly spell out to the reader the levels of violence that
were reached during the conflict. For example, in the
report published by the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council, we
saw underscored the unprecedented devastation as well
as the serious violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law caused by Israel and
Palestinian armed groups, actions which in some cases
could be equated to war crimes.
In addition, in the Secretary-General's summary of
the report of the United Nations Headquarters Board
of Inquiry on various incidents that had occurred
in Gaza which affected schools administered by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, we see clear evidence of the
attacks and abuses committed against United Nations
schools that were being used as emergency shelters.

Moreover, in one of the most alarming reports, the
report (S/2015/409) ofthe Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict, we are confronted with the statistic
of the number of Palestinian children murdered in 2014,
a number higher than the number of children who died
in the Syrian Arab Republic and in Darfur. There can
be no doubt that the situation is unsustainable.

In addition to all that I have just detailed, we need
to add the precarious economic situation that persists
in Gaza, an area in which the unemployment rate is the
highest in the world, standing at 44 per cent. Although
it could be said that some progress has been made in
the reconstruction of Gaza following the lifting of some
restrictions, the blockade imposed by Israel continues
to heavily impact upon the viability of this people.

The situation in the West Bank has been further
complicated by the increasing number of clashes
between Palestinian protesters and the Israeli security
forces, alongside the expansion in settlements and the
forced displacement of Palestinians from Area C in
East Jerusalem. In a similar vein, following a period
of relative calm, the number of sporadic rocket attacks
launched from Gaza targeting Israel has also increased.

For all those reasons, it is essential that we establish
a political time line that responds to the legitimate
needs of both peoples that would allow us to arrive at a
lasting and just agreement. It is for that reason, and to
avoid a repetition of the conflict that we saw a year ago,
that the international community has to play a key role
in supporting and driving forward the peace process in
the region.

We recognize the value of the principle of shared
responsibility, and therefore believe that the active
participation of both the diplomatic Quartet on the
Middle East and the Security Council in the peace
process can, and should, serve to revitalize the process
so that the parties are able to take responsible steps
towards a broad, just and lasting peace. We urge the
Council to debate the Arab Peace Initiative, which sets
out a vision for a global solution to the Israeli-Arab
conflict, as well as the key role that can be played by
countries in the region and the Security Council.
Parties should avoid adopting measures that
will hinder still further perspectives for a renewal of
meaningful talks. We see the parties as being those
who are principally interested in making a genuine and
renewed effort, which would include, inter alia, the
total lifting of the blockade, a halt in the construction
of illegal settlements, a halt in the carrying out of
provocative acts and the cessation of the launching of
rockets, all ofwhich should be done in order to guarantee
the legitimate security concerns ofIsrael. It is essential
that parties continue to build trust between themselves
and that they commit to the option of peace talks and
the two-State solution, Israel and Palestine coexisting
side by side in conditions of peace and security, and
both adopting measures aimed at rebuilding mutual
trust.

Very briefly, I should like to refer to the very
serious humanitarian situation and the risks posed to
economic and social development caused by the various
conflicts in the Middle East region.

Over the last few years, we have borne witness
to the havoc caused by war and the rise in violence in
Syria, Iraq and Yemen, as well as the poverty into which
the civilian population has been thrown. We would like
to point to the invaluable support extended by peoples
and Governments of countries neighbouring Syria, in
particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Egypt, which
have sought to alleviate somewhat the circumstances
of these persons. But the burden they have shouldered
is too great and it is crucial that the international
community support them in their development goals so
that they can maintain their domestic stability, given

that this is a cornerstone for guaranteeing peace in the
region.

We are aware of the huge challenges that the
quest for a political solution, both at the national and
international level, might pose to the parties. But this is
the only path open to us. It is our political and historical
responsibility as member States of the international
community to support those measures that might allow
us to achieve such a solution.

