Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, Madam President, allow me to welcome
you to New York to preside over this meeting. I also
wish to welcome Foreign Minister Koroma and Foreign
Minister Fall, and to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency for the initiative to
convene this meeting.

I focus my remarks today on two points. First, the
situation of the internal conflict in the host country of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation, the aspirations
of its people, the attitudes of the neighbouring
countries and the unity of the international community
are very important conditions for the success of the
mission.

In Sierra Leone, what is right and wrong between
the Government and the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) is quite clear. The parties to the conflict are few,
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has a relatively united position on the
conflict. Once it was isolated and had come under
tremendous external pressure, RUF disintegrated in
relatively short order. The timely dispatch of troops by
the United Kingdom played an important role in this
process.

In contrast, the United Nations has had to face
more complicated problems in Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where there is a
complex mix of parties to the conflicts. Regional
countries are of several minds about these conflicts,
and it has proved hard to forge consensus in the
international community on these issues.

The success of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations hinges on a combination of factors inside
and outside the areas of operation. Under given
circumstances, the proper resolution of external

questions could become the key to progress in the
peace process.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock took the Chair.

Secondly, peace in Sierra Leone cannot be
separated from the regional environment of the Mano
River Union. Security in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Guinea is closely related among the three, a fact
recognized by all. Sanctions against Liberia have
played an important role in the peace process for Sierra
Leone in that they have led to the isolation and
eventual collapse of RUF. If the situation in Liberia
further deteriorates, it might produce a spillover effect
into Sierra Leone, and even into Guinea. Right now
there are differences of opinion between the Security
Council and regional organizations regarding sanctions
against Liberia. We need to consider seriously how the
Security Council can strengthen coordination with
regional organizations in this regard.

At the present time, there are a number of
initiatives working towards a solution to the Liberian
conflict. These initiatives are, among others, those of
ECOWAS, the King of Morocco and the Mano River
Union, with the latter having become increasingly
active in the past two years. All of these efforts need to
be coordinated in order for them to be effective.

The Secretary-General has just established an
Office for West Africa and has appointed an
experienced Special Representative who is well-versed
in West African issues. We eagerly await his
recommendations as to how the United Nations can
support the initiatives to end the Liberian conflict, with
a view to achieving lasting peace for the three
countries in the Mano River Union.

