The President (spoke in Arabic): After
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and recalls that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of peace and security and consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations can improve collective security.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
relevant resolutions and statements which
underscore the importance of developing
effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union, in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and the relevant statutes of the
regional organizations, in particular the African
Union.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continuing important efforts of the African Union
to settle conflicts in the African continent, and
expresses its support for peace initiatives
conducted by the African Union.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 1809 (2008), which recognizes the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing regional organizations
when they undertake peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate.

"The Security Council recognizes that
regional organizations have the responsibility to
secure human, financial, logistical and other
resources for their organizations.

"The Council underscores the importance of
supporting and improving, in a sustained way, the
capacity of the African Union, and welcomes
recent developments regarding cooperation
between the United Nations, the African Union
and international partners, including the
enhancement of the African Union capacities.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the African Union-United Nations panel in
producing a report on modalities to support
African Union peacekeeping operations
(A/63/666-S/2008/813). The Security Council
notes with interest the panel's report.

"The Security Council requests the

Secretary-General to submit a report, no later
than 18 September 2009, on practical ways to
provide effective support for the African Union
when it undertakes peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations, that includes a
detailed assessment of the recommendations
contained in the report of the African Union-
United Nations panel, in particular those on
financing, as well as on the establishment of a
joint African Union-United Nations team.

"The Security Council further requests the
Secretary-General to take into account in his
report the lessons learned from past and current
African Union peacekeeping efforts, in particular
the African Union-United Nations mission in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the efforts to provide a
logistical support package for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and the
establishment of a trust fund called for by
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009).

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of implementing the Ten-Year
Capacity Building Programme for the African
Union on peace and security, in particular the
operationalization of the African Union Standby
Force and the Continental Early Warning System.
The Council stresses its support for ongoing
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and
Security Architecture and reiterates its call for the
international community, particularly donors, to
fulfil their commitments in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document.
20

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of establishing more effective
strategic relationships between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, and encourages further joint efforts
in this direction, focusing on issues of mutual
interests. The Security Council calls on the
Secretariat and the African Union Commission to
further collaborate on issues of mutual interests,
including through developing a list of the
military, technical, logistic and administrative
capacities that need developing, supporting
regular follow-up missions, experience sharing,
staff exchanges, and in financial and logistical
areas.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to further consider this issue following
the report of the Secretary-General."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/3.

Before I adjourn this meeting, I wish, on behalf
of all the members of the Council, to express my
gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Romano Prodi and
the other members of his panel for their valuable
efforts and for the report before the Council. We are
grateful to Mr. Prodi for having come to New York to
present the report to us.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5 pm.
09-27223
