Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me first of all to express
my delegation's satisfaction at seeing you preside this
afternoon over the Council's deliberations; I should also
like to thank the delegation and the Permanent
Representative of Botswana for the work they carried out
during the month of March and for the wisdom that is
always characteristic of them.

A very few months ago, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, for
whom my delegation has very special respect, in
submitting the traditional report by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the state of the
world's refugees for 1995, told us that:

"One of the greatest challenges of the twenty-
first century will be to ensure that peoples, wherever
they may be in the world, can enjoy security and
freedom; security against armed conflicts, violence,
human rights abuses and poverty; freedom to
achieve their own personal potential, participate in
the government of their countries and express their
individual and collective identity."

Naturally, we agree with her. But if we take an
honest look at the map of our world today and search for
a spot where there is not even a minimum of security and
where freedom is only an aspiration, or perhaps a still-
distant dream, that place, unfortunately, is Afghanistan.

The people of Afghanistan has suffered more than
16 years of pointless, uninterrupted violence, the result of
a war in which the major Powers were not uninvolved.
One even intervened directly; others did so through
proxies, in ways that do not relieve them of moral
responsibility and which, in any case, were typical of the
so-called cold war. Unfortunately, the war in Afghanistan
continues, and there are third countries that are apparently
not completely uninvolved in the violence that still grips
that country. They should now unite in an effort for
peace.

In addition to being so harshly afflicted, the people
of Afghanistan is, and has been for too many years now,
one of the poorest in the world, in spite of being a hard-
working and industrious people. Life expectancy at birth
is only 43 years; the literacy rate is around 20 per cent;
infant mortality in Afghanistan is one of the highest in the

 

world. Sadly, the only things that abound in that country
are weapons and ammunition.

Almost 3 million Afghans continue to live outside
their country as refugees, while 1 million persons are
internally displaced. This is the largest group of refugees in
the world. In the relative haven of the camps, they find
what they do not have at home: mainly security, but also
water, schools, health services, electricity and, for some,
even jobs. These are all pieces of a whole that represents
the minimum necessary for human dignity.

With such a large number of refugees, it is clear that
the question of Afghanistan has a significant impact on
neighbouring countries and on the region as a whole.
However, very little is said these days about that country,
as if the prevailing state of affairs there were inevitable or
could not be remedied - as if all of a sudden Afghanistan
had faded into the background in the agenda of urgent
matters to resolve in the area of peace and security.

Only a few days ago, in the 1996 edition of the very
useful annual report of the United States Mission on world
humanitarian emergencies, the situation in Afghanistan was
one of only three crises to be described as "intense",
together with those in Burundi and Sierra Leone. The
report adds that the latter is now improving since the recent
elections held there and the negotiations that have just
started between some of the parties. Furthermore, it
describes what is occurring in Afghanistan as one of the
worst humanitarian situations in the entire world. Today,
the nearly 1 million inhabitants of Kabul lead a precarious
existence, trying to meet their minimum needs, threatened
all the while by the advance of the so-called Taliban.

The real Victims of this situation - the civilian
population of Afghanistan - are surrounded by this wall of
silence, which all too frequently in our world hides from
View the tragedies of the neediest. It would seem that some
progress has been made recently, in particular in a few rural
areas; while this may be encouraging, it is clearly not
enough.

The most urgent thing is peace, or at least the
cessation of hostilities. Otherwise it is not possible to think
seriously of reconstruction, nor is it possible to dream of
the return of refugees, or of reconciliation, tolerance and
diversity. We believe that the time has come to take serious
steps on the ground and in neighbouring countries that
could lead to a break in the violence. In this respect, we are
among those who believe that it would be beneficial to hold
a conference at the highest level, with the participation of
all the States that in one way or another are linked to the
crisis, in order to form what we might call a "coalition
for peace", capable of collectively supporting a peace
strategy, or perhaps even a renewed group of friends, or
contact group, to try to generate greater political force
and assist in the efforts undertaken by the Secretariat of
our Organization.

The presence of the United Nations in the area is,
for now, our only reason for hope, but it must be more
active and probably establish priorities. Its true chances of
success depend not only on the behaviour of those
fighting on Afghan soil but also on the conduct of those
who support them, arm them and, ultimately, use, or have
used, them. That international presence must be supported
without delay, in every possible way, and here the Vision
and the actions of the major Powers and the neighbouring
countries are, in our View, crucial.

Without a basic, minimum agreement among all, at
least with respect to the first steps that should be taken
towards peace, success will be much more difficult to
achieve. Promoting this quest for agreement and then
reaching agreement - these are the tasks that fall to this
Organization. Furthermore, they cannot be postponed,
given the magnitude of the tragedy.

The emergency issues for Afghanistan are clear.

First of all, an attempt must be made to effectively
impede and control the flow of arms and military
supplies, and the related financial flows; otherwise,
violence and destruction will continue. In addition, today
we must try to avert attacks on Kabul and Herat, which
would seriously aggravate the crisis. At the same time,
we must endeavour to ensure respect for human rights
and humanitarian law. The abuses, arbitrary acts and
excesses of all kinds that are occurring in this area are a
main cause of the instability afflicting Afghanistan. They
also represent a serious practical difficulty that hinders the
work of those who are generously trying to help.

We must put an end once and for all to unilateral
steps and activities that compromise the territorial
integrity of Afghanistan, such as the building of roads or
communications systems. Next, we must start to define,
with the participation of the parties to the Afghan conflict,
a strategy for reconciliation and the urgent needs of
reconstruction. It is the inescapable duty of the
international community to do everything in its power to
urgently facilitate peace, and it is the particular
responsibility of those who at one point seemed to be

 

adding fuel to the fire to cooperate today in efforts to
restore peace.

In a climate of terror or of misery, peace is not easy
to achieve; but even if it were to be achieved, it could not
be sustained. This is what history teaches us time and time
again. It is therefore time to begin negotiating efforts,
bearing in mind, as appropriate, the time-frames that
sometimes result from political developments affecting the
various players or parties concerned. But we should not
wait for that to occur before moving forward, since, despite
the silence that surrounds this issue, the affliction that
violence is bringing down on the people of Afghanistan has
not ceased; it continues relentlessly. This current situation
of impotence, in a world that talks on and on about all
kinds of globalization, should shame us all. The time has
come to act concretely and collectively to try to globalize
peace, and Afghanistan should be one of the first steps in
that direction.

The question of Afghanistan, in our view, has been
around for too long. If we do not persist in our efforts and
if, as donors of humanitarian assistance to that country, we
suffer "donor fatigue" - understandable as that may be -
the attainment of peace will continue to be impossible.

That is our View of the substance of the Afghan
question, whose resolution should not continue to be
postponed.

I should now like briefly to refer to the Council's
procedure today - a formal meeting at which States not
currently members have the opportunity to be heard on
matters before the Council. We welcome the reasonably
frequent holding of such meetings. They are extremely
important, in my delegation's opinion, in the attempt to
consolidate the current trend towards the greatest possible
transparency in the work of the Council. This approach,
which has strengthened over the last two years, has already
made a difference in the Council's work.

These meetings, together with institutionalization of
meetings with countries contributing troops to peace-
keeping operations, a new system, but one which is now
established, with its own identity, are evidence of a fresh
outlook on how the work of this body should be carried out
- in an integrated manner, not separate from the Member
States, as a whole, which are now heard and have their
views known.

If this were not so, we would continue to read or hear
about past events when we were perhaps in the grip of a
kind of petty and short-sighted philosophy that resulted in
views not being listened to. More seriously still,
information essential for taking decisions in this Council
was filtered or perhaps even cut out.

Such is the case, for example, of some information
in volume II, recently published, of "The International
Response to Conflict and Genocide: Lessons from the
Rwanda Experience" by the Steering Committee of the
Joint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda.
That work, edited by David Millwood, was printed in
Odense, Denmark, in March 1995. The possibly serious
concern aroused by a reading of that work is that it seems
just possible that at some point a cable was sent to the
Secretariat containing essential information. That
information was never shared with the members of the
Security Council, which would certainly have been done
if such a cable actually existed.

We recall that our repeated requests for information
at that time provoked suggestions, which we did not agree
with, that some of us wanted to "micro-manage" from the
Council the crisis on its agenda. Of course, that was not
so.
There is another matter to consider. If there had
been an institutionalized mechanism for dialogue between
the Council and the Secretariat, and the troop-contributing
countries, the information in question, if it existed, might
have been passed to all those of us who were then
members of the Security Council.

My delegation therefore welcomes meetings like this,
which allow the Council to hear the views of Member
States on the various issues before it.

