Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): This is not the
first debate we have held in this Chamber on Burundi.
What is new since the last occasion is the coup against the
constitutional Government in the country and, more
hopefully, the strength of the region's response to that
situation and determination to restore political and
constitutional order. What has not changed, as the
Secretary-General's report makes clear, is the appalling
violence which continues to be inflicted on the people of
Burundi by other Burundians.

We agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion that
the conflict in Burundi is not susceptible to a military
solution, and that the international community must
continue to focus its efforts on bringing the parties together
to end the fighting, to restore a legitimate government and
to achieve lasting national reconciliation in Burundi.

My Government welcomes and fully supports the
initiatives taken at Arusha by the leaders of the States
neighbouring Burundi, and the mediation efforts of former
President Nyerere in particular. We welcome the principled
approach of the region towards the unconstitutional change
of government which took place in Burundi on 25 July, and
we share their determination to press for the return of
constitutional order and a negotiated settlement to end this
long-standing conflict. We welcome the African lead, while
believing that the Security Council and the international
community also have a vital role to play.

The Council now has before it a draft resolution which
should, in our View, be an important vehicle for
coordinating the response of the region with that of the
wider international community. We support the decisions
taken at Arusha with regard to economic sanctions, but we
share the Secretary-General's concern about the possible
effect of sanctions on humanitarian supplies and personnel.
Humanitarian agencies must be allowed unrestricted access
to those in need and must be able to operate in conditions
of adequate security. We welcome, therefore, the decision

 

of the regional leaders to establish a regional coordinating
committee in Nairobi, and the assurance that humanitarian
supplies will be allowed access. We call on the parties in
Burundi to cease attacks on aid workers and to ensure
that they can operate in secure conditions.

We also see a continuing need for the presence of
human rights observers in Burundi. We commend the
team there now, both on what it has achieved so far and
on the courage which they have displayed in difficult
circumstances.

Major Buyoya has made many public promises since
25 July. He has also taken some actions with regard to
control of the armed forces which are potentially positive.
At the same time, it is clear that acts of oppression
continue and that there is no national consensus as yet
behind his proposal for an extended transitional period
before a return to constitutional government. He must
respond to the concerns expressed by the regional
community. We welcome the fact that he has publicly
stated his willingness to enter into dialogue and that he
has met with former President Nyerere. We call similarly
on other parties to the conflict to commit themselves to
early all-party talks.

All parties must agree now to an immediate
cease-fire and enter into serious negotiations. If a
cease-fire is declared, we are willing to provide practical
assistance to the regional efforts to assure adequate
security for all in Burundi. And, once a lasting settlement
has been achieved, we are willing to contribute to
international efforts to restore Burundi's economy in
support of such a settlement.

While it is right to focus on achieving a settlement,
we also agree with the Secretary-General that contingency
planning should continue in case regional and
international efforts are not sufficient to forestall a
humanitarian catastrophe in Burundi.

Finally, the responsibility for ending the killing lies
with the leaders of Burundi and the factions outside it.
They must act now so that a process of genuine political
dialogue can begin. We encourage those who currently
hold power in the country to act for their country by
seeking agreement with other groups and seizing the
opportunity which has been presented by the Arusha
process to begin the hard, but in the long run, inescapable
task of rebuilding a single nation under a constitution
which enjoys the widest possible support.

 

