Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our sincere congratulations to Jordan for its
membership in the Security Council for the 2014-2015
term and its presidency of the Council for the month of
January. My delegation has full confidence that Jordan
will make a significant contribution to the work of the
Council in the coming two years.

The year 2013 was another year that regrettably
ended without any concrete advancement towards
bringing an end to the oldest conflict in the Middle
East. Sadly, we continued to recite over and over again
the litany of unacceptable settlement and demolition
activities; acts of settler violence; violations of
the basic rights of the Palestinians in the occupied
territory; provocations against religious and holy sites,
including the Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque; the continuation of the illegal embargo and
the construction of the separation wall in defiance of
international law and Security Council resolutions; and
the most regrettable loss of lives and injuries on both
sides.

However, the initiative and dedicated efforts of
United States Secretary of State Kerry encouraged us
to welcome 2014 with optimism for a genuine chance
that would lead to the two-State solution, which we
have long yearned for.

Turkey sincerely supports the ongoing talks between
Israel and Palestine towards a just, comprehensive
and lasting resolution based on the concept of two
States, living side-by-side within the pre-1967 borders
in peace and security, through a just settlement of all
final-status issues on the basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

However, in order to achieve that most-desired
outcome, the parties must refrain from actions that
undermine the negotiations. At a period when we
need to foster confidence-building measures, each
and every step taken should be well-planned and taken
with caution. For instance, the systematic coupling of
prisoner releases with new settlement announcements
is not helpful ifthe parties are sincere about the process.

The basic prerequisite for progress in the peace
process is to fully understand the linkage between
security and a just peace. Only a just and comprehensive
settlement to the conflict will provide a true, lasting
peace and a secure, stable and prosperous Middle East.
Meanwhile, the responsibility on the shoulders of the
international community has not lessened. We will all
be morally accountable if this window of opportunity
for peace once again slips away.

The General Assembly has proclaimed 2014 as the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. This should be a year for all of us to mobilize
our means and capabilities to support Palestine in
the economic and political realms. A politically and
economically strong Palestine will surely be a stronger
partner for Israel and the entire neighbourhood for years
to come. Turkey therefore supports the inalienable right
of the State ofPalestine to sit among us, under this roof,
as an equal Member of the United Nations and fully
recognized by the international community. Needless
to say, Palestinian reconciliation constitutes an integral
part of that strength.

For our part, Turkey will continue to do its best
in alleviating the difficulties of the Palestinian people
through various multilateral and bilateral projects in
Palestine. Two recent examples have been the transfer
of $850,000 to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to be
used in the provision of fuel for generators for critical
service sectors such as health, water and sanitation in
Gaza, and the launching of the Jenin Industrial Zone
Project, in the West Bank, which aims at creating
business and employment opportunities for the
Palestinians in the area.

However, those initiatives can yield effective
results only in an economy that is functioning at full
capacity, where there are no restrictions on the access
of goods and labour. Movements in and out of Palestine
and the contiguity between Gaza and the West Bank
are of vital importance. We therefore call once again
for an immediate lifting of the embargo on Gaza,
in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009) and the
ceasefire commitments of November 2012. The recent
flexibility extended for access for materials for United
Nations projects is welcomed by many, but declared not
enough by many more, considering in particular the
damage caused by the recent severe weather conditions
in the region.

Another source of optimism is the upcoming
second Geneva Conference on Syria, wherein the
countries invited and representatives of the European
Union, Arab League and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, together with United Nations officials,
will try to boost the chances for a political solution to
the Syrian crisis, based on the Geneva communique of
June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). Turkey looks forward
to a genuine process, through the establishment of a
transitional governing body with full executive powers
by the mutual consent of the two parties.

However, just as important as the commencement of
the Conference is the grim reality on the ground in Syria,
where innocentpeople continue to be killed every day by
bullets, indiscriminate aerial bombardments, ballistic
missiles and, last but not least, epidemic diseases and
hunger while under siege. The recent wave of escalating
attacks against Aleppo is extremely worrisome. That
brutality must end. There should be an immediate end
to the hostilities and violence, and the presidential
statement of 2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) should
be implemented immediately in its entirety. Reports
of the eventual access of the humanitarian convoy to
Yarmouk is only partially comforting, as we know
that it is not a long-term remedy. Sadly, there are still
hundreds of thousands of internally displaced persons
who have yet to be reached.

On the other hand, the burden of the humanitarian
crisis on neighbouring countries has reached
intolerable levels, posing a threat to not only domestic
but also regional instability. We would recall that
the Governments of Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq, Egypt
and Turkey, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in a meeting
that took place in Sanliurfa, Turkey, on 17 January,
appealed once again to the international community to
boost solidarity with countries in the region hosting the
majority of refugees fleeing Syria. We call once again
on the Security Council to devise an effective strategy
under Chapter VII to end this, the biggest humanitarian
crisis of the twenty-first century.

Despite the full mobilization of the international
community to implement resolution 2118 (2013), the first
benchmark for the elimination of the chemical weapons
declared by the Syrian regime has not been met. That

is not acceptable. As we have legitimate security and
environmental concerns, we shall continue to closely
monitor the timetable devised by the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. We would also like to take this opportunity
to underline once again that paragraph 4 of resolution
2118 (2013) envisages the complete destruction of Syria'
chemical-weapons programme.

I must clarify the facts regarding one particular
accusation by one speaker. Recently, Turkish authorities
confiscated material allegedly bound for Syria. Those
incidents are a testimony to Turkey's commitment to
international norms and is proof that Turkey is a State
governed by the rule of law. Investigations are being
carried out accordingly. Having said that, Turkey
will stand by the Syrian people, and its humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian people will continue.

While the Middle East is going through a turbulent
period, we may well be within reach of putting an end
to the long-term Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is time
for us all to work together to achieve that goal and
for both parties to show the necessary leadership and
political will to prevent a failure, which we may not be
able to afford.

