Mr. D'Alotto (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam, and the delegation of
Tanzania for organizing this open debate on such an
important subject as peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region of Africa.

Through the decades, that region has had to face
civil wars and conflicts among countries of the region
that have caused terrible suffering through grave
human rights violations, the internal displacement of
civilians and refugees, and the destruction of property
and national economies. Unfortunately, such facts have
been a historic constant for all those nations, especially
during their period of foundation.

The Great Lakes region has been no exception.
However, a democratically elected Government in
Burundi and progress in the transition towards
democratic elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are advances that encourage hope for a future of
peace, stability and progress for the region. Those
advances have been made possible by several
circumstances, including stronger and more decisive
collaboration among Governments of the subregion;
the efforts of the African Union and other multilateral
organs; the organization of such international
conferences as that on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region which took
place in Dar es-Salaam in November 2004; greater
cooperation in decision-making between the Security
Council and regional organizations; the tireless efforts
of peacekeeping missions in the region; the assistance
of donor countries; and the ongoing monitoring by
non-governmental organizations of human rights
violations committed by the parties to conflicts, as well
as of the need for humanitarian assistance. Equally
essential has been the will of the peoples of the region
to opt for democratic and inclusive solutions.

We do not believe that acts of the past must
inevitably be repeated in the future. Structural changes,
such as coordinated assistance in the creation of stable
institutions, the reconstruction and development
of countries during the post-conflict period - inter
alia, by the recently established Peacebuilding
Commission - and an end to impunity at the national
level for violators of human rights and humanitarian
law, or at the supranational level by the constitution of
international tribunals or by the action of the
International Criminal Court, may generate the
necessary incentives to reduce the recurrence of
conflicts in the region. Once a peace accord has been
reached, structural change may be an effective tool to
guarantee peace and stability.

In our opinion, the granting of amnesty for grave
violations of human rights as a strategy to end a
conflict has not had positive long-term results, since
the combating parties rarely put down their weapons,
while lasting peace cannot be reached without
reconciliation within society. Only by bringing to
justice all violators of human rights and international
humanitarian law will it be possible to end the culture
of impunity, thus promoting a solid starting point for
long-term stability for the countries of the region.

Argentina is committed to the defence of those
values and principles and therefore supports the draft
resolution prepared by the Tanzanian delegation.

Finally, and in accordance with the Secretary-
General's recommendations in his report, my
delegation reiterates here its message of support for the
timely convening of the second International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region of Africa, to
be held in Nairobi, Kenya, with a View to adopting a
pact on security, stability and development to ensure a
future of peace and sustained progress in the region.

