Mr. Amayo (Kenya): May I begin by congratulating
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs for having convened this important meeting.
We believe that this open debate presents an excellent
opportunity to reaffirm our strong support for this
important mandate on children and armed conflict.

Allow me also to commend Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Peter
Awan for their comprehensive briefings this morning.

My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2019/509) and acknowledges the many activities
undertaken with the aim of improving the lives of
children in conflict. We believe that action plans,
participation in ceasefire negotiations and demarches
with various countries have contributed to improving
the lives of the innocent children who are made victims
of conflicts and strife. We have no doubt that the
recommendations contained in the report will enhance
the broad and effective protection of children in armed
conflict, including those in schools and hospitals.

Over the past decade, the world has witnessed an
increase in violent extremism and extremist ideology
propagated by terrorist groups to advance their
negative agenda, including the targeting of children for
recruitment into violent extremism.

Kenya decries the recruitment and use of children
as weapons of war. We believe that it underlies larger
and systemic issues that include the breakdown of
a country's social fabric. As such, child protection
should be part and parcel of any conflict-management
and prevention strategy. In that regard, we appreciate
the progress made through the current monitoring and
reporting mechanism and by the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

We note with dismay the prevailing challenges
with regard to the protection of children growing up
in situations of conflict. The fact that children are
subjected to reprehensible acts of violence and abuse
must move humankind to reimagine the responsibility
to protect. It is indeed our collective moral imperative,
besides being a legal obligation.

In a number of developing countries, the major
root causes of conflict include extreme poverty;
political, social and economic inequality; and high
unemployment. For these reasons, restless young
people, most of whom are still children, are easily
enticed to fight and also fall into radicalization, with
minimum economic incentives.

I therefore would conclude by focusing on three
important points.

Firstly, I stress the importance of the balanced
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in addressing the economic development
challenges that are at the root of most conflicts. We
believe that the Sustainable Development Goals offer
the most cost-effective and sustainable impact in
alleviating poverty and conflicts and affording all
children the bright future they rightfully deserve.

Secondly, we call on the Security Council not
only to maintain peace but also, as a priority, to use
its mandate to bring peace to areas that are in conflict.
That will require the cooperation of the entire United
Nations system and the international community in
contributing to the pacific settlement of disputes.

The protection of children will be guaranteed
only where there is peace and where national laws
and international humanitarian law are observed and
implemented. This calls for the continued observance
by all nations, big and small, of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter.

Last but not least, there must be an acknowledgement
of the important role played by regional and subregional
organizations in developing regional policies to guide
their members in developing common national action
plans for Child protection during conflict. We can
work together and do more to ensure a world in which
children, those of this generation and generations to
come, can have and enjoy the right to be children.

