Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by expressing France's heartfelt thanks to
the Chinese presidency. Your initiative, Sir, to convene
the members of Security Council, as well as all Member
States, to meet on the issue of multilateralism in defence
of the United Nations is particularly welcome given
the threats facing the multilateral system. I also thank
all those who are speaking today and, above all, the
Secretary-General for his unwavering commitment and
the important perspectives that he just provided, which
must inspire our work.

The international order that was built on the resolve
to leave the horrors of the first half of the twentieth
century behind us and that has been consolidated over
the course of more than 70 years must not be taken for
granted. That would be a big mistake. As the Secretary-
General alluded to, opposing currents undeniably have
never been as strong as they are now since the end of
the Second World War. This fragile edifice, with the
United Nations at its core, is needed more than ever
in facing today's challenges. But it must evolve and be
comprehensively reformed if it is to be able to meet
them and stand up to the criticism and even attacks
levelled against it.

The foundation of multilateralism is international
law. The rule of law is in its DNA, as opposed to the
law of the strongest and the law of the jungle. Respect
for the law is at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations, together with, first and foremost, human
rights - in one month, we will celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights - international humanitarian law and, more
generally, all obligations arising from treaties and
under international law, in particular Security Council
resolutions. The practice of multilateralism consists
in the collective approach to crises with major global
repercussions. As the concept paper (S/2018/982, annex)
circulated by the presidency points out, a collective
and cooperative approach to the peaceful settlement of
disputes is the very essence of the United Nations. Our
commitment is based on the conviction that collective
responses to our shared problems is more effective
than a set of disparate unilateral responses, or, to put it
another way, in the face of today's global challenges, the
juxtaposition of nationalisms can lead only to disaster
for everyone. Based on experience, France believes that
the precept of the whole being greater than the sum of
its parts resides at the heart of multilateralism.

The advantage of multilateralism lies in its
effectiveness to provide concrete responses to crises
and major world issues, which holds truer than ever in
an increasingly multipolar world, which by definition is
more complex to deal with. A multipolar world therefore
makes multilateralism even more imperative at a moment
when a rationale based on power is weakening its very
principles. Let us make no mistake: the only alternative
to multilateralism in a multipolar world is a return to
one consisting of spheres of influence, of which history
has taught us the great dangers. Multilateralism and the
United Nations are at a crossroads today.

My second point is the fact that the threats facing
the international order, which we have inherited, must
be taken extremely seriously. In some cases, they feed
on our failures, but they result far less from the system's
failure than from that ofits members 4 their inability to
unite in the Security Council and their failure to act on
issues such as human rights violations, including women
and children's rights, impunity for the most serious
crimes and the absence of women's representation and
participation in political processes, as well as climate
change and famine, which are closely linked to issues
relating to peace and security and will lead to future
crises. Similarly, the world sees the attitude of every
Council member with regard to the issue of Syria, and
the obstacles or support that they provide in dealing with
that country's conflict within the framework that we set
up for ourselves through resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). However,
such threats are also fuelled by a more fundamental
challenge. It is the challenge posed to the legal and
political principles of multilateralism in the name of
national sovereignty; to the institutions and functioning
of the United Nations, including negotiation and
compromise; and to agreements that have been signed,
such as the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
the 2015 Iranian nuclear deal. With regard to the risks
posed to multilateralism, a collective surge is needed at
a few major levels. And that is the third point I would
like to raise.

First of all, as President Macron reminded the
General Assembly, the principle of State sovereignty
is not at odds with the universality of our principles,
the requirements of the rule of law or with effective
multilateralism. That point is crucial and is a core
principle of the Charter of the United Nations. The
sovereign equality of States is the foundation on which
the United Nations is built. It is the first principle
listed in the Charter. Before that, the Charter outlines
the purposes of the United Nations: the maintenance
of international peace and security, the promotion of
peace, cooperation and respect for human rights. That
means that there is no contradiction between respect
for sovereignty and the effective implementation of
our principles. To make that point even clearer: respect
for State sovereignty does not mean handing over the
Syrian people to the regime's goodwill or ignoring the
fate of the Rohingyas in Burma.

Secondly, promoting and strengthening regional
cooperation is an essential part of multilateralism, and
Chapter VIII of the Charter provides for complementary
United Nations action. The strengthening of relations
between the United Nations and the European Union
and between the United Nations and the African Union,
action in support of African peace operations or the
deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel force and its coordination with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali consistently reflects the vital regional
and subregional dimension. In that regard, I would like
to highlight the Secretary-Generals' commitment to
those various areas.

Thirdly, with regard to the major challenges we
will all face in the future, it is the United Nations
system, together with each one of us, that must provide
the right responses. Whether it is economic and social
inequalities, equality between women and men,
sustainable development, environmental protection and
the fight against climate change or issues related to
education, health or migration, artificial intelligence,
social networks and cybersecurity, we must continue
to create regulation and cooperation methods and rules
of law that will ensure a better future for our societies.
To succeed, now more than ever, the multilateralism
we value must be creative, open to civil society actors,
plugged into the technological revolution under way
and constantly in the process of reinventing itself. We
achieved it through the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the silent revolution to reach the
Sustainable Development Goals. France will pursue
that goal by focusing its 2019 presidency of the Group
of Seven on combating inequality. On the other hand,
we realize that reverting to the notion of every man for
himself would mean simply giving up and preparing for
future crises.

Fourthly, the system's ability to evolve will
determine its effectiveness in meeting the challenges
of this century. Multilateral institutions must undergo
reform and, in many cases, are doing so. However, we
cannot accept their legitimacy or funding being called
into question in the name of an ideological approach.
The Human Rights Council, the International Criminal
Court, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and UNESCO
play an indispensable role that we must protect and
strengthen. If our framework for action is to retain
its legitimacy over time, we must develop and adapt
it. I would therefore like to reiterate France's support
for the reform the Secretary-General has initiated
in three areas: the peace and security architecture,
the development system and the management of
the United Nations. We will defend expanding both
member categories of the Security Council so that its
composition reflects today's balances ofpower, remains
legitimate in everyone's eyes and is strengthened as a
forum for consultation rather than obstruction. In the
same spirit, France, along with Mexico, is taking the
initiative - now supported by 101 Member States and
could be implemented without delay - to suspend the
use of the veto in cases ofmass atrocities. We call on all
States Members of the United Nations, in particular the
other four permanent members of the Security Council,
to join our initiative.

Given the considerable increase in the number
of crises and global challenges, we do not have the
right to simply yield to the temptation to withdraw
and opt for unilateralism. Future generations will not
forgive us, and they would be quite right not to do so.
Multilateralism is a common good, whose positive
effects are not always properly perceived or explained.
Criticizing the United Nations - otherwise referred
to here as UN-bashing - often guarantees a hollow
victory. It is so much easier to do that than to work to
strengthen the United Nations, but it is at odds with
France's demanding and humanist approach. France
calls on all of its partners to recommit to the United
Nations within a framework of renewed and exacting
multilateralism, while working together and employing
what our Foreign Minister, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
refers to as goodwill powers. Such commitment is at
the heart of France's identity and action. That is why
President Macron will host the Paris Peace Forum in two
days' time in Paris, which will bring together all global
governance stakeholders - Governments, institutions,
civil society actors and citizens - to discuss major
global issues and develop collective responses together.
That is the challenge for our generation.

