Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting, which
we find very relevant and useful in the light of the
common goal that the three Committees share as
important subsidiary organs of the Security Council in
countering terrorism.

We express appreciation to all three Chairs - Amr
Abdellatif Aboulatta, Kairat Umarov and Sacha Sergio
Llorentty Soliz - and their respective teams for their
dedicated efforts.

With regard the report ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism (CTC), we recognize the indispensable
role that it plays in monitoring the implementation
of resolution 1373 and the other relevant resolutions
on counter-terrorism. Ethiopia also appreciates the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) in implementing the CTC's
decisions. The expert assessments, which provide
assistance to Member States in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions on terrorism, have also
been very useful and relevant. We note in particular the
increase in the number of assessments and their follow-
up on facilitating technical assistance, as reported by
the Chair, and appreciate the CTC as well as CTED for
their efforts in that regard.

We believe that the promotion of regional
cooperation should be strengthened and should also
focus on the most affected countries and regions. It
is right that the assessment visits to Member States
should be followed-up with the facilitation of capacity-
building and technical assistance where there is a need
to fill in the existing gaps. In that regard, we would
like to commend the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other bilateral partners
in their continued engagement with the CTC and the
CTED. We also note that identifying new threats,
emerging trends and potential responses; countering
terrorist financing, transnational organized crimes and
their linkage to the funding of terrorism, the misuse of
social media for the purposes of financing terrorism, as
well as establishing awareness of the increased use of
the Internet and other communication technologies for
terrorist purposes, have also been given due attention
by the Committee.

In all those areas, the engagement and cooperation
of all relevant stakeholders, both public and private,
remain very critical. We appreciate the timely submission
by the Council of the comprehensive international
framework to counter terrorist narratives as requested
by the presidential statement adopted on 11 May 2016
(S/PRST/2016/6). We believe that developing counter-
narratives should benefit from existing good practices
and also take into account respective national contexts
so as to be effective.

The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities is very critical in
overseeing the sanctions measures imposed by the
Security Council on ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated groups, individuals, undertakings and
entities, in accordance with the relevant resolutions. We
appreciate the report and updates that we have received
on the activities of that Committee. We recognize the
important work of the analytical support and sanctions
Monitoring Team in assisting the Committee's work
and commend their expertise and professionalism. The
report rightly points out that Al-Qaida and its affiliates
continue to present a complex and difficult challenge to
international security. Moreover, the emergence of ISIL
has not strategically weakened Al-Qaida. Although
the decline in the number of volunteer fighters going
to Iraq and Syria is good news, we note the growing
challenge with regard to returnees and the relocation of
fighters. We note what South-East Asia and West and
East Africa are experiencing in terms of a rising level
of risk emanating from ISIL and Al-Qaida affiliates.
Therefore, enhanced information sharing among
Member States, as highlighted by the Monitoring Team,
remains vital.

We note with great concern the threat posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials, and of the
possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorists. We believe
that the issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction under the agenda of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) should
be seen from the broader point of View of a total ban
and elimination of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery. The objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
can be best achieved through the gradual control and
reduction of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons,
leading towards their total elimination and prohibition.
In that regard, we welcome the ongoing discussions in
the context of the General Assembly to negotiate and
adopt a comprehensive and universal legally binding
framework on the prohibition of nuclear weapons with
a view to their total elimination. We believe that is
vitally important.

We concur with Ambassador Llorentty Soliz
that cooperation between the three Committees at
the experts' level should continue. As a follow-up to
today's joint briefing, the Chairs of the Committees
could consider convening a joint meeting between the
Committees at the experts' level to identify concrete
measures or mechanisms that could help to further
enhance the existing cooperation with a View to
preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction
into the hands of terrorists. In addition, the possibility
ofthejoint participation ofthe 1540 Committee's Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities in national workshops
and regional meetings in the context of 1540-related
issues could be further explored, where appropriate.
Coordination between the 1540 Committee Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team could also be
envisaged in relation to the capacity-building and
technical assistance provided to Member States or other
organizations. Such joint participation and coordination
would enable the 1540 Committee Group of Experts
and the Monitoring Team to coordinate their responses
to the risks posed by terrorists.

