Mr. Bolton (United States of America): As
mandated by resolution 1546 (2004), I am pleased to
report to the Council, on behalf of the 30 countries
making up the multinational force, on the force's
efforts and progress to fulfil its mandate. During this
reporting period, at the request of the Iraqi
Government, the Council unanimously extended that
mandate until 3] December 2006.

We cannot, and should not, gloss over the
violence and instability in Iraq. To do so would show
disrespect to those, foreign and Iraqi, who have lost
their lives fighting for a federal, democratic, pluralistic
and unified Iraq. At the same time, however, we cannot
dismiss Iraq's successful political transition or the
strides made in training and equipping Iraq's security
forces.

As in the run-up to the October referendum, there
has been an increase in insurgent attacks leading up to
tomorrow's election. Insurgent attacks remain
concentrated in four of Iraq's 18 provinces: Baghdad,
Ninewa, Al Anbar and Salahaddin. Although about 80
per cent of all attacks are directed against the
multinational force, about 80 per cent of all casualties
are suffered by the Iraqi population. While attacks on
Iraq's infrastructure account for a small portion of total
attacks, they continue to have a significant impact on
the Iraqi Government's oil revenue and provoke public
dissatisfaction with essential services. Attacks on
infrastructure have increased in this reporting period,
but are below the historic highs of 2004.

Multinational force operations are coordinated
with local officials, tribes and/or clerics. Those
operations have disrupted key insurgent cells, limited
insurgents' movement and facilitated progress in
reconstruction and democracy-building. The dramatic
increase in intelligence tips provided by the population
in recent months has been crucial, and indicates
increasing popular rejection of the insurgents. In
March 2005, Iraqi and multinational forces received
more than 400 intelligence tips from Iraqi citizens. In
August 2005, they received 3,300, and in September
2005 more than 4,700.

Despite persistent security challenges, significant
progress has been made in wresting territory from
enemy control. Due to multinational-force- and Iraqi-
led operations, parts of Iraq previously under terrorist
control are now under the control of the Iraqi
Government. Furthermore, residents of those areas can
participate freely in the political process, which
continues to move forward. In rural Iraq, Iraqi and
multinational forces have worked to clear out hard core
enemy elements, maintaining a security presence and
building local institutions to advance local
reconstruction and civil society.

The multinational force continues to work with
the Iraqi Government to train and equip the Iraqi
security forces (ISF). We have worked together to
identify a force structure to meet Iraq's security needs,
and we continually reassess force requirements based
on current threats. The goal is to complete total force
generation - which refers to institutional capacity -
by August 2007. Despite repeated brutal attacks
against ISF volunteers, recruiting continues to outpace
demand, even as the ISF rapidly expands. Nor are
those recruits only from the Shia and Kurdish
communities, as some erroneously assert. In the past
several months, nearly 5,000 recruits have joined from
Sunni areas. As one senior military official has said,
"Iraqi security forces are fighting hard. They are
fighting well. They are not cracking under pressure.
And they are making a tremendous contribution."

The ISF, which now numbers more than 214,000,
continues to develop despite an insurgency actively
attempting to disrupt the forces' development, destroy
their infrastructure and equipment and intimidate
recruits. Iraqis are taking on more of the fight, both in
combat missions and follow-on operations, including
bringing supplies, medical help and other services to
return affected communities to normalcy.

Specific examples of Iraqi Ministry of Defence
and Ministry of Interior forces progressing in their
ability to take ownership of Iraqi security including the
following.

Iraqi units are increasingly able to take the lead in
combat operations against the insurgency. Ninety-
seven Iraqi army and special operations battalions are
conducting combat operations against the enemy. Of
the 97 operational army and special operations units,
38 have the security lead, with multinational force
support, or are fully independent. There are also 28
special police force battalions capable of combat
operations.

The Iraqi security forces are assuming more
battle space and preparing to assume command and
control responsibilities at the division level. In June
2004, no Iraqi security force unit controlled territory.
At present, Iraqi forces are responsible for security in
Najaf, Karbala and much of Baghdad province. Other
Iraqi battalions and brigades control hundreds of
square miles of territory in other provinces with
multinational force support and assistance. In
September 2005, 11 Iraqi battalions participated in
operations in Tal Afar, controlling their own battle
space and outnumbering multinational forces for the
first time in a major offensive operation. Over the last
six months, the number of patrols being conducted
independently by Iraqi forces has doubled, bringing the
overall percentage to nearly a quarter of all patrols in
theatre.

The number of operational units and individuals
trained, equipped and formed has increased. More than
102,000 Ministry of Defence soldiers, sailors and
airmen have been trained and equipped. In addition,
75,000 police and highway patrol officers have been
trained and equipped. They work alongside 37,000 other
Ministry of Interior forces for a total of approximately
112,000. Overall, that represents an approximate 12 per
cent increase in Ministry of Defence and Ministry of
Interior forces trained and equipped for
counterinsurgency operations in the last five months.

However, while acknowledging all of that
success, we must also acknowledge that the Iraqi
forces are not yet ready to conduct independent
operations unilaterally without the multinational
force's assistance. The multinational force stands ready
to continue to provide that assistance.

The distinct entities of the multinational force -
notably the Georgians, Romanians and South Koreans -
continue to provide security for the United Nations in
Baghdad, Basra and Erbil, respectively. They provide
static site security, reconnaissance, security patrols,
convoy escorts, checkpoints, and, where necessary,
MEDEVAC and emergency evacuation.

The United Nations contributions, most notably
preparations for tomorrow's election, are vital. We urge
the United Nations to continue to fulfil its mandate as
per resolution 1546 (2004). Considerable work,
including humanitarian and reconstruction assistance,
remains to be done, and expansion is necessary for the
United Nations Assistance Mission For Iraq (UNAMI)
to do that work and fulfil its mandate. We are pleased,
as Under-Secretary-General Gambari just said, to have
signed last week a memorandum of understanding
between the United States and the United Nations to
codify the security arrangements for UNAMI currently
in place.

Even with the progress I have outlined today, the
multinational force and its Iraqi partners continue to
face multiple challenges in the security sphere. Those
include countering the intimidation and brutality of
enemies who are not constrained by law or moral
norms; building representative Iraqi security forces and
institutions whose first loyalties are to the Iraqi
Government; neutralizing the actions of such countries
as Syria and Iran, which provide comfort and support
to terrorists and the enemies of democracy in Iraq;
understanding the composition of and relationships
between terrorists and other enemy networks;
addressing the militias and armed groups that are
outside the formal security sector and central
Government command; ensuring that the security
ministries have the capacity to sustain Iraq's new army
and police forces; and integrating political, economic
and security tools - and synchronizing them with
Iraqi Government efforts - to foster good and
transparent governance, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and the well-being of all Iraqi citizens.

The multinational force is serving its mandate
and working with the Iraqi Government to build
security and stability in Iraq. The force is helping the
Iraqis develop police forces and combat units, as well
as the elements necessary to manage, control and
sustain them. It is moving towards fulfilling its
mandate and it looks forward to the day when the
Iraqis are able to assume full responsibility for the
maintenance of security and stability in Iraq.

Lastly, I know I speak for all members of the
multinational force and the Council in wishing Iraq a
safe and successful election tomorrow. It is important
that Iraq's election be transparent and inclusive. We
urge all Iraqis to participate in the election to make
their views known regarding the future of Iraq. We
welcome the efforts of the Iraqis, the United Nations
and other members of the international community that
are enabling Iraqi citizens to participate in their
political process.

