Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-fifth report on
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2014/314, annex). We
applaud his continued efforts over the past five years
in ensuring the full implementation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace.

Rwanda is concerned by the continued deterioration
of the political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina at
the national and states levels alike. The main concern
for us is the increasing rhetoric by senior officials of
Republika Srpska, including President Milorad Dodik,
predicting and advocating the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the independence of the Republika
Srpska, as well as the attempt to link the situation in
Ukraine as a motivating factor for the future secession
from the State. We recall that the self-determination of
any State within the country would be in violation of
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We
urge the authorities in the Republika Srpska to refrain
from any negative rhetoric and to engage constructively
in efforts towards national unity and reconciliation.

The immediate consequence of such rhetoric is a
lack of the political will that would be fundamental to
reaching an agreement on many legislative proposals.
Those include legislation related to State and defence
property, which is important for making progress in
the implementation of the outstanding objectives of
the "5+2" agenda as prerequisites for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative. The current
stalemate in the political situation is an impediment for
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to reach their
Euro-Atlantic integration goal, and we hope that the
benefits of such integration will be a driving factor for
overcoming the gridlock.

Despite positive economic growth and improvement
of the foreign trade balance in 2013, the economic
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still dire, with
a very high unemployment rate, at almost half of the
active population, a sharp decrease in foreign direct
investment and serious fiscal challenges. All political
actors must show resolve, solidarity and a sense of
responsibility to improve the economic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The demonstrations that were held in February
in several cities of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, mainly in Mostar, resulting from
frustration over the socioeconomic situation, were an
indication that local official needs to strengthen the
fight against corruption. However, it is regrettable that
what should have been a peaceful demonstration turned
violent, causing injuries to a number of police officers,
protestors and journalists. We strongly condemn the
destruction of public property, and in particular the
burning of the presidency building. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will continue
supporting the local authorities in preserving peace and
safety for the local population.

In the meantime, we are disappointed that no
tangible action has been taken by domestic authorities
and political parties to implement the 2011 ruling of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court on
the current electoral system in Mostar. We call on all
political actors to assume their responsibility and to end
the crisis and to enable the election for a functioning
city council.

We welcome the appointment of two new judges to
the Federation's Constitutional Court, and we hope that
the appointment of the remaining ninth judge will take
place in the near future. In that respect, we encourage
the relevant authorities to complete the establishment
of a functional, vital, national interest panel within the
Court, ahead of the October general elections so as to
ensure the smooth and timely formation of the post-
election Government.

With regard to the ruling of the European Court of
Human Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case, we commend
the efforts made by senior European Union officials
to find a lasting solution. We encourage the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble their
efforts in order to reach an agreement on a constitutional
amendment that provides equal political rights for
all the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
minorities.

Next month, as we commemorate the centenary
of the First World War and the attack in Sarajevo, as
mentioned by Mr. Inzko, we also recall that next July
the world will commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide against the Bosniaks in Srebrenica,
committed only one year after the genocide against
the Tutsi in Rwanda. We Rwandans believe that paying
tribute to the victims and survivors of that tragedy
should begin by fighting against the deniers of the
genocide. We therefore call upon all political actors
in the country to assume responsibility and to avoid
questioning the decision of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia in the Kristie case and to
work towards healing, reconciliation and the economic
empowerment of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

