Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like at the outset to welcome the
presence in the Council of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, Hoshyar Zebari. I would like also to
thank Mr. Ashraf Qazi as well as Ambassador
Khalilzad for their respective briefings.

For my part, I will make the following comments.

My first comment concerns the situation on the
ground, which is clearly of concern. It is of concern
first of all in terms of security, even though it is still
probably too early to assess the new measures taken, in
particular the plan put in place in Baghdad. The picture
remains a gloomy one. Iraq is the scene of too many
attacks. Today's fresh attack against the Shi'ite mosque
in Samarra is proof of this. France vigorously
condemns that attacks and calls on all parties to
exercise utmost restraint.

The people of Iraq continue to pay a very high
price. Hundreds, probably thousands, of innocent
people have been killed in the past few weeks. The
Green Zone itself is now hit on a regular basis, even
the Parliament, which was the target of a suicide
attack. In addition, the militias - whose deadly
activities we had hoped would decrease - have,
according to the Secretary-General, resumed their
assassinations and kidnappings.

The situation on the ground is of concern also in
humanitarian terms. The Secretary-General confirms
that Iraq is experiencing a major crisis, stating that the
situation is continuing to deteriorate. Between 30,000
and 50,000 Iraqis are leaving the country each month,
in addition to the 4 million Iraqis who are internally
displaced or refugees within or outside the country.

Above and beyond this, it is urgent now more
than ever to work collectively to seek solutions. Along
those lines, a number of developments should be noted.

First of all, at the internal level, the Secretary-
General has noted some progress, and we hope that it
will continue and enable the political process to

proceed. I would also note the Iraqi Government's
adoption of a draft hydrocarbon law which will now be
debated and approved by the Parliament. It is a draft
that, we know, deals with the key question of how to
distribute Iraq's wealth.

I would also note the upcoming conclusions of
the work of the Constitutional Review Committee,
which has been done in cooperation with United
Nations teams and whose vital importance is clear to
all.

At the regional level, some developments have
taken place such as the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting,
which brought together a number of neighbouring
countries on the basis of important principles such as
the stability and unity of Iraq and refusal to interfere in
its internal affairs, and made it possible also to lay the
foundation for strengthened regional cooperation in the
areas of security, energy and refugees.

Finally, there have been some international
developments: the holding of the conference organized
by the High Commissioner for Refugees on the
question of displaced persons - now a priority issue
for the United Nations - and the launching of the
International Compact with Iraq.

It is now necessary to build on this beginning
momentum. Of course, the solution rests with Iraq and
with a true process of national reconciliation, one that
is as inclusive as possible and that will isolate those
forces that want to see Iraq fail. That requires all Iraqi
officials to come to an agreement on key issues, first of
all on the equitable sharing of power and of resources,
which must be the subject of a broad consensus.

The countries of the region, which have no
interest in seeing chaos prevail in Iraq, will themselves
need to play their full role. All efforts that would allow
them to contribute to the stabilization of Iraq should be
encouraged. In that respect, it is important that the
working groups on the questions of security, energy
and humanitarian issues, whose establishment was
decided at Sharm el-Sheikh on 4 May, develop specific
proposals for cooperation. France, of course, fully
agrees with the call of the Secretary-General to
maintain the momentum established at Sharm el-
Sheikh.

Finally, the international community must remain
mobilized to maintain this international and regional
momentum. That is why the Secretary-General went to
Baghdad, thereby sending a strong message. It is the
reason for the International Compact with Iraq, which
is an ambitious project that can function only if there is
respect for reciprocal commitments without losing
sight of the political dimension of the problem.

That is the goal of the commitment of United
Nations, which continues to play a major role in
stabilizing Iraq under very difficult conditions and
which could, as the Secretary-General has suggested,
perhaps play a broader role - provided, of course, that
security requirements are fully respected. It is also the
objective of the Multinational Force in Iraq, whose
mandate, pursuant to resolution 1723 (2006), will draw
to a close once the Iraqi forces are fully responsible for
maintaining security and stability in the country.

