Mr. Denisov (spoke in Russian): As Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), I would like,
at today's meeting, to inform the Security Council
about the Committee's activities during the past three
months, as well as to introduce the fourteenth work
programme for the next 90-day period, namely, from
1 January to 31 March 2005.

Before making my briefing, I would like to take
this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
delegations of Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and
Spain for their outstanding contributions to the work of
the Committee during their membership of the Security
Council. I would also like to welcome the delegations
of Argentina, Denmark, Greece, Japan and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which have already participated
actively in the activities of the CTC as new members
of the Council.

I should like to begin the first open briefing of
2005 by reviewing the Council's work during 2004.
Security Council resolutions 1535 (2004), 1540 (2004)
and 1566 (2004), as well as other decision adopted by
the Council, have created a new and more
comprehensive and multifaceted agenda for the
Council in the area of counter-terrorism. The Council's
ongoing focus on various aspects of counter-terrorism
has created additional challenges for the CTC. That
requires additional efforts to accelerate the
revitalization process as part of a changing agenda in
the fight against terrorism, especially in terms of
making the CTC's Executive Directorate (CTED) fully
operational.

The Committee has also focused particular
attention on building up the Committee's capacity by
developing new practical ways and means to carry out
more effective monitoring of Member States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). I would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
the Executive Director of the CTED, Mr. Javier
Ruperez, and his staff for their useful work and
valuable contribution to the work of the Committee.
During the period covered by the thirteenth work
programme, the CTC has continued to rely upon the
support of the Secretariat. We are extremely grateful to
the entire staff of the Secretariat for its assistance.

Reviewing the reports submitted to the
Committee by Member States in conformity with
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) and maintaining
a regular dialogue with States have continued to be the
primary means by which the CTC has monitored the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution and
built up the capacity of States in the area of counter-
terrorism. The Committee had received 551 reports
from Member States and other entities by 31 December
2004. That included the first reports from 191 Member
States and six reports from other entities, 160 second
reports from Member States and two reports from other
entities, 119 third reports from Member States and one
report from another entity, and 72 fourth reports from
Member States. I should note that, in the coming
months, the CTC will receive the fifth series of reports
from a number of Member States.

At the same time, however, an analysis of the
CTC's experience with regard to reviewing Member
States' reports has identified two problems that require
that we take special measures to resolve. The first has
to do with the shortage in the number of experts. We
hope that problem will be resolved once the CTED
becomes operational. The Committee had planned to
review 40 reports during the period covered by the
thirteenth work programme. However, the Committee
actually surpassed that target, reviewing a total of 49
reports. Nevertheless, that is less than the 65 reports
the Committee reviewed during previous 90-day
periods. Another subject of concern in that regard
pertains to the increase in the number of Member
States that have failed to submit their reports in
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) to the
Committee in a timely manner. On 16 December 2004,
the Chairman of the CTC presented to the President of
the Security Council an official list of 75 Member
States that had not met their obligations under the
timetable established to submit their reports to the
CTC. I would like to emphasize that, operating through
the CTED, the Committee is prepared to provide
Member States with the necessary assistance and
guidelines on issues relating to their implementation of
the resolution, including assistance to guarantee the
timely submission of reports. The CTC has also begun
to review that problem in a broader context. Effective
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) calls for more than just reviewing reports; it
requires additional means and resources.

The Committee has also continued to make
efforts to develop new approaches to providing
technical assistance. In that regard, the Committee is
beginning to undertake analytical work to assess the
assistance needs of Member States, with a view to
including that analysis in the process of reviewing
reports. Following the guidelines of the CTC, the
experts of the CTED have already prepared first drafts
of assessment letters to various Member States. With
the consent of the States concerned, the Committee
intends to provide such assessment data to interested
donor States and organizations. The Committee will
continue to carry out its work in accordance with that
approach, strengthening the role of the CTC in the
global coordination of technical assistance in order to
enhance the effectiveness of such assistance and
harmonize it with the actual needs of States. The
Committee will also continue to update the Directory
of Counter-Terrorism Information and Sources of
Assistance and the Assistance Matrix, as important
sources of information for Member States interested in
receiving technical assistance.

In accordance with resolution 1566 (2004), which
reaffirmed the Security Council's appeal to all Member
States to accede to the 12 international conventions and
protocols related to terrorism, the CTC has continued
to take steps to achieve that goal as a matter of priority.
The Committee focused in particular on prompt
ratification of all 12 conventions and on the importance
of effectively incorporating their provisions into
national legislation, regardless of whether or not a
State is party to a regional convention related to
terrorism. The CTC will continue to encourage
Member States to accede to the 12 relevant
international conventions and protocols and will
regularly monitor progress in that area.

With respect to the achievements of the
Committee over the past three months, I should like to
underscore the fact that the Committee has essentially
completed its preparations for the CTC's first visit to
several Member States, in implementation of
resolutions 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004), taking into
account the particular importance of such visits to
achieving the aim of the revitalization of the CTC. The
Committee has accelerated its work to prepare for
those visits, the first of which is slated for March of
this year.

Since November last, the CTC has been carrying
out preliminary consultations with several Member
States regarding a possible time-table and conditions
for the implementation of CT C visits. The Committee
is committed to the idea of implementing such visits to
Member States in order to develop a deeper and more
direct dialogue with national Governments, to enhance
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), and to ensure a more accurate assessment of
the capacities of States and of their needs in terms of
technical assistance for the full implementation of the
resolution.

The CTC attaches great importance to broadening
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with the
action plan agreed at the special meeting of the
Committee on 6 March 2003.

During the period under review, the CTC actively
prepared for its fourth special meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The Committee commends the proposal of the
Commonwealth of Independent States jointly to
organize that meeting in Almaty, Kazakhstan, from 26
to 28 January 2005, as well as the efforts of the
Government of Kazakhstan to prepare for it.

The Committee deems of particular importance
the further development of its relations with
international, regional and subregional organizations
and will maintain the existing practical thrust of its
measures in implementing the decisions of the Almaty
meeting in order to strengthen the global counter-
terrorism network.

Over the last three months, the CTC has
continued to abide by the fundamental principle of
transparency in its work. The web page of the
Committee has been regularly updated and improved. I
should note that, thanks to the efforts of the Secretariat,
it is currently accessible in all official languages of the
United Nations.

In accordance with resolution 1566 (2004), the
CTC was fully resolved to broaden its interaction and
coordination with other structures of the United
Nations involved in fighting terrorism. One example of
this kind of cooperation was the participation of the
CTC, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the seminar held in
late November and early December 2004 in Paraguay
on a draft resolution on counter-terrorism.

The Committee devoted particular attention to
further cooperation with the Security Council
committees involved in various aspects of the
prevention of terrorism - the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-
Qaida and the Taliban, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on non-proliferation
in the context of the threat of terrorism.

The Chairmen of the three committees have held
informal meetings in order to find new areas of
cooperation and coordination among the Committees.
That approach has contributed to greater agreement in
the implementation of a single, comprehensive strategy
of the Security Council in the fight against terrorism.
On that basis, the Chairmen of the Committees
established under resolution 1267 (1999) and
resolution 1540 (2004), respectively, were invited to
take part in the fourth special meeting of the CTC in
Almaty.

Furthermore, the Committee has maintained
cooperation between experts of the CTC and the
Monitoring Group on sanctions against Al Qaeda and
the Taliban. The CTC will also seek to establish
appropriate contacts with the newly appointed experts
of the Committee established under resolution 1540
(2004), as well as the working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004). Such cooperation among the
committees must take place in full compliance with the
rules of procedure and the mandates of the relevant
organs.

In conclusion, I would like to make several
general comments regarding the fourteenth work
programme of the CTC.

In the next three months, two practical tasks have
a high priority - first, implementation of the first
visits to Member States, and, secondly, the convening
of the fourth special meeting of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
Almaty. However, all of the goals set forth in the
programme can be achieved only on the condition that
the CTED becomes fully operational as soon as
possible. At this time, now that the CTED budget has
been adopted and work on its administrative
mechanisms has been completed, it is of particular
importance to recruit in a timely manner experts and
staff whose qualifications accord with the requirements
and tasks related to the revitalization of the CTC.

