Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zarif
for his briefing. We welcome Foreign Ministers Thaci
and Dacic' back to the Security Council.

I commend both countries for their continued
dedication to the normalization of relations. We
particularly welcome Kosovo's continuing integration
into the community of States, as demonstrated by its
participation in regional meetings and forums in recent
months. Specifically, we congratulate Kosovo on its
recognition by the International Olympic Committee,
and look forward to seeing Kosovo's athletes competing
under the Kosovo flag in Rio de Janeiro in 2016.

The United States welcomes the successful
formation of a Government in Kosovo in December
2014. Although the process took time, it represents
the first democratic transition of political authority
resulting from free and fair elections across the entirety
of Kosovo's territory. This coalition Government and
the process that led to its formation demonstrated the
resilience and vitality of Kosovo's democratic and
political institutions. The United States appreciates the
leadership of President Jahjaga in helping to facilitate
the political dialogue that led to the formation of the
Government in accordance with Kosovo's Constitution.

The new Government, which includes representatives
of minority communities, has been tested over the past
month by violent protests and by the separation from
Government service yesterday of the Minister for
Communities and Returns. The importance of a fully
representative, fully participatory and multi-ethnic
Government and Parliament cannot be understated.

With respect to the protests, let us be clear: all
citizens have the democratic right to protest, but
violence is illegal and unacceptable. We condemn all
acts of vandalism to public and private property, and
the intimidation ofjournalists and television crews. All
citizens of Kosovo should exercise their democratic
rights, and they should do so legally and responsibility.
We encourage the new Government to move quickly
to address the socioeconomic challenges in the country.
Economic growth and new employment opportunities
will demonstrate to the citizens of Kosovo, regardless of
ethnicity, that they have a prosperous and free future at
home, thereby stemming the tide of migration out of the
country. Additionally, we encourage efforts by Kosovo
to undertake the measures necessary to encourage the
return of those displaced, both internally and outside
of Kosovo, as a result of the conflict, including by
adjudicating property claims and enforcing court
decisions.

We will continue to urge Serbia, Kosovo and all
States in the region to increase cooperation at their
shared borders. Such cooperation will advance the rule
of law, increase security and counter criminal activity,
including smuggling and trafficking in persons.

We again condemn the actions of those who seek
to oppose the work of building inclusive democracy in
Kosovo by committing acts of violence of by sowing
tension, mistrust and fear among communities.
The use of violence against religious pilgrims, as
we unfortunately saw in Gjakova/Dakovica on
Orthodox Christmas, is clearly unacceptable. All
sides must guarantee the freedom of movement for
local populations. To that end, the Kosovo Force and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
continue to exercise indispensable roles in facilitating a
safe and secure environment.

The United States notes the visit of Prime Minister
Vucie to Kosovo in January, and the cooperation of
Kosovo authorities to provide protection. That act was
another step towards the normalization of relations. The
European Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue
and the implementation of the April 2013 Agreement
continue to be critical elements of building a strong,
inclusive and multi-ethnic democracy in Kosovo. We
welcome next week's high-level meetings in Brussels
and we hope that the session on Monday will lead to
concrete progress that will directly benefit the citizens
of both countries.

The United States commends Serbia and Kosovo
as well for their work in combating foreign terrorist
fighters, as demonstrated by their attendance at the
first ministerial-level plenary session of the counter-
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant coalition, held
in Brussels in December. Kosovo's dedication to that
effort is also apparent in the recent work to arrest and
prosecute foreign terrorist fighters in Kosovo and by
the introduction of a law to criminalize participation in
such activity.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that, while
the United States believes that the situation in Kosovo
remains an important issue and and there is much work
to be done to advance the dialogue, there is important
work to be done to discuss issues critical for long-term
stability, reconciliation and development in the region.
There is little, however, that such regular briefings
contribute to those issues. We reiterate our preference
that the Council extend the reporting period for the
Secretary-General to every six months.

