Mr. J enie (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to express to you, Mr. President, my delegation's
appreciation for convening this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I should also like to welcome in our
midst Mr. Massimo D'Alema, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy.

We thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing. We also appreciate the
participation in this debate of Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and we are grateful for
his important presentation.

Afghanistan has been undergoing a steady
transformation since it emerged from armed conflict.
Progress has been visible in the economic and political
spheres. The launch of the Afghanistan Compact and
the successful holding of presidential elections in
October 2004 marked major achievements in the
country.

Yet, at this moment, optimism about peace,
stability and economic development in Afghanistan
seems to be seriously challenged by the increase in the
activities of insurgent forces in some parts of the
country. My delegation is concerned about the harmful
effects of those activities on the Government's capacity
to provide security and basic services to the Afghan
people and to ensure the enjoyment of their
fundamental freedoms and basic rights.

In that regard, we commend various initiatives
proposed by the Afghan Government with a view to
enhancing security in the country. However, we believe
that all parties - including the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) - should continue to take all
necessary measures to prevent civilian casualties in
their operations.

Considering the fact that, as indicated in the
Secretary-General' s report (S/2007/ l 5 2), the
revitalization of the insurgency has also been caused
by adverse socio-political factors such as popular
alienation, the monopolization of power and the
marginalization of those outside the dominant social
and political groups, we hold the view that civic
measures that include reconciliation, participatory
decision-making and inclusive political processes are
also of critical importance for the achievement of
sustainable peace in the country.

My delegation also attaches great significance to
the national unity programmes - including at the
village level - that the Afghan Government is
currently promoting. We hope that those programmes
can help to promote national ownership through the
participatory contributions and inclusive involvement
of all segments of Afghan society.

My delegation welcomes the positive
developments that the country has achieved in its
economic sector. We hope that the decline in the
inflation rate and the increase in development
expenditures will promote further economic progress.
Afghanistan's trade relations with key countries in the
region, which amounted to more than $2.5 billion in
2006, are also an encouraging achievement. We
commend the increase in Afghanistan's economic
cooperation with regional partners, and we believe that
its enhancement will help to integrate the country into
the regional dynamics and the global economy.

My delegation also underlines the significance of
regional initiatives in the political and security fields
that include Afghanistan. Close cooperation with
Pakistan is of particular importance, given the presence
of cross-border elements in the security of both
countries.
With regard to border cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, my delegation sees some
opportunities for both countries to develop joint
programmes along the border. On the basis of our
experience in advancing border diplomacy with
neighbouring countries, the establishment of a jointly
administered economic zone and the joint development
of traditional commerce involving local merchants at
the borders have proved viable.

My delegation welcomes the establishment of the
Tripartite Commission, which involves a military
component from Afghanistan and Pakistan, in addition
to ISAF. We hold the view that similar mechanisms
aimed at promoting political dialogue should be
considered.

My delegation is also concerned about the
difficulties that the narco-economy has brought to the
efforts of the people and the Government of
Afghanistan to reconstruct their country. The 2007
UNODC survey predicts that an increase in the main
poppy-growing areas of the southern provinces could
result in an overall increase in opium poppy cultivation
in 2007.

We fully share the views of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
UNODC Executive Director as to the importance of
introducing alternative sustainable livelihoods to the
community as part of the overall efforts to decrease
opium cultivation. The successful story of the Golden
Triangle in South-East Asia could be taken as one
lesson learned.

With regard to UNAMA, my delegation applauds
the role that the Mission has played in supporting the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We welcome UNAMA's
intention to increase the number of its provincial
offices. In our View, that step will help to build the
capacity of local governments to provide basic services
and promote good governance.

UNAMA's contribution to the rebuilding of
Afghanistan will remain pivotal in the future.
Considering the magnitude of the challenges that
Afghanistan continues to face, my delegation supports
the continuing role of UNAMA in assisting the Afghan
people and Government in achieving their goals.

