Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this urgent meeting to address the critical
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly the grave humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip; as a result of the continued siege being
imposed by Israel, the occupying Power.

Before proceeding, allow me to congratulate you
and your country Croatia upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month, and to
also take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation to Costa Rica for its most able and wise
leadership of the Council last month. At this time, I
wish also to convey our appreciation to the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya for its call for today's meeting to
address the serious issues before us.

The situation in the whole of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem; remains
extremely critical due to Israel's continuing violation of
the human rights of the Palestinian people and its
continuing colonization of Palestinian land by unlawful
means and measures. Today, however, I wish to
specifically address the crisis that is prevailing in the
Gaza Strip, where more than 1.5 million Palestinians -
including children, women, the elderly, and ill and
disabled persons - are facing miserable socio-
economic conditions, a dire humanitarian crisis and the
virtual collapse of their society and all coping
mechanisms as a result of Israel's total siege and
closure of the area, which have obstructed even
humanitarian aid from reaching the Palestinian civilian
population.

In that regard, we regret that the Libyan ship
Al-Marwa, which was attempting to deliver desperately
needed humanitarian supplies to the population, was
prevented from doing so by the occupying Power. This
effort was undertaken following the recent call on the
Arab countries by the League of Arab States Council of
Ministers to provide emergency humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people under occupation,
particularly in the Gaza Strip, in order to alleviate their
suffering and impoverishment resulting from the severe
Israeli restrictions on the movement of persons and
goods.

The Palestinian Authority expresses its
appreciation for this Libyan effort and the good-will
intentions to provide aid to our people by such
extraordinary means, necessitated by the most unusual,
08-63224
unacceptable and indeed deplorable circumstances in
which our people find themselves.

We have come before the Security Council on
several occasions to draw attention to the humanitarian
catastrophe that is unfolding in the Gaza Strip as a
result of Israel's illegal punitive measures, and we have
repeatedly called upon the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities under the United Nations Charter and
act to bring an end to the inhuman siege and to compel
Israel to comply with its obligations under
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law.

In addition, there have been numerous reports by
the Secretary-General and by several United Nations
agencies highlighting the critical situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, has specifically briefed
the Council on the grim, deplorable situation in the
Gaza Strip, and Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, have also come before this Council
numerous times, conveying the urgency and the stark
reality of the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
and calling on Israel to lift its siege as well as calling
for a new approach to the situation in Gaza.
Regrettably, despite all our urgent pleas and repeated
appeals, no measures have been undertaken to address
that unjust situation.

Assessed under any pretext and in any context,
Israel's collective punishment of the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip constitutes a grave
violation of article 33 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which, inter alia, prohibits the occupying
Power from punishing a protected person for an
offence he or she has not personally committed and
prohibits the imposition of collective penalties and
likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism.
This provision of the Convention, whose direct purpose
and intention is the protection of the civilian
population in time of war, is being breached by Israel
on a massive scale, constituting a war crime against the
Palestinian people - a crime for which the occupying
Power should be held fully accountable.

As we are all aware, since this crisis has unfolded
before the eyes of the international community, the
l7-m0nth-long Israeli siege has transformed the Gaza

Strip into an open-air prison that is not only totally
separated from the rest of the Palestinian territory, but
also completely isolated from the rest of the world.
Israel has continued to impose this most severe and
inhumane form of closure, even after the calm that has

largely prevailed - despite several violations,
including Israeli military attacks last month that killed
dozens of Palestinians - since June of this year,

following the ceasefire agreement reached through
Egyptian mediation efforts, which were intended to
break the cycle of violence as well as the blockade.

The occupying Power continues to close all of the
Gaza Strip's border crossings and allowing only for the
infrequent opening of some crossings under many
restrictions. Restrictions continue to be imposed on the
import of food, medicine, fuel, building materials and
other essential supplies. That has caused a shortage of
all necessities and is causing extensive human
deprivation. Even purely humanitarian aid is being
obstructed, as recently witnessed. In addition,
Palestinian exports continue to be completely
prohibited by the occupying Power, destroying
thousands of livelihoods.

At the same time, Israel continues to obstruct the
movement of persons, including patients requiring
emergency medical treatment unavailable in Gaza,
many of whom have died waiting for the right to travel
outside Gaza. Israel also continues to hamper the
access of humanitarian personnel to Gaza, including
those working for United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which continues its valiant
efforts to provide assistance to nearly 1 million
refugees there despite the many restrictions, obstacles
and shortages of supplies.

Every sector of life in the Gaza Strip has been
disrupted by this criminal and punitive siege. Poverty,
hunger, disease and unemployment have risen to
alarming levels. In our world today, as we collectively
face the growing economic and food crises and seek a
panacea for them, I would like the members of the
Council to pause to consider the following harsh
realities that the Palestinian people in Gaza are being
forced to endure, not as a result of a natural disaster or
some unforeseen global development, but rather as a
result of deliberate, unlawful policies carried out by the
occupying Power, which are intended to punish the
population and plunge it into desperation.
5
Today, 80 per cent of the civilians in Gaza - the
majority of whom are refugees and 50 per cent of
whom are children - live below the poverty line.
Eighty per cent of the population is also dependent on
food aid for survival. More than 95 per cent of the
industries, businesses and workshops are now closed,
and nearly 50 per cent of the workforce is unemployed.
Health and sanitation systems and other infrastructure
are falling into disrepair and decay as spare parts and
building materials - including for United Nations
projects - remain restricted and in scarce supply,
hastening the collapse of those systems.

As reported by various United Nations agencies
and international organizations, the negative short- and
long-term repercussions of this crisis for the
Palestinian people and their institutions, public
services and infrastructure are vast and will be
catastrophic if this situation continues. Moreover,
without redress, tensions, insecurity and despair in the
Gaza Strip will continue to rise and will further
destabilize the entire situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, with all the destructive
ramifications that that would have for the fragile and
struggling peace process and thus the prospects for
stability in the region as a whole.

The Palestinian leadership is engaged in a peace
process and is committed to that process with a view to
achieving a just, lasting and peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine in all its aspects. However, the
existence of the peace process cannot be used as a
cover or distraction by the occupying Power as it
continues its pursuit of illegal policies and practices
that are destroying Palestinian society, destroying
Palestinian land and destroying our chances for
achieving an end to the occupation, an end to the
conflict and real peace for our peoples. Indeed, there is
no legal, political, moral or human justification for the
inhumane policies that Israel is carrying out against the
Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza Strip.

While the Palestinian leadership continues to
make every effort to advance the peace process and to
uphold its commitments, Israel, to the contrary,
continues its illegal practices and provocative actions
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Examples include
its intensification of settlement construction while we
are negotiating and its debilitating and punitive
blockade of the Gaza Strip, ensuring the further
aggravation of tensions, the undermining of confidence
and the continued deterioration of the situation on the

ground. That is to no one's benefit; it will only hasten
the destabilization of the situation and a resurgence of
the deadly cycle of violence, which will surely
sabotage the peace process. Such an outcome must be
averted at all costs and requires urgent action, not
continued tolerance for this totally unjust situation.

It is therefore imperative that Israel be compelled,
first and foremost, to immediately and completely lift
its siege of the Gaza Strip to allow for the movement of
persons and goods in order to ease the isolation and
humanitarian suffering of the Palestinian civilian
population. In that regard, the Palestinian Authority
once again reaffirms its readiness to assume
responsibility for the Palestinian side of Gaza's border
crossings, in line with the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access. Israel should be called upon to
abide by its commitments and legal obligations in that
regard, including vis-a-vis the Palestinian civilian
population under its occupation in the Gaza Strip, in
compliance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, by
which it is bound as the occupying Power.

The international community must act; it cannot
remain on the sidelines as Israel continues to flagrantly
and blatantly breach international law and United
Nations resolutions, which has only emboldened the
occupying Power in its impunity over time.

It is high time that the international community,
including this Security Council, undertake its
collective duty to exert the necessary, serious efforts to
redress the illegal situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and bring an end to Israel's illegal policies and
practices.

Peace can never be realized as long as Israel
continues to defy the law and remains an unwilling
partner in the peace process. The international
community therefore must cease its appeasement of
such behaviour by Israel and must shoulder its
responsibilities to bring about a change of course that
will actually help the parties to truly realize the two -
State solution for peace, a sovereign, independent,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security, based on the
1967 borders. Ultimately, this will bring peace to the
region as a whole.

