I thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their usual cooperation and dedication. I also thank our briefers, Mr. David Beasley and Mr. Omer Badokhon, not only for the relevant information provided this morning but also for the invaluable work that they do in Yemen. People desperately need relief from the conflict and its unjustified consequences. We commend the work of all humanitarian organizations operating in Yemen to mitigate the adverse conditions for life and livelihoods, but this is not a solution. It is merely a transient cure for the symptoms of the conflict. We also recall the importance of the humanitarian response plan. While we welcome additional humanitarian funding, there remains a need for donors that have pledged funds to disburse them with the greatest urgency. A shortage of funds will end life-saving humanitarian assistance. Yemen cannot afford this. In that regard, we also recall the parties' obligations under international law that demand the unhindered passage of humanitarian aid. Moreover, there is a moral onus on all parties to ensure that all persons in need are able to access such aid. The threat of famine is real, but it need not be inevitable. Under-Secretary- General Lowcock has consistently reiterated the various pillars of the solution that made it possible to avert famine in 2018, including funding and support for the economy, and he has emphasized that these remain relevant. Notwithstanding this, we are approaching a dangerous precipice, and it will be unforgivable if critical action is not taken to save the people of Yemen. The fuel shortages in some parts of Yemen add to the suffering, and we call on the parties to work together for a resolution of the crisis. The parties have the ability to work together, as was seen on various occasions, including the most recently concluded prisoner exchange. Dialogue has been the necessary basis upon which that cooperation was achieved, and we call on the parties to continue working with each other and with the Special Envoy's Office in good faith to open the pathway to consolidated peace. We close by noting that the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains an unresolved issue requiring urgent action. The threat of an environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe still lingers, and we appeal for the necessary concrete steps to be taken as soon as possible, before our window of opportunity is permanently closed.
