Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I
congratulate the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I want to thank the Polish Mission for what it did
last to help make everything go smoothly. Before I get
started, I would like to clarify for my Kuwaiti colleague
that they did not take into account everyone's edits,
because we had quite a few, and there were concerns
in the Security Council at the fact that Hamas was not
mentioned in the draft resolution (S/2018/516).

The draft resolution presented by Kuwait represents
a grossly one-sided view of what has taken place in
Gaza in recent weeks. Anyone who cares about the
peace process should vote against it. But make no
mistake: regardless of how others choose to vote, the
United States will oppose the draft resolution and we
will veto it if we must.
The terrorist group Hamas bears primary
responsibility for the awful living conditions in Gaza. It
is Hamas that has served as the de facto Government of
Gaza for last ll years. It is Hamas that has consistently
diverted humanitarian assistance into military
infrastructure, building rockets instead of schools and
terror tunnels instead of hospitals. It is Hamas that
has attacked the very humanitarian access points into
Gaza that are lifelines for the Palestinian people. It is
Hamas and its allies that fired rockets - at least 70 of
them this week alone, indiscriminately - into Israeli
communities. It is Hamas that has incited violent acts at
the boundary fence, purposely infiltrating its terrorist
fighters among civilians and deliberately using innocent
people as human shields. It is Hamas that openly calls
for the destruction of the State of Israel. It is Hamas
that refuses to cooperate with the Palestinian Authority
to unite in the pursuit of peace. And yet Kuwait's draft
resolution makes no mention of Hamas, none at all.

Instead the draft resolution places all the blame on
Israel. Kuwait actually blames Israel for Hamas firing
rockets onto a kindergarten playground in Israel. It
conveniently ignores the fact that there is not one single
Israeli settlement or soldier in Gaza - there have not
been any since 2005. It ignores the fact that, according
to Hamas officials themselves, the majority of those
killed by Israeli Defence Forces in recent weeks were
members of the Hamas terrorist group, not peaceful
civilians. Finally, the draft resolution perpetuates the
bias towards Israel that has long been the hallmark of
the United Nations.

It is draft resolutions like this one that undermine
the credibility of the United Nations in dealing with
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Because this draft
resolution is wildly inaccurate in its characterization
of recent events in Gaza and because it would harm
any efforts aimed at achieving peace, the United States
will oppose it and will veto it if necessary. But there is
an alternative.

For those who are able to bring themselves
to recognize the reality that Hamas terrorism is a
considerable factor in the recent unrest and for the
terrible conditions in Gaza, we are offering a separate
draft resolution (S/2018/520). This draft resolution
rightly places responsibility where it belongs. It
includes many features that Kuwait's draft resolution
lacks. It condemns the indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hamas against Israeli civilian communities. It
condemns Hamas diversion of resources into military
infrastructure. It demands that Hamas stop its deliberate
efforts to put Palestinian civilians at risk at the boundary
fence. By offering this draft resolution, we are giving
members of the Security Council additional options.

They can choose to condemn the terrorists who are
responsible for inciting violence in Gaza and against
condemning a country for acting in self-defence, just as
any of us would do. They can choose to cast their votes
in ways that condemn both parties or neither party.
Finally, they can make the choice to vote in favour of
the Kuwaiti draft resolution and against the American
draft resolution. In doing that, they would make it clear
that they believe that all responsibility lies with Israel
and none lies with the Hamas terrorist group.

The situation in Gaza is truly tragic. No one should
have to live in such conditions. The United States
remains fully determined to pursue a long-term peace
agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Such an agreement would benefit the entire Middle
East region, and most especially the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples. But a necessary precondition for peace
is recognition of reality. One of those realities is that
Hamas is a major impediment to peace. It is in Charge
of Gaza and it uses its resources not to help the people
of Gaza but to wage war against Israel.

Another reality is when the United Nations sides
with terrorists over Israel, as the Kuwaiti draft resolution
does, it only makes a peaceful resolution ofthis conflict
harder to reach. We strongly encourage the Security
Council to vote against Kuwait's draft resolution and
to acknowledge the concerns about Hamas by voting in
favour of the United States draft resolution. Everyone
at this table has a choice e either to support Hamas or
not. This vote will tell the story.

