Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate
on a matter that my delegation believes to be of particular
importance, given its topical and sensitive nature. We are
also grateful for the report by Mr. Holmes this morning.

The Security Council has provided the legal
framework for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006). This legal framework should
be used to protect victims. The Security Council, in its
resolution 1674 (2006), established that attacks
deliberately targeting civilians or other protected
individuals in situations of armed conflict represented
a flagrant breach of international humanitarian law and
condemned such practices most energetically.

This Council has also repeatedly required
compliance with obligations under international law, in
particular the provisions of the Hague Conventions, the
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols, and the
decisions of this Council. The Council has repeatedly
condemned, in the most energetic terms, all acts of
violence or abuse committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict in breach of the applicable
international obligations, be it in Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Darfur or
the Middle East.

The recent political history of my country and its
commitment to international law, international
humanitarian law and respect for human rights prompt
us to speak up on matters that occur in other places. We
are particularly sensitive to the suffering of civilian
populations, and we are of the view that the State
apparatus is responsible for protecting citizens living in
territories under its control.

In this context, the Republic of Argentina
expresses its profound concern with regard to the
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East. We
condemn the excessive use of force by Israel in Gaza
and the launching of rockets towards Israel from the
Gaza Strip.

Full respect should be ensured for obligations in
the context of international humanitarian law and all
measures should be taken to protect the civilian
population. The United Nations reports are eloquent:
the number of civilians who have died as a result of
bombings and land operations is horrific. This must
stop.

Humanitarian conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territories are also cause for special concern
for our countries. The international community should
take urgent steps to alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian population. Israel must also contribute to
that end by allowing humanitarian personnel
immediate and secure access.

The humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip is
alarming. In the current circumstances, international
assistance cannot reach the affected population. If we
do not act urgently, a major humanitarian crisis could
ensue, potentially affecting more than 1.5 million
Palestinians. We know that various coordination efforts
are being considered to provide assistance in the area.
Argentina is preparing a significant package of
humanitarian assistance for Gaza. We are prepared to
join our efforts with those of the international
community. Our country is also prepared to contribute
to official assistance, in particular by providing
personnel from our White Helmets initiative and
placing specialized teams of trained volunteers able to
act as reserves at the disposal of the United Nations
humanitarian system.

The Government of Argentina strongly
emphasizes that this is the time for diplomacy. The
inclination towards bellicose action should be
abandoned. A negotiated way out of the crisis should
be supported, including the urgent establishment of an
unconditional ceasefire that allows the international
community to immediately set up a humanitarian truce
to make it possible to help people at risk.

