Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): Mr. President, it is our pleasure to participate in
the deliberations in the Security Council during the few
remaining hours before the end of this month under your
wise presidency. Allow me, Sir, to seize this opportunity to
express my congratulations to you on a very successful
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
February, and also to express to the friendly country of
Botswana our congratulations on its being a member of the
Security Council.

Allow me also to commend the presidency of the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, Ambassador Emilio
Cardenas, with whom we were proud to cooperate on this
issue when it was submitted for consideration by the
Council in January.

 
Throughout their recent history the Palestinian
people have been subjected to grave injustices, including
the uprooting of a large proportion of them from their
land and homes and the subjugation of those who
remained to occupation, repression and the denial of their
right to self-determination, a right due to all the peoples
of the Earth. For many years, the international
community, including with the United Nations, has been
dealing with the question of Palestine in all its aspects in
an attempt to put an end to the injustice done to the
Palestinian people and to allow for the achievement of a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, no great successes have been achieved in
this respect, despite the significant steps that have been
taken and despite some accomplishments towards the
achievement of the goals for which we strive.

One of the harshest things endured by our people,
which is also a grave violation of their inalienable rights,
is the campaign of settler colonialism waged on
Palestinian lands occupied by Israel, the occupying
Power, since 1967, including Jerusalem. This campaign
was carried out in the past, and continues to be waged,
before the very eyes of the international community, and
despite the will and the stated positions of the United
Nations as set forth in various relevant resolutions. The
fact is that Israel, since the early days of the occupation,
under both Likud and Labour-led Governments, has
confiscated Palestinian land and State-owned land for the
purpose of constructing many settlements, and has
transferred large numbers of Israeli settlers to those
settlements in an obvious campaign to colonize the land
it occupies and to change the land's demographic
structure, thus paving the way to the total or partial
annexation of this land.

All this has been done using different methods and
at different rates throughout time, in accordance with the
prevailing domestic, as well as international, situation at
any given period. Nevertheless, it has always been
carried out in a way in which each step complemented the
preceding one, amounting to a calculated policy with very
clear objectives. This has always constituted a clear
violation of international humanitarian law, particularly
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as of the
resolutions of the various bodies of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has adopted scores of resolutions
reaffirming the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to all the territories occupied since 1967 and
calling upon Israel to abide by the provisions of the
Convention. These resolutions also consider the Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories to be illegal, and

 
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, immediately
cease its policy and practice of settlement-building.

Further, the Security Council has adopted a large
number of resolutions with similar content with regard to
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the
Council has adopted more than five resolutions dealing
primarily with the settlements and the confiscation of land.
Some of these resolutions, in addition to those provisions,
have called for the dismantlement of the settlements. The
Council also formed a commission of three of its members
to examine the matter and present reports to the Council,
and this has been done.

We are witnessing a rare case in the history of the
United Nations, as well as in contemporary international
relations, in that a Member State has for over 25 years
continued a specific policy and action, thereby creating
facts on the ground, despite the consistent and clear
positions taken by the Security Council and General
Assembly. The failure of the Council to impose its will in
this case, compared with some other cases, has allowed
Israel to continue pursuing its policy up until the present
date, resulting in the existence of approximately 140
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, inhabited
by approximately 300,000 settlers, including those settlers
brought to East Jerusalem.

The settlers are a major source of repression and
injustice against the Palestinian people, ranging from
stealing their lands and their water, to interfering in and
even destroying their daily lives - as in the case of the
city of Hebron, where the presence of about 400 settlers has
led to the destruction of normal life for some 80,000
Palestinians - and to repression and outright harassment
by armed settlers, who in reality constitute an armed militia
in the occupied Palestinian territory.

Is there any comparable situation elsewhere in the
world? Has anything like this ever happened in the history
of the twentieth century? The Council has a fundamental
responsibility in this regard, including the preservation of
the integrity of international law and international
humanitarian law, and of the integrity of previous Security
Council resolutions. It has a responsibility to ensure that
justice is achieved and that hope is restored to the
Palestinian people by bringing a final and comprehensive
end to any and all settlement activity in the occupied
territories.

Then came the peace process and the historic
handshake at the White House upon the signing of the

 
Declaration of Principles, which was followed by many
agreements, the most important of which was the first
agreement on the implementation of the Declaration of
Principles, relating to the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area.
No one, at least no one on the Palestinian side, imagined
that the Israeli Government would actually continue
carrying out its settlement policy while seeking to move
forward in the peace process: the two things simply
cannot be reconciled.

The Declaration of Principles led to the
postponement of negotiations on a number of important
issues, including settlements. This, of course, does not
and should not mean any change in our position or in the
position of the international community in this regard, or
for that matter any change in the status of the settlements,
which are illegal and constitute a real obstacle to the
achievement of a comprehensive peace. The same logic
must be applied also to the issue of Jerusalem and to
other issues on which negotiations have been postponed.

The minimum required for negotiations in good faith
is that the negotiating parties desist from creating facts on
the ground that affect the negotiating process and preempt
the results of that process. Unfortunately, however, the
Israeli Government is doing exactly the opposite with
regard to the settlements, particularly around Jerusalem,
with regard to Jerusalem in general and in respect of
certain other areas, such as Hebron. This situation
requires the full and scrupulous implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions, the most recent
among them being resolution 904 (1994).

The present Government of Israel claimed that its
settlements policy would be different from that of
previous Governments, but the facts do not bear this out.
Some sources have estimated that there has been a 10-
per-cent increase in the number of units built under the
current Government, and other sources estimate the
increase in the number of settlers as 15 per cent.
Moreover, it is a fact that the Israeli Cabinet committee
overseeing the matter has recently taken specific decisions
to continue settlement activities, as we indicated in our
letter dated 31 January 1995 addressed to the Secretary-
General (S/ 1995/95).

We firmly believe that any settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem,
constitutes a flagrant violation of the letter and the spirit
of the Declaration of Principles, the Fourth Geneva
Convention and relevant Security Council resolutions.
What is needed now is the immediate and total cessation

 
of all settlement activity, whatever its nature or volume -
full stop. The alternative could seriously undermine the
peace process. Clearly, the Palestinian situation has reached
the point where the average person can no longer accept
any other position or practice.

The Council therefore has a basic responsibility here,
in addition to the responsibilities to which I referred earlier:
guaranteeing the continuation and integrity of the peace
process, as the Council has done in the past with the
adoption of resolution 904 (1994), which helped salvage the
peace process and set it back on the right path.

We cannot continue to talk about our main subject
without referring to other Israeli practices that violate the
human rights of the Palestinian people or that are not
compatible with, and actually endanger, the peace process.
These include the repeated closures of the occupied
territory, the isolation of Jerusalem and the delays in the
implementation of agreements between the two sides.

Some quarters in the media are presenting the closure
issue just as the Israelis do, as though it were only a way
to prevent Palestinians, including Palestinian labourers,
from entering Israel and to prevent traffic in the other
direction as well. If that were all it was, we would have
accepted it on the basis of our national pride and dignity,
despite Israel's full responsibility for the situation that has
resulted from its policies, which destroyed the Palestinian
economy during the prolonged occupation. But the matter
is much worse than that. The closure also divides the
Palestinian land by isolating some parts from others -
Gaza from the West Bank, the West Bank from Jerusalem
and even parts of the West Bank from each other - and by
isolating the entire Palestinian territory from the outside
world.

How can this be connected in any way to Israeli
security concerns? Further, how can Israel, unilaterally and
without warning, close the border crossings agreed upon in
the Declaration of Principles? The closure is a matter
completely different from that of separation. It constitutes
an act of revenge and punishment against the Palestinian
people and it violates many provisions of the agreement
reached between the two sides. This could be said also
about the isolation of East Jerusalem from the Palestinian
people and from the rest of the West Bank, in spite of the
clear fact that it is the religious, cultural and economic
centre of the Palestinian people.

The other outstanding issue is that of Israeli delays in
completing implementation of all the provisions of the

 
Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area,
including that providing for safe passage and those
relating to commercial activities and Palestinian financial
rights. In addition, there have been delays and
procrastination in the implementation of the second phase
of the Declaration of Principles, which was due to begin
over seven months ago, especially in relation to the
redeployment of the Israeli army away from populated
areas and to convening Palestinian elections.

We are not talking here about mistakes or
shortcomings. Mistakes do happen. Neither are we are
speaking of reactions - for example, reactions to the
attacks perpetrated by radical elements against Israeli
targets. We have firmly condemned these attacks and
have tried, within our limited resources, to deal with such
acts as well as with their underlying causes in order to
put an end to them, thereby maintaining law and order
and achieving peace and security for both sides. We
remain convinced that the fundamental solution to this
phenomenon is a political one and that it is directly linked
to socio-economic and political aspects.

Therefore, we are speaking here about positions and
practices, some of which have been interpreted differently
but that nevertheless represent what we believe is a policy
aimed at delaying the implementation of the agreements
reached. The most striking thing here is that such
positions and practices continue despite several important
meetings, such as the recent Cairo summit and the
Foreign Ministers' meeting at Blair House in Washington,
and despite all the other efforts made by parties
concerned with the preservation of the peace process.

The peace process is walking a tight rope. It is no
exaggeration to say that it is experiencing a real crisis.
The process must be salvaged, and this can be achieved
only through the complete fulfilment of the parties'
contractual obligations emanating from the agreements we
have reached, including also the time framework, which
is an integral part of the agreements. We also need to put
an end to policies and practices that Violate these
agreements and are contrary to their letter and spirit. It is
also necessary to negotiate in good faith in order to
implement them.

For our part, we reaffirm our strategic commitment
to the achievement of peace and to the ongoing peace
process, and we should like to believe that this applies
also to the Israeli side. We are confident that the sponsors
of the peace process will indeed fulfil the duties that they
have shouldered in this regard, and we are also confident

 
that the other important and active parties and partners,
such as the European Union and Egypt, will spare no effort
in assisting the peace process.

To achieve the ultimate goal of peace, it is imperative
to take the first, important step, one that could open the
way and demonstrate good intentions, namely, the total
cessation of all settlement activities. It is obvious that, in
this respect, we need the backing and support of the
Security Council. We are confident that the Council will
take the necessary actions in this regard.

