Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): On behalf of
the Vietnamese delegation, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, and the Republic of the Congo for your effective
leadership of the work of the Security Council this
month. We warmly welcome your initiative to hold this
important open debate and highly appreciate your
substantive concept paper to that end.

My delegation shares the view expressed
previously by various delegations that it is pertinent for
the Council to revisit the question of its role in conflict
prevention and resolution on a regular basis. The
Charter of the United Nations stipulates that the

07-4920]
Security Council has the primary role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Given the alarming devastations caused by
contemporary intra-State and interstate conflicts, there
is an overwhelming agreement that durable peace can
be achieved at a much lower cost in human and
material terms through comprehensive and integrated
prevention strategies. Over the years, the Security
Council and the General Assembly have adopted a
number of resolutions on the question of prevention
and resolution of conflicts.

In this connection, my delegation wishes to recall
that General Assembly resolution 60/1, which was
adopted at the 2005 World Summit, underlines the
importance of prevention of armed conflicts in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and promotes a culture of prevention as a
means to effectively address the interconnected
security and development challenges faced by many
nations in the world. Security Council resolution 1625
(2005), while highlighting the need for strengthening
the Council's role in conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa, reaffirms the principles of refraining from the
threat or the use of force and of peaceful settlements of
international disputes.

Equally important, the international community
has attached greater importance to such interdependent
and complementary components as early warning,
preventive diplomacy and demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as post-
conflict peacebuilding. There is also agreement on the
need for greater coordination and cooperation among
United Nations organs, Member States, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector, non-
governmental organizations and other civil society
actors to help war-ravaged countries to break out of the
vicious cycle of poverty, conflict and
underdevelopment and move into the mainstream of
globalization.

For the past decades, Africa - the second largest
and second most populous continent - has been
grappling with protracted civil wars, ethnic strife,
extreme poverty and humanitarian tragedies. In spite of
certain remarkable progress in some areas, the African
continent continues to have the lowest share of global
foreign direct investment flows while shouldering a
growing debt burden and suffering from inequitable
global trade regimes. All these tremendous challenges

07-4920]
instil in the international community a momentum of
broad support for addressing the root causes of
conflicts in the continent and reinvigorating socio-
economic development in the African countries.

In the spirit of solidarity with African countries,
Viet Nam supports fully the initiatives of the African
Union and the concerned subregional organizations to
prevent, mediate and resolve conflicts through peaceful
negotiations, with stronger support from the United
Nations. Viet Nam has followed with keen interest the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) programmes, especially within
the South-South cooperation framework, and notes
with satisfaction that significant headway has been
made in the fight against hunger, poverty, malaria,
tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and in other fields and sectors
such as infrastructure, health, education, science and
technology development. Together with the
international community, we shall continue to explore
ways and means to further contribute to the cause of
peace, development and integration of the African
countries.

