Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation
warmly welcomes the focus of this debate on armed
non-State actors. We thank the briefers. We particularly
appreciate the comments made by those who have
suggested concrete measures to make progress on the
issue.

In that regard, I would like to add three points from
my delegation's perspective. The first point concerns
abductions. Mass abductions of children are becoming
ever more frequent. We have seen horrific cases in
recent times, including by Boko Haram in Nigeria and
by Daesh in Syria and Iraq. We believe that the Security
Council should recognize abduction as grounds for
listing conflict parties in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's reports on children and armed conflict. In
fact, we believe that such action is overdue.

Secondly, we support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to negotiate
and help to implement action plans directly with
armed non-State actors. We believe that such direct
engagement is crucial. In this Chamber, we often call
on conflict parties to respect international human rights
law and on rebel groups not to use schools for military
activities. But we all know, of course, that they are not
listening to the webcast ofthis event or reading the press
release the day after. Without the direct engagement
with those actors, many of the efforts we undertake
will prove meaningless. We therefore urge concerned
Governments to fully support such engagement. We are
also very grateful for the direct engagement undertaken
by non-governmental organizations, which often
have a different way of accessing those groups that is
extremely crucial, from our perspective.

My third point underlines the important role of
justice mechanisms in deterring violations against
children; there two aspects to this issue.

The first is that perpetrators must be made aware
that their actions are illegal. That does not always go
without saying, as seen in the case of the conscription
of child soldiers. In the example of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the International Center for
Transitional Justice documented the educational impact
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) trial against
Thomas Lubanga on other rebels in the field.

Secondly, perpetrators must be made aware
that they can be prosecuted. That requires either a
functioning national judicial system or the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court. Referral by the
Security Council may sometimes be necessary to
establish jurisdiction. Furthermore, third States could
and should exercise jurisdiction, either based on the
nationality of the perpetrator, which is becoming
increasingly relevant as ever greater numbers of
fighters are traveling to conflict zones, on the basis of
universal jurisdiction, which is well established with
respect to war crimes.

I would like to particularly emphasize the deterrent
effect of the International Criminal Court, which
is increasingly being documented. Liechtenstein
had the great pleasure of co-hosting a recent event
at the International Peace Institute, where a study
undertaken by Harvard and Texas A&M. Universities
was presented. The study's main result was that, under
certain conditions, the ICC can, indeed, prevent crimes
and have an impact on the people on the ground. It does
so through prosecutorial deterrence, by signaling to
perpetrators that they could be subject to indictment,
trial and jail sentences, as well as through social
deterrence.

There are indirect and extralegal consequences
to the activities of the ICC. It can lead to perpetrators
and potential perpetrators being shunned by their
communities, or being subjected to informal sanctions
and other measures. At our even, one example cited was
that, in the Central African Republic, rebel commanders
told Human Rights Watch researchers that they did
not want to end up before the ICC, and they offered to
demobilize child soldiers. And children were, in fact,
demobilized.
In sum, we believe that justice mechanisms can be
a great ally to the Security Council in its fight to protect
children in armed conflict. We call on the Security
Council to make better and more consistent use of that
important tool.

