Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): This is a sad day
for the Security Council; it is a sad day for the cause of
universal norms and standards; and it is a sad day for
the non-proliferation regime. But, above all, it is a very
sad day for the people of Douma, who now are without
the protection that the international system was set up
to provide for them.

This is the fourth time in six days that the Council
has discussed chemical weapons. Yesterday 14 members
of the Security Council called for an investigation.
Several members called on the permanent five (P-S)
to assume their responsibilities to uphold the universal

prohibition on weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
As a P-S member, the United Kingdom was ready to do
that and was joined by France and the United States.
Conversely, by vetoing, Russia has crossed a line in the
international order, and worse, if possible, history is
repeating itself one year on from Khan Shaykun.
Russia helped to create the original independent
investigation that attributed Khan Shaykun to the
Syrian regime and concluded that sarin, which can be
developed only by a State actor, had been used. But last
autumn, Russia vetoed renewal of that mechanism on
not one but three occasions. The reason is clear: it is
because Russia would rather cross the WMD line than
risk sanction of its ally Syria. Instead, we are asked
to believe that the Russian version of this latest attack
should be the one that the Security Council believes.

Russia is not authorized by the Security Council
to carry out an investigation in Syria. Russia says
that there were no traces of a chemical attack. No
traces were found by whom? I repeat: Russia is not
authorized to carry out an investigation on behalf
of the Security Council. We need an independent
investigative mechanism for that purpose, and only
that sort of mechanism can have the confidence of the
Security Council, the confidence of the membership
of the United Nations and the confidence of the people
of Syria.

Sadly, reports of chemical-weapon attacks in Syria
have continued since the original Russian veto, in
November. It has become very clear that Russia will do
what it takes to protect Syria, whatever the compelling
evidence of the crimes committed, and to shut down
further investigation and discussion of those crimes.
This has come at the cost of Russia's own obligations
and credibility as a permanent member of the Council,
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention
and as a declared and supposed supporter of peace
in Syria.

The Security Council has been unable to act solely
because Russia has abused the power of veto to protect
Syria from international scrutiny for the use of chemical
weapons against the Syrian people. Even today open-
source investigations have located a chlorine cylinder,
the same kind that the Joint Investigative Mechanism
has found that the Syrian regime used, atop a house
in Douma full of people who had clearly died from
respiratory problems.

I frankly doubt that in 48 hours Russia has verified
all similar reports and can conclude that they are all
fake. They are not fake; they need to be looked at and
investigated by a proper independent mechanism such
as the Council was prepared today to pass.

Russia's credibility as a member of the Council is
now in question. We will not stand idly by and watch
Russia continue to undermine the global norms that
have ensured the security of all of us, including Russia,
for decades. As a P-S member, the United Kingdom
will stand up for international peace and security; it
is our moral duty. It is a matter of shame that Russia
has once again blocked a draft resolution. The Russian
Ambassador mentioned that it was not a question of
counting the number of Russian vetoes. I beg to differ.
To quote Lenin, quantity has a quality all of its own.
Russia's actions today are a step against the rules and
authority of the Security Council and the wider United
Nations. They are a step against international peace
and security and non-proliferation, and they are a step
against humanity.

