Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Iwould like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

Sweden condemns yesterday's intercontinental
ballistic missile test in the strongest terms. The
test constitutes a clear threat to international peace
and security, an unacceptable provocation and a
clear breach of the international obligations of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in defiance of
numerous Security Council resolutions. The actions of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea represent a
threat not only to its own region but to all regions.

We again urge the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to heed the Council's decisions that it should
cease provocations, fulfil its international obligations,
engage in meaningful dialogue and abandon its nuclear
and missile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner. It should return to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime and
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.

Sweden fully supports the relevant resolutions
adopted unanimously by the Council in relation to
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It is
important that the Council remain united and that the
Security Council resolutions be swiftly implemented
by all countries so as to ensure the full effect of
those resolutions.

At the same time, sanctions alone will not resolve
the situation on the Korean peninsula. We need to
pave the way for a peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution. Therefore, in parallel with an effective and
rigorous implementation of the sanctions regime,
we must urgently undertake further work to reduce
tensions, so as to advance the prospects for a
comprehensive settlement.

Turning now to the report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and your team for the
excellent work as Chair of that important Committee.
The Committee has a critical role to play in effectively
implementing the resolutions adopted by the Council
in order to ensure that they have the desired effect.
The Committee and its Panel of Experts should
continue its outreach to Member States on sanctions
implementation, as well as to support their capacity-
building efforts. Some further efforts are already
under way, but more can be done. We look forward
to continuing discussions on how to enhance the
effectiveness of restrictive measures.

The responsibility to protect and uphold the
well-being of its people indisputably falls to the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Yet, while the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea regime diverts critical resources to expensive
weapons programmes, its people continue to suffer
from serious human rights violations and a grave
humanitarian situation.

The humanitarian situation remains of serious
concern. The measures adopted by the Council were
never intended to have a negative effect on humanitarian
assistance. Therefore, recent reports that the sanctions
are having adverse consequences, including on the
ability ofhumanitarian organizations to respond to those
urgent humanitarian needs, are deeply concerning.

Such challenges need to be addressed, and
humanitarian principles need to be adhered to. In
that regard, we look forward to discussions in the
Committee, with input from the Panel of Experts and
relevant United Nations bodies, on how to ensure
that the resolutions are implemented as intended and
rigorously, while, at the same time, ensuring that
humanitarian aid reaches those in need of assistance.

