Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries members of
the European Economic Area - Iceland and
Liechtenstein - align themselves with this statement.

The armed conflict in Angola has lasted for
decades, causing the population horrendous suffering,
creating a dire humanitarian and economic situation in
the country and contributing to instability in the region.
The responsibility for this situation rests primarily with
UNITA, under Jonas Savimbi. The European Union
demands that UNITA put an immediate end to
hostilities, discharge its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol and abide by the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The European Union also calls upon the
Government of Angola to extend the State
administration to areas previously controlled by
UNITA in a manner consistent with the principle of
democracy, good governance and human rights.

The European Union believes that the United
Nations can assist the Government of Angola to
achieve those objectives, in particular through the
United Nations Office in Angola. The European Union
remains deeply committed to a peaceful political
solution to the conflict in that country, and we welcome
the initiative of the Secretary-General to appoint Mr.
Ibrahim Gambari as his Special Adviser. We call upon
all parties to the conflict to make every effort to assist
him in his task.

The failure of UNITA to accept the 1992 election
results and the ensuing breaches by UNITA of the
Lusaka Protocol led to the adoption of Security
Council resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173
(1998). The sanctions against UNITA, which clearly
identified that movement as responsible for the
continuing war, were adopted unanimously by the
Security Council and were welcomed by the
international community. The sanctions were
specifically targeted to put pressure on the UNITA
leadership and to reduce the capacity of UNITA to
wage war, while minimizing the effects on the people
of Angola. Large-scale humanitarian assistance was
provided continuously after the sanctions came into
effect. Moreover, the sanctions were imposed only after
repeated warnings to UNITA that measures would be
taken if the rebel movement failed to join in the efforts
to find a lasting, peaceful solution, and they were
designed with clear exit strategies.

UNITA has consistently refused to participate
constructively in the Angola peace process, and has
instead sought ways to inflict suffering upon the
Angolan people. In that context, the European Union
expresses its concern about information on the
continuing use of mines by UNITA. Moreover, UNITA
has continued to seek alternative methods to evade
United Nations sanctions, thereby enabling itself to
pursue military activities and further hindering the
implementation ofthe Lusaka Protocol.

The report of the Monitoring Mechanism, while
confirming that significant and systematic violations
have continued from both within and beyond the
region, also indicated that sanctions were restricting
the supply routes to UNITA and making imports more
costly for the rebel movement.

The European Union welcomes the work of the
Panel of Experts and the Monitoring Mechanism, and
believes that it has contributed significantly towards
strengthening the implementation of the sanctions
against UNITA.

The European Union notes that the Mechanism
raised the question of UNITA members trying to take
advantage of the structures of the Schengen Agreement
to circumvent the travel ban imposed by Security
Council resolutions 1127 (1997) and 1295 (2000), and
recognizes that member States and the Union should
study this in order to enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions. The European Union attaches considerable
importance to the question of UNITA representation
abroad. Its member States have therefore formally
ended UNITA representation in their countries and
have denied entry into or transit through their
countries, as well as suspending the visas or residence
permits, of UNITA representatives, in accordance with
resolution 1127 (1997).

An important tool in enhancing the effectiveness
of sanctions against senior UNITA officials resides in
the regular updating and improving of the United
Nations list containing the names of those subject to
United Nations travel restrictions and financial
sanctions. In that respect, the European Union
welcomes the input given by the Monitoring
Mechanism to the sanctions Committee and looks
forward to the early publication of a new list.

On 25 January 2001, the Security Council in an
open debate discussed violations of the sanctions
against the Revolutionary United Front in Sierra
Leone. In its statement that day, the European Union
noted that systematic and deliberate violations of
Security Council resolutions continued to fuel the long
and bitter conflict in Sierra Leone. The international
community cannot disregard the fact that the actors
violating the sanctions in Angola and in Sierra Leone
respectively are to a large extent the same. As stated in
the report of the Monitoring Mechanism on sanctions
against UNITA, there are many common elements in
terms of arms dealers, diamond dealers and air-
transport carriers involved in these conflicts. Thus,
these situations must not be seen in isolation, and
measures must be taken in a coordinated manner. There
is clearly a need to give urgent consideration to the
establishment of a global certification scheme for
diamonds, and to the harmonization of trade practices
such as statistics and customs codes. In that context,
the European Union reiterates its full support for last
year's General Assembly resolution 55/56, on conflict
diamonds.

The Monitoring Mechanism has made a wide
range of important recommendations aimed at
addressing violations of sanctions in the areas of arms
and military equipment, travel and representation,
diamonds and finance, and transport, as well as at
maintaining the effectiveness of sanctions. Bearing in
mind Security Council resolution 1295 (2000), as well
as the Charter of the United Nations, the European
Union further takes note of the recommendation that
the Council should consider applying sanctions against
any Government found to be intentionally and
systematically violating them, and it believes that that
proposal merits further discussion in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and in the context of
sanctions regimes in general.

As regards the Monitoring Mechanism itself, the
European Union welcomed the extension, on 23
January, of its mandate, to enable it to complete the
tasks and the investigations it has undertaken, in
consultation with the sanctions Committee. The work
of the Mechanism is an important tool for keeping up
the pressure and for ensuring continued and
strengthened implementation of the sanctions against
UNITA. The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to express its full support to the new
Chairman of the Committee, the Permanent
Representative of Ireland, and to welcome the
commitment he has shown here today to active pursuit
of effectively implemented sanctions against UNITA.
We would like also to pay tribute to the important work
accomplished under Canada's chairmanship of the
Angola sanctions Committee ofthe Security Council.

Effective implementation and monitoring of
sanctions against UNITA can reduce UNITA's capacity
to prolong the conflict in Angola and can, by
extension, enhance the credibility of sanctions regimes
and the authority of the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. Member States should thus
be ready to make available adequate resources for the
effective monitoring of sanctions. The European Union
supports the ongoing deliberations with the Security
Council on this issue, and encourages measures aimed
at strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
perform that task effectively. Wholehearted support
should be given to monitoring mechanisms, expert
panels and sanctions committees, and to any further
United Nations initiatives in this regard. Attention
should be paid in order to avoid overlap and
duplication caused by the simultaneous existence of
different panels of experts.

In its conclusions, the Monitoring Mechanism
notes that

"Only tight control on the strict compliance with
the sanctions will assist in forcing UNITA, at
some time, to fully comply with the peace process
it has betrayed." (S/2000/1225, annex, enclosure, para. 251)

The European Union fully concurs with that
statement and would like to stress once more its
commitment to maintaining strong international
pressure on UNITA and its leadership, in particular
Jonas Savimbi, through the full implementation by all
Member States of United Nations sanctions against
UNITA.

