Ms. Skare (Norway): I am delivering this statement
on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and
my own country, Norway.

Improving the Security Council's working methods
enhances the Council's ability to take meaningful action
in an efficient, results-oriented and accountable way.
We commend Kuwait's efforts to that end in chairing
the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We welcome the
progress achieved and support the initiatives taken to
ensure the full implementation of the revised note 507
(S/2017/507).

Permanent and elected members share obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
should have equal access to the means to shoulder
that responsibility. That includes a balanced division
of labour in areas such as penholderships and the
chairmanships of subsidiary bodies. Improving the
inclusion of newly elected members in the Council's
affairs is also important.

The Office of the Ombudsperson is central to
safeguarding due process. The Nordic countries urge
the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office's
capacity is strengthened. The necessary arrangements
must be made "to ensure its continued ability to carry
out its mandate in an independent, effective and timely
manner", as stated in paragraph 65 of resolution 2368
(2017). We also recommend that the Council consider
creating an Ombudsperson for other sanctions regimes.

The Nordic countries would further like to
acknowledge the valuable role of the Security Council
Report. Every year, Finland arranges a Hitting the
Ground Running retreat for the Council and its
newly elected members, in close cooperation with the
Security Council Report and Professor Edward C. Luck
of Columbia University. Its informal discussions have
proved to be useful and important.

In the past few years, it has been made abundantly
clear that the continued use, or threat of use, of the veto
seriously hampers the Council's ability to respond to
global crises. The Nordic countries therefore strongly
support all measures aimed at limiting the use of
the veto. That includes the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group's code of conduct against mass
atrocity crimes, as well as the French-Mexican initiative

to restrain the use of the veto. We encourage member
States that have not yet supported those initiatives to do
so without delay.

We recall that Article 24 of the Charter enshrines
the Council's responsibility to act on behalf of the
entire United Nations membership. We call for broader
engagement in that regard. The Council should also find
a role in the decision-making process for States that are
concerned with issues it is discussing. They should also
be involved in informal consultations, in accordance
with Article 31 of the Charter. Interaction with the
broader membership should be improved and enhanced.
The Council needs to talk with countries - not only
about them.

The Council must also be open to voices from
outside the Chamber. The practice of inviting civil
society briefers should be maintained in order for the
Council to broaden its understanding of the issues on
the agenda. The Council should also improve its ability
to address problems at all stages of a conflict cycle.
More attention needs to be given to the prevention of
conflict. Informal situational awareness briefings by
the Secretariat is a format that should be fully utilized.
Recent progress regarding the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission as an advisory body to the Council should
be harnessed and developed further.

A relevant and strong United Nations requires an
efficient, transparent and inclusive Security Council
to meet today's challenges to international peace and
security and to improve global governance. I can assure
the Council of the Nordic countries' full support in the
important work of improving the working methods of
the Council.

