The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
13 July 2006 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2006/520 and which reads as follows.

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 13 July 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
2
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansoar
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to
the requests contained in letters dated 29 June 2006
from the Permanent Representatives of Algeria and
Qatar addressed to the President of the Security
Council, documents 8/2006/458 and S/2006/462,
respectively.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/508, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Qatar.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, France, Ghana, Greece,
Japan, Qatar, Russian Federation, United
Republic of Tanzania

Against:
United States of America

Abstaining:
Denmark, Peru, Slovakia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland


The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 10 in favour, one against and
four abstaining. The draft resolution has not been
adopted, owing to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to make statements following the voting.


