Mr. Jallow: Since our last report to the Council
on 18 June 2010 (see S/PV.6342), the Office of the
Prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) has continued to focus its efforts on
the core activities for ensuring the trial readiness of
new cases; the completion of ongoing trials;
preparations for the renewal of our requests for referral
of cases to Rwanda for trial; preparations for the
commencement of rule 71 bis evidence preservation
proceedings; the conduct of appeals; the intensification
of our tracking efforts; and the provision of legal
assistance to national authorities in respect of cases
being investigated by them.

Today, with the delivery this morning in Arusha
of judgement in the Hategekimana case, we have now
received five judgements arising out of the cases in
progress. On our side, the Office of the Prosecutor has
completed the evidence phase in the Gatete case and
we have closed the prosecution phase in respect of
three other cases - Nzabonimana, Ngirabatware and
Ndahimana - that are now in the defence phase.
These three cases now join the ongoing trial of
Karemera and two others.

We are now ready to commence proceedings in
respect of the Nizeyimana case, now scheduled for trial

on 17 January 2011. Finally, since the last reporting
period, the Office was able to secure the arrest of Jean-
Bosco Uwinkindi, an indicted fugitive in Uganda, on
30 June, and to have him transferred to the Tribunal on
2 July. I would like to record our appreciation to the
Government of Uganda for its cooperation in securing
the arrest of this and other accused persons in the past
and their transfer to the Tribunal. Indeed, the interval
between the arrest and the transfer of - this particular
accused was a record-breaking event in the way it was
diligently pursued.

Over the same period, the Office of the
Prosecutor also prepared and filed three prosecution
appeals and responded to one defence appeal.
Currently, work is under way in anticipation of appeals
in respect of several judgements, which we expect to
have delivered from December onwards.

On 4 November, following extensive law reform
and measure to build the capacity of the Rwandan legal
system to address the concerns of ICTR judges in the
first round of referral requests, my Office filed
applications for referral of three ICTR indictees to
Rwanda for trial. They are Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi, a
recent arrestee, and two other fugitives, Fulgence
Kayishema and Charles Sikubwabo. The referral of all
but three of the 10 fugitives to national jurisdictions for
trial remains a key element of the completion strategy
of ICTR. In the absence of acceptance of these cases
by other Member States, Rwanda continues to be the
focus of this strategy.

Two other cases - Bucyibaruta and
Munyeshyaka - referred to France on 20 November
2007, remain with the French judiciary. It is our hope
that Member States with the requisite capacity will
share this responsibility of the ICTR completion
strategy by accepting transfers from the Tribunals of
some of the remaining cases.

A determination of the referral of the cases for
which requests have been filed will have a clear impact
on the completion strategy of the Tribunal and on the
design, the timing, the size and the cost of the
international residual mechanism expected to inherit
the residual functions of the Tribunal. In the absence of
a transfer of these cases and with the probable arrest of
fugitives in the near future, the work of the Tribunal
could increase significantly, thus extending the
projected dates for the completion of trials. The
transfer of such a workload to the proposed residual
mechanism would expand the size and perhaps alter the
nature of such an institution. However, the referral of
these cases now to national jurisdictions could possibly
see the end of trials at the Tribunal by the end of 2011.

Tracking efforts to secure the arrest and transfer
to ICTR of Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana continue to be a top priority of our
tracking team. We continue to count on the call of the
Security Council on all States to cooperate fully with
us. We are committed, in the meantime, to continuing
and intensifying our tracking efforts for as long as
these fugitives remain earmarked for trial at ICTR.

In relation to the case of Kabuga, and following
the invitation extended to me by the Government of
Kenya in November 2010, I was able to meet last
month with the Minister for Internal Security and other
senior Government officials in Nairobi. I am pleased to
report that the Government of Kenya and the ICTR
delegation agreed to re-establish the joint ICTR/Kenya
police task force, with the mandate to receive and
review all material in the possession of the
Government in respect of the fugitive; to investigate
and report on his whereabouts and fully investigate his
assets and other interests in Kenya so as to assist the
ICTR tracking team; and to address all other pending
issues in relation to the case. We have also agreed that
the task force should report back within three months. I
hope that this renewed promise of cooperation from the
Government of Kenya will assist in our investigations
and bring this matter to a favourable conclusion.

For over a year now, my Office has also been in
contact with the Government of Zimbabwe in relation
to the fugitive Protais Mpiranya, the former
Commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard and a
top-level indictee of the Tribunal. There are indications
that Mpiranya has connections with that country and
had for several periods resided therein. During my visit
to Harare in 2009, I was assured by officials of the
Government of Zimbabwe of their cooperation in that
particular matter. Investigators from my office continue
to work with their Zimbabwean counterparts. All the
same, I would urge the Zimbabwe Government to
devote top priority to the case of this high-level
fugitive in order to secure his location, arrest and
transfer to Arusha.

The majority of the ICTR fugitives have been
located within the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On a number of occasions, I visited that country and

held discussions with high-level Government officials.
We re-sent the indictments and arrest warrants
regarding the fugitives to the Government and have
been promised effective support and cooperation for
their arrest. Nonetheless, I regret to report that, despite
those regular efforts on the part of my Office, there has
been very little progress in securing the arrest of the
majority of the detainees who are in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is urgent that the
Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kenya, Zimbabwe and the neighbouring States
intensify their cooperation and search for the 10
fugitives, all of whom, according to our sources, are
within East, Central and Southern Africa.

Cooperation between the ICTR and national
prosecuting and judicial authorities continues to
strengthen, as more and more national jurisdictions opt
to investigate, prosecute or, otherwise, deny safe haven
to genocide suspects residing within their respective
jurisdictions. During the current reporting period, my
Office has already processed and attended to 58 such
requests from 11 Member States for assistance with
evidence. That represents a very significant increase
over the levels in 2009. We expect that those requests
will continue. The support that is expected from the
Office of the Prosecutor involves an extensive search
of our evidentiary database for relevant materials for
use by the law-enforcement authorities.

Work on the international prosecutors' manual of
best practice for the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes, a concrete legacy product of the
Colloquium of Prosecutors of International Criminal
Tribunals, has received much needed support from the
Government of Canada. The manual is under
preparation and is expected to be ready by the middle
of 2011. Indeed, we are greatly indebted to Canada for
sponsoring that particular project.

In the months ahead, we expect to commence the
trial of Idelphonse Nizeyimana, to file additional
requests for the referral of the cases of the remaining
five fugitives to national jurisdictions, to prepare for
the commencement of evidence preservation
proceedings in respect of the cases of Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana, and, also, to continue our
tracking efforts.

All those activities - preparing new cases,
supporting ongoing trials and commencing fresh
proceedings under rule 71 bis, as well as tracking -
continue to be challenged by staffing constraints. As
reported at the last meeting (see S/PV.6342), the Office
of the Prosecutor continues, at this critical juncture, to
lose staff with experience and institutional memory in
trial and, particularly, in tracking. Attracting competent
and experienced staff to replace them for just a short
period of time has been a slow process.

Extended multitasking on the part of staff and
staff concerns about contract extensions and future
employment security all add to the continuous loss of
the critical human resources required for the timely and
effective completion of our mandate. A sympathetic
consideration of our difficulties in the current winding-
down stage by the United Nations Secretariat and its
organs would greatly facilitate our efforts for a timely
and effective completion, to which we remain firmly
committed.
The cooperation of Member States and the
support of the Security Council, the other United
Nations organs and the Secretariat have been, in the
past, and will continue to be indispensable for the
success of our strategy. I would like to record our
appreciation of all such previous and ongoing support
and look forward to further support at the current
particularly crucial stage of our task.

