Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Chairs of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities; the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for their strong cooperation.
Those Committees play a crucial and complementary
role in assessing and countering global threats and are
invaluable in our fight against terrorism.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) and
Al-Qaida are dynamic organizations, evolving with the
pressure the international community brings to bear on
them. The 1267 Committee must continue to keep up
its pace to adapt to the evolving threat. We are pleased
that, this month, the 1267 Committee designated
Masood Azhar Alvi, leader of Jaish-e-Mohammed, and
ISIL-Khorasan, a dangerous ISIS affiliate operating
in Afghanistan and Pakistan, for United Nations
sanctions. Azhar's listing shows that the international
community can and will hold terrorists accountable
for their actions. The designation of ISIS-Khorasan
demonstrates the Committee's commitment to
ensuring that ISIS affiliates do not take up the mantle
of a diminished ISIS core. In that vein, it is important
that the Committee designate other ISIS affiliates
who seek to replicate the destruction wrought in Iraq
and Syria in new corners of the world. We commend
our Security Council colleagues for supporting those
important designations.

The threat of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
proliferation is a growing concern, and the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is more important than it has ever
been. We have all seen the devastating consequences of
chemical weapons use by State and non-State actors in
Syria and Salisbury. We cannot allow the international
norm against the use of such dangerous weapons to
break down. The possibility of WMD proliferation is
real. We must all work together to stop that, through the
work of the 1540 Committee and beyond.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
examined issues we consider critical over the past year.
In February, the CTC presented its Addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles, which provides Member
States practical tools to address the threat of returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. We also look
forward to working with the CTC and Member States
to implement resolution 2462 (2019) to counter the
financing of terrorism.

Finally, the United States was happy to welcome the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to New York, Minneapolis, and Washington,
D.C., this month as part of our assessment visit. We look
forward to reviewing the results of the CTED visit and
encourage other Member States to work with CTED on
visits of their own.

The three Committees and other relevant parts
of the United Nations system, including the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, should work
closely together and take a whole-of-United Nations
approach to counter-terrorism. We still see many gaps
and considerable overlap.

In conclusion, we will continue to promote regular
and continued engagement to better understand the
intentions and capabilities of terrorists. We urge the
three Committees to continue sharing notes on how the
United Nations can help to build State capacity to counter
terrorist threats and advance our common security.

