Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). We thank Ambassador Jacques Paul Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive and upbeat briefing and commend
him for his dynamic leadership and for the efforts he
has made in the further implementation of the Dayton-
Paris Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are happy to note that UNMIBH continues to
make significant contributions in solidifying the
establishment of the rule of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully appreciate the Mission's
ongoing efforts to restructure and reform the local
police forces in both entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are pleased with the progress made in
consolidating the State Border Service and with the
operational support extended to it by some Member
States.

Another welcome development is the recent
breakthrough in canton 7 in respect of the integration
of the Ministry of the Interior and the appointment of
judges. We also note that further progress has been
made in the registration and certification of the local
police, and we hope that the target of establishing the
first transparent and comprehensive personnel data-
bank of all authorized police officers will be reached
within the set time-frame. Similar progress has been
noted in the recruitment and selection of minority
cadets for the police academies.

The role of a professional police force,
comprising personnel from the different ethnic groups,
is vitally important for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Hence
the need to ensure adequate representation of
minorities in the local police forces in both entities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are therefore seriously
concerned at the lack of progress in this area,
especially in the case of the police force of the
Republika Srpska, less than 1 per cent of which
consists of minority officers, which misses the
benchmark set in the 1998 Framework Agreement. We
hope that progress in this area, as well as in the training
of specialized police forces, can be made, with the
necessary involvement of UNMIBH and the
international community. We also look forward to the
early establishment of a court police service in the
Republika Srpska, which still lags far behind.

Important contributions by UNMIBH in other
areas of the civilian component of the Peace
Agreement, such as the assessment of the judicial
system and the strengthening of the legal system's
respect for human rights, also deserve our
commendation. Given the findings of the judicial
system assessment programme regarding the current
court system in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the
entire judiciary is politically, professionally and
structurally dysfunctional we feel that further
determined efforts will be essential to remedy such
serious shortcomings. In that regard, we would support
further efforts through appropriate arrangements in that
vitally important area.

Despite these achievements, much more still
needs to be done. The progress made thus far must be
further consolidated, and critical remaining tasks must
be accomplished so that peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will be irreversible. We note that the
rate of return of refugees and displaced persons, in
particular to the Republika Srpska, is still
unsatisfactory and far below expectations. Clearly,
reconciliation among the Bosnian ethnic communities
has a very long way to go.

While economic recovery has begun to take root,
it too is below expectations. There must be more
tangible progress in all these areas to ensure viable
statehood for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The success of
the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina still
depends very much at this stage on the commitment
and sustained support of the international community.
The continuing active involvement of the international
community remains essential. The work of UNMIBH,
including the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
should continue as the international community strives
to ensure a self-sustaining and enduring peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore fully support
the recommendation by the Secretary-General that
UNMIBH's mandate should be further extended for
another period of 12 months, until 21 June 2001.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
effective presence of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) is
essential. My delegation commends the important role
of the international community, particularly that of the
High Representative and his Office, the relevant
Governments, all the personnel of SFOR and of
UNMIBH, and other United Nations agencies, all of
whose contributions have been invaluable in
facilitating work towards the full implementation of the
Peace Agreement. The commitment ofthe international
community and its contribution to the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina should be matched by the
commitment and full cooperation of the Bosnian
leadership and the Bosnian people at every level. For
ultimately, the main responsibility for achieving peace,
national reconciliation and nation-building lies with
them.

Malaysia is proud to be associated with the
efforts to build peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We will continue to be actively engaged
in ensuring the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement through our participation in UNMIBH and
IPTF, by making available training and other facilities,
and by sharing our experience in the field of socio-
economic development and in the field of privatization,
which has been successfully implemented in Malaysia.

