Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Permit me, at the outset, to
join those who have spoken before me to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Coming from the same subregion
of Africa, we are doubly confident that under your able
leadership the deliberations of the Council will be
conducted in a manner that will ensure justice and will
enhance the principles and purposes of the United
Nations. I also commend your predecessor for the
excellent work he did as President. We also wish to
welcome warmly His Excellency Omar Mustafa
Muntasser of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

My delegation welcomes the opportunity to
participate in today's formal discussions on this very
important matter of the long-standing dispute between the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on the one hand and the United
Kingdom and the United States on the other. As you are
aware, my country is deeply concerned that this dispute
has not yet been resolved, thereby prolonging the anguish
of the two sets of victims affected by this tragedy: the
families of those who lost their lives in the Lockerbie air

 

disaster, on the one hand, and the families of ordinary
Libyans who bear the brunt of the sanctions imposed on
Libya by the Security Council, on the other.

That is why Nigeria seizes every available opportunity
to contribute to the process of finding a just solution in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law, as well as
respect for the sovereignty and integrity of Member States,
whether they are big or small, weak or powerful.

Today's meeting is taking place in the aftermath of the
two landmark Judgments issued by the International Court
of Justice on 27 February 1998, in which the Court
confirmed its jurisdiction in the Lockerbie case under the
1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation. In effect, these
two Judgments support the argument that the Lockerbie
case, being a legal issue, should be deliberated upon by the
International Court of Justice. Indeed, it is important to
recall that the five members of the Security Council who
abstained from voting on Security Council resolution 748
(1992) of 31 March 1992 had advised that the dispute be
handled under Chapter VI of the Charter, which provides
that disputes of a legal nature should, as a general rule, be
referred by parties to the International Court.

My delegation is of the opinion that the Libyan
Government has demonstrated sufficient flexibility to meet
the demands of the United States and the United Kingdom,
with a view to finding a just settlement of this dispute. By
so doing, Libya has been supported by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).

Therefore, my country wishes to appeal to the two
members of the Security Council most directly affected to
demonstrate commensurate flexibility in order to reach a
just and fair settlement of the case under Chapter VI of the
Charter. We should not lose sight of the fact that the
families of the victims want to see justice done as soon as
possible, and we all know that justice delayed is indeed
justice denied. Unfortunately, the rejection to date by the
United States and the United Kingdom of all proposals
from Libya for holding the trial in a place that meets the
requirements of neutrality and impartiality has led to the
delay in the trial of the two suspects.

Regarding international terrorism, the entire world
must be united in condemning it. It must not be tolerated.
Nigeria is opposed to all forms of international terrorism,
especially as it impacts on innocent peoples. It is on record
of the Security Council, however, that Libya has taken a
firm and unequivocal stand against such acts by whoever
perpetrates them. Libya has also pledged full and positive
cooperation with regional and international efforts to
combat this dreadful crime. We shall hold them to their
words and actions.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that since the
International Court of Justice has confirmed its
competence to deal with this case, it should be allowed to
do so without further delay. Meanwhile, we would like to
join the many others in calling for the suspension or
lifting of the sanctions against Libya which have had
devastating effects not only on the targeted country's
innocent civilian population, but also on the region as a
whole and even beyond. The Court's ruling supports the
argument that the sanctions, which appeared to pre-empt
a definitive legal ruling on the case, should not have been
imposed in the first instance and there is now no
justification for their continuation before the case is heard
by the Court.

Finally, my delegation wishes to remind members of
the Security Council of their very heavy responsibility
when they act on behalf of all the 185 members of this
United Nations. It is only right and just that every
decision taken by this Council in these times should be
able to withstand the careful scrutiny of all Member
States, on whose behalf the Council is acting. Otherwise,
the very legitimacy of Council decisions would be
seriously undermined. The ripples of any hasty decisions
by the Council forced on it by a determined minority,
however powerful, would have far-reaching implications
which could damage the credibility and image of our
Organization, with dire consequences for international
peace and security.

