The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Singapore, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration Without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Heraldo Munoz,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.

It is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Mufioz to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/679, which contains the text of a
letter dated 23 August 2004 from the Chairman of the
Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee,
transmitting the first report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. I now
give him the floor.


