Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): It has
taken so much loss of human life; such unspeakable
horror and terrible destruction; the bloodcurdling terror
of millions of innocent people subjected to a horrible
campaign of shock and fright, coldly conceived and
planned; and hundreds of millions of people crying
tears of blood before the fury of a war broadcast live
for the Council - to which the nations of the world
have given the responsibility of forever protecting us
from war - to realize that there is a nation in danger
of death and that, if it should turn away, it would have
to assume an onerous responsibility before God,
humankind and history.

The Council has therefore decided to meet today
following the joint request of the Group of Arab States
and the Non-Aligned Movement. I am sure you will
agree with me, Sir, that it was high time for it to do so.
The situation we face today is so serious and fraught
with peril for a people and a country whose very
existence is threatened; for a region that is already
heavily battered and bruised; and for humanity
challenged in terms of its very humanity that to do
nothing would be tantamount to complicity in failing to
help a nation in jeopardy.

How can the use of such extreme,
disproportionate and definitive measures be justified
when no present and immediate danger was threatening
international peace and security and when the
inspections instituted by the Security Council for the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq were proceeding in the
right direction?
How can we characterize the irreparable damage
inflicted on millions of children who had already been
made sickly and famished by the sanctions that the
Council imposed on them? They have been rudely
awakened in the middle of the night and kept awake for
days, terrorized, stupefied and plunged into a
permanent nightmare by explosions of such
unbelievable power that they have made us flinch even
in front of our television screens and shaken us to our
deepest foundations?

While we rightly worry about the effects of
televised violence on our children, who can predict the
serious trauma and immense suffering of these millions
of children who have been robbed of their childhood
and their innocence, who have been forever branded by

the mark of horror, and who will never forget the
unbearable ordeal that, in a split second, turned their
lives forever inside out?

Neither they, nor all those who have been
demonstrating against this war for months - including
here in New York, where we have seen the families of
the victims of 11 September leading the peace march
because, having experienced it in their souls and in
their flesh, they know what man's folly can be - can
resign themselves to believing that freedom and
security can be bought at such a price. These children
will undoubtedly bear permanent scars and their hearts,
like those of anyone whose hopes have been robbed,
will be heavy with sorrow, bitterness and frustration.

Since the onset of the crisis, Algeria has called
for a peaceful settlement of the conflict based on Iraq's
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Only a few days ago, we warned of the
dangers and perils that a conflict in Iraq would entail
for Iraq itself, the countries of the region and world
peace. We wish today to express our immense sadness
and grave concern before this terrible ordeal being
imposed on the brotherly Iraqi people, who, besieged
and bloodied, is meeting adversity with a courage and a
dignity that compel our admiration and respect.

We say this with the conviction of those who
know from experience that war is always the worst of
solutions and that civilians always pay the highest
price, as borne out by the unbearable images of
hundreds of civilians, including women and children,
who have been killed or wounded by the bombing. In
spite of censorship, self-censorship and worse, such
images have forced themselves willy-nilly onto our
television screens.

Algeria profoundly regrets that the inspection
missions were abruptly cut short just as they were
beginning to bear fruit thanks to Iraq's active
cooperation. Algeria wishes to recall that the force to
which Iraq is today subject has not been duly
authorized and that it does not therefore meet the
required conditions of legality and legitimacy. In fact, a
precedent of exceptional gravity has been set in
international relations, against which the Secretary-
General issued a warning on 11 March when he stated
that those who would decide to act outside the Security
Council would be doing so in violation of the United
Nations Charter. Moreover, it is obvious today that the
objectives of this war go well beyond those of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) and that this is not
merely a question of destroying the weapons of mass
destruction that Iraq claims not to possess.

For all these reasons, my country fully endorses
the resolution adopted on 24 March by the Council of
Ministers of the League of Arab States, calling for the
immediate cessation of acts of war and the total and
unconditional withdrawal of foreign forces. This is a
pressing and solemn appeal that can be ignored neither
by the Council nor by the coalition that is waging war
against Iraq.

It is for these reasons, too, that we reiterate the
obligation of strict respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Iraq; reaffirm our full solidarity with the brotherly
people of Iraq in their current terrible ordeal; and call
for strict compliance with the Geneva Conventions
relative to prisoners of war and to the protection of
civilian persons in times of war.

It was likewise with regret and dismay that my
country learned of the Secretary-General's decision on
17 March to put a halt to the activities of all United
Nations bodies present in Iraq. While we understand
the security reasons behind this measure, we would
point out to the Council that the suspension of the oil
for food programme is about to unleash a veritable
humanitarian disaster, particularly in Basra, as the
Secretary-General himself indicated two days ago.

The suspension of this humanitarian programme
will mean neither more nor less than stopping the
delivery to Iraq of medicine, food and other
humanitarian supplies at the very moment when,
deprived of water and electricity and subject to the fury
of combat and bombardment, Iraq's civilians need
more than ever to be protected, assisted and effectively
led.

We therefore call for the immediate resumption of
the oil for food programme, which must be
administered under the authority of the Council, and
only according to the terms of existing signed
contracts. It is understood that when the sanctions are
lifted, the system in place will have lost its reason for
being and that any adjustment to the programme should
not prejudice the future or violate the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Iraq. Nor should it violate the principle of the Iraqi
people's right to dispose freely of their resources.

When the founding fathers created the United
Nations, it was clearly not to create an agency for
dispensing humanitarian assistance - as important and
as necessary as that can be - in cases of catastrophe
and armed conflict. The United Nations was, in fact,
designed to realize ambitions and to embody the
greatest ideals.

It is, above all, a political organization comprised
of nations motivated by the will to work together in
taking up the many challenges facing humanity today.
The global, transnational nature of those challenges
obliges all States, large and small, to unite their efforts
and to act collectively and in solidarity to tackle them
with success. The United Nations is the institution that
embodies our universal conscience, the organization to
which all look when there is a threat to international
peace and security. This institution is expected to
ensure peace, justice and law and to protect the
weakest and most destitute. It is a unique forum in
which the nations of the world come together to dream
and to construct together, through dialogue,
collaboration and cooperation, a safer and more just
world in which the rule of law is applied to all, in all
circumstances.

Therefore it is our duty, the Member States, and

that of the Secretary-General - as he has just
demonstrated in his statement before the Council this
afternoon - to ensure that this Organization,

irreplaceable from any point of view, is not
sidestepped, marginalized, weakened or relegated to a
minor role but, rather, emerges enhanced by the trials
imposed by the circumstances. Otherwise, it would lose
its soul, and we would all suffer for it.

Today the Council truly stands at a crossroads. It
faces a situation of extreme gravity that touches upon
its very reason for existence and which obliges it to do
all to maintain international peace and security. The
Council's responsibility is today greater because this is
a question of the unauthorized use of force and because
the Council is expected, at the least, to call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and the return to
peaceful means for the settlement of conflicts.

Is that too much to ask of the Council, which
remains for so many nations, large and small, despite
the disappointments and frustrations, the object of our
hopes and our will to create a safer, more just world
and the last defence against brute force and the law of
the strongest?

