Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
shares the concerns outlined by Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Gilmour, as well as those expressed by other Council
members, about the severity and systematic nature of
human rights violations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Sadly, we have seen no discernible
improvement since the Council last discussed this
agenda item. Some of the most serious human rights
violations of our time, including murder, enslavement,
torture, imprisonment, rape, forced abortion, other
sexual violence and starvation continue to be reported.
It is no surprise that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea regime works so hard to restrict an independent
assessment of the situation.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
leadership maintains tight control over its
population - control grounded in terror instilled by
egregious and widespread human rights violations.
It is a regime that executes its citizens, without due
process, for acts as minor as watching or distributing
foreign media. Torture and ill-treatment at detention
facilities, including in its extensive prison camp
system, are routine, as we have heard this morning.
Harsh restrictions remain on the freedom of movement
by ordinary North Koreans.

The continuation of such gross violations of human
rights demonstrates that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea authorities do not feel bound by
the rules of the international system. Pyongyang's
weapons-of-mass-destruction programme exemplifies
that attitude. We must not stand by and let that
rejection of internationally accepted norms, under
the guise of this being a so-called internal matter, go
uncontested. To do so would be to fail the people of
North Korea. To do so would be to fail the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's neighbours, which are
faced with a heightened security threat resulting from
Pyongyang's reckless development of weapons of mass
destruction - a programme advanced on the back of
the suffering of its people. And, to do so would be to
fail ourselves, given the regime's continued defiance of
the Council's resolutions.

As the Council stressed in resolution 2321 (2016),
there is an urgent need for the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to respect and ensure the inherent
dignity of people within its territory. As noted by others
this morning, Democratic People's Republic of Korea
nationals are being sent abroad by their authorities
to work under conditions that reportedly amount to
forced labour. That is one of the ways in which the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is able to
subvert United Nations sanctions and fund its weapons-
of-mass-destruction programme. New Zealand finds
the diversion of domestic funds towards weapons of
mass destruction, and away from desperately needed
humanitarian support, simply deplorable.

Despite the time that has passed since the release of
the commission of inquiry's report (A/HRC/25/63), the
urgency of its recommendations has not diminished.
We must ensure that our picture of the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea remains up-to-
date. In that regard, we welcome the important work
being undertaken by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul.
We also welcome the appointment of a new Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation, Tomas
Quintana, who recently completed his first visit to the
region. The Special Rapporteur has emphasized the
importance of efforts to both engage the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and pursue accountability.
Those are not mutually exclusive goals.

Engagement is important in order to ensure that we
improve the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. In that regard, there
have been some small positive developments, such as
improvements in the rights of persons with disabilities.
We should also be prepared to support practical options
for pursuing accountability against those within the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea system who
bear primary responsibility for the worst crimes that
have been committed.

New Zealand reiterates its call on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to take immediate steps
to bring an end to all human rights violations and to
meaningfully cooperate with the Special Rapporteur
and other international human rights mechanisms. We
urge the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
review its policies, remove constraints on the United
Nations and other international organizations, and
ensure that meaningful assistance is provided that can
make a practical difference to the lives of its citizens.

New Zealand also encourages the international
community, particularly those States with an established
relationship with the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, to engage the Pyongyang authorities on human
rights issues where possible, and to encourage its
cooperation and participation in human rights dialogue.
We must make our concerns known and be clear that we
expect tangible improvement.

Finally, we call on the Council to remain seized of
the human rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, given its clear link to Pyongyang's
weapons-of-mass-destruction programme and the
continued absence of meaningful engagement or any
discernible progress by the authorities in addressing
the Council's concerns.

