Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation congratulates you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and offers you our highest commitment of cooperation
with the Council as it carries out its tasks this month.

We also wish publicly to thank the Ambassador
of Cameroon for his magnificent work at the helm of
the Security Council in October.

We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Uganda to our meeting.

I wish to begin by stressing the great importance
of the introduction of the report before the Council,
which was undertaken, as proposed by the Chinese
presidency of the Council, so that we may consider its
contents together with the countries that are referred to
in the recommendations and findings contained in the
report and that have been involved with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent years. We believe that
the report's topic is one of the key elements in the
restoration of peace and security to the region and in
the establishment of political stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, along with respect
for the fundamental rights of the citizens of that
country.

The peace process must be lasting. It is advancing
thanks to progress made in recent months, most
certainly including the political agreements that have
led to the onset of the definitive withdrawal of foreign
troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We believe that, in the next phase, full
sovereignty must be restored to the Congo over its
natural resources. My country considers that to be an
essential ingredient of economic development, peace
and security in the region.

The natural resources with which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is generously endowed
constitute fundamental attributes of that country's
sovereignty and must serve, first and foremost, the
economic and social development of Congolese
citizens. They can also be an engine for the economic
and social development of the region if they are
rationally exploited by means of equitable and fair
machinery that will benefit the Congolese and their
African neighbours. In order to be able to achieve that
objective, important far-reaching measures will have to
be taken in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
well as in the neighbouring countries, which the
international community must support.

The report prepared under Ambassador Mahmoud
Kassem, which is before us today, is a very rich
document that provides very important revelations and,
therefore, is very controversial. My country believes
that the Security Council is committed to giving timely
follow-up to the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts, evaluating them and assessing their
applicability. In keeping with its responsibility, the
Council must also ensure that the follow-up to the
findings of this report will lead to full clarification of
the criminal acts referred to in this report, and that can
also lead to holding those involved in these possible
criminal acts responsible for their actions. The
establishment of the rule of law is a main instrument
for the exercise of the sovereignty by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo over its natural resources.

The report describes the significance of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources as an element that
explains the nature of the conflict the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is still experiencing and the size
and magnitude of the challenges involved in
confronting the basic causes and motives of that
conflict in the search for lasting peace.

I believe that the report contains elements that
should provide a standard for initiating investigations
within the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well
as within the jurisdiction of the countries referred to in
the report, particularly in Rwanda, Uganda and
Zimbabwe. The Security Council must respond
completely and impartially to the comments made by
the authorities of those countries on the content of the
report. Yet, it must also encourage those authorities so
that the necessary investigations are carried out to
provide clarification on the nature of the events
described in the report and, when necessary, to clarify
its veracity.

The conditions under which this report was
prepared were not easy, and the Security Council
should not disregard that fact. The difficulties of
identifying sources to obtain the information to carry
out the investigations within the limitations stemming
from the nature of the work of this Working Group
must be considered by the Council and must be a point
of departure for fairly evaluating the work and effort
achieved by the Panel of Experts.

My delegation believes that the recommendations
made by the Experts must be discussed and analysed at
length by the members of the Security Council in order
to determine what measures are necessary so that we
may agree on ones that may be appropriately applied.
They are recommendations that respond to the
protection of natural resources and the establishment of
mechanisms that ensure their legitimate exploitation, as
well as recommendations that relate to building the
foundations of a just and lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Working Group must continue its work, and
it must be founded to a certain degree on a mechanism
to maintain monitoring in the new phases of regulation
and control of natural resources, which, we hope, will
be forthcoming. Sustained social and economic
development, a mechanism of governance and
entrenchment of the rule of law in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, under fully transparent
conditions, and the effective fight against corruption -
only these will guarantee that the Congolese will
ultimately be the beneficiaries of the immense natural
wealth bestowed on that nation.

My delegation must insist that the Council
continue to be committed to the work proposed by the
recommendations and findings of this report. We
believe that dialogue, which the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbouring countries, cited many times in the report,
must continue within the Working Group. This will
provide the procedure that will enable us to achieve our
objectives.

In conclusion, the report contains a description of
the problem of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
involves private, national and foreign companies and
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of other countries, as well as criminal
organizations openly engaging in illegal activities. That
complicated combination, described in the report, also
speaks to us, the international community at large, of
the need to make both neighbouring countries and
countries distant from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo responsible for establishing mechanisms to
prosecute crimes, investigate them and to make justice
and law prevail. We believe that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will not be able by itself to
carry out the enormous task of re-establishing control
over its natural resources if it does not have the strong
support of the authorities of other countries and the
international community as a whole. The Security
Council must remain vigilant and ensure that this
machinery for cooperation and these commitments are
fulfilled.

