Mr. Kazuo Kodama (Japan): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Amos,
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross Director-
General, Mr. Daccord, for their very pertinent briefings.
It is clear that civilians in great numbers become
victims when conflicts erupt. It is therefore imperative
for us all to achieve concrete improvements on the
ground with the help of today's debate.

To that end, we support the proposal by the
Secretary-General to promote three approaches aimed
at overcoming the five challenges raised in his
previous report (S/2009/277). The first of the three
approaches, the comprehensive approach, can be
achieved when the actors involved are proactive and
engage in greater cooperation with each other. First, it
is the responsibility of the Government and the army of
a country in which a conflict occurs to protect its own
people. To that end, the rule of law should be
established by promoting security sector reform and
strengthening the judicial system and law enforcement.

Secondly, with the enhancement of the response
capacity of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
we are pleased to see that the United Nations missions
in C6te d'Ivoire, the eastern Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Sudan have developed strategies for the
protection of civilians and that training modules will be
completed shortly for all peacekeeping personnel. Still
more comprehensive strategies are required to fill the
gap between existing capacities and the standards to
which we aspire.
Thirdly, the control of weapons, should be
strengthened, especially through the promotion of
regional cooperation and the creation of a legal
framework. As for small arms, last June the fourth
Biennial Meeting of States on Small Arms considered
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, which should be
implemented without delay to prevent and eradicate the
illegal trade in small arms. Also, the first Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention on Cluster Munitions
was held in Laos in early November, and the Vientiane
Declaration and Vientiane Action Plan were adopted
there. Japan would like to see the international
community engage in the cooperation necessary to
make that treaty universal and fulfil its provisions.

Fourthly, the protection of women and children is
a priority. Japan appreciates the active discussions at
the ministerial open debate on women and peace and
security last month (S/PV.6411) and supports the
utilization by the United Nations and Member States of
a set of indicators in implementing resolution 1325
(2000). Japan is also concerned over the intentional use
of sexual violence by armed groups, and therefore it
supports the active efforts being made in that area by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict. We expect UN
Women also to play a significant role in coordinating
the work being done in this field, and we reaffirm the
need to strengthen targeted sanctions against persistent
perpetrators of violence against children, in accordance
with the resolution 1882 (2009).

Turning to the consistent approach, Japan
welcomes the recent development of the operational
concept by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support aimed at
promoting consistency. Cooperation between the
military and civilians should be strengthened to further
ensure humanitarian access. It is also a priority to
protect humanitarian aid workers in order to prevent
them from becoming the target of attacks. In that
regard, the establishment of a nationwide network of
interagency protection working groups, under the lead
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS),
is a good example.

Secondly, in light of the need to share best
practices and lessons from the past, we must definitely
learn from the tragic and heinous accident of mass
rapes that were committed in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo earlier this year,
which provided us with many lessons, including that
the early warning system needs to be strengthened,
communication between local people and peacekeeping
missions needs to be developed, troop-contributing
countries need to receive training, and there needs to
be close and smooth communication between the
Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. An example of the kind of success we need
in that area was the establishment in Timor-Leste of a
hotline between the United Nations Mission and
civilians and local authorities. The updated aide-
memoire should also be utilized proactively to this end.
The experience of drawing down and then withdrawing
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) should be shared,
with a view to utilizing benchmarks for the protection
of civilians.

Thirdly, the Council should obtain the most
accurate and objective information and then make use
of it on the ground in a timely manner, so that the
establishment or renewal of a mandate related to the
protection of civilians can be considered. For that
reason, we should start to communicate with troop- and
police-contributing countries at an early stage in
United Nations involvement. The Council should
utilize informal mechanisms, such as interactive
dialogue, and the discussions in the Security Council
should better reflect those taking place in informal
expert groups.

Last but not least, Mr. President, I stress the
importance of the accountable approach, which stresses
maintaining accountability and fighting against
impunity. To those ends, the affected country should
build its own capacity to establish the rule of law as a
means of strengthening the protection of civilians. And
cooperation between the affected country and the
United Nations should be pursued in order to spread
the rule of law to many more countries. I might
mention, in that connection, that in July this year the
first conviction was handed down by the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, to which Japan
has given its support. Further efforts should be made to
strengthen the rule of law at both the international and
the national levels, based on a careful analysis of the
situation in each country. In addition, the Council
should engage in efforts to strengthen accountability
and enhance cooperation with United Nations
organizations, including the Human Rights Council and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We should be aware that measures
are being taken, such as the establishment of the
committee of investigation at the Human Rights
Council. As mentioned in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/5 79), strengthened
monitoring on the ground, through the involvement of
many United Nations and other actors, will contribute
to promoting and enhancing the protection of civilians.

In closing, I would like to emphasize the
relevance of the human security approach, which can
serve as a conceptual basis for protecting and
empowering those in a society who are its most
vulnerable members. Empowerment of vulnerable
people, such as children, internally displaced persons
and refugees through education and training at the
individual and community levels, is also an essential
means of preventing conflicts from recurring once they
have been resolved. For that reason Japan has been
steadfast in providing support for such efforts, for
example, through the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security.

