Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this open debate. I also wish
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine.

The ongoing conflict in Syria continues to generate
appalling and preventable civilian suffering. Reports
of renewed military offensives and counter-offensives
by nearly all parties to the conflict, in violation of
the cessation of hostilities still in force, are deeply
worrisome.

Brazil has long held that the war needs to be and
should be solved through a political process that is led
and owned by the people of Syria. While reaffirming
our strong support for the efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, we cannot help but express our
concern at the apparent lack of progress of the recent
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva. All parties and their
supporters must demonstrate the readiness to act
constructively in the rounds to come and advance
towards a political transition based on credible,
inclusive and non-sectarian governance and towards
the drafting of a new constitution, as established by
resolution 2254 (2015).

Brazil vehemently condemns all war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of terrorism and other
serious violations committed in Syria and stresses the
need for accountability. In that regard, I underscore the
latest report of the Independent International Inquiry
Commission on Syria, led by Professor Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro, which depicts a horrifying range of atrocities
perpetrated by Da'esh against the Yazidi community in
Sinjar, atrocities that may constitute a case of genocide.
We also urge all parties and their supporters to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including the prohibition on the deliberate targeting
of civilians. Resolution 2286 (2016) was an important
step towards strengthening the legal framework for
the protection of medical and humanitarian personnel
and facilities in armed conflict. That is highly relevant
in Syria.

The recent release of the report of the Iraq
Inquiry, a comprehensive report on the circumstances
surrounding the 2003 military intervention of Iraq
and its aftermath, is a sobering reminder of the perils
of military action in the absence of a clear mandate
issued by the Security Council. The repercussions of
misguided and ill-informed choices made 13 years
ago still threaten the security and stability of Iraq and
the Middle East region in particular, but their overall
negative effects on other parts of the world cannot be
overlooked.

Brazil condemns, in the strongest terms, the terrorist
attacks of 3 July, which killed more than two hundred
people in Iraq - the deadliest in the country since the
2003 invasion - as well as the recent attacks that took
place in Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and Yemen. Brazil conveys its condolences to all those
affected by terrorist attacks and reiterates that there
can be no justification for terrorism. Terrorism, which
runs counter to all principles and values for which the
United Nations stands, requires a coordinated response.
In that regard, we commend the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 70/291 at the fifth review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
held on 1 July, and expect it to play an important role in
guiding our collective efforts for the future.

We took good note of the report of the Middle East
Quartet, which scrutinized the main impediments to
a lasting resolution to the Palestinian-Israeli dispute
and offered concrete recommendations in that regard.
Brazil believes that the report should have highlighted
the illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories and the challenges they pose to a peaceful
resolution of the dispute. We acknowledge that steps
must be urgently taken to reverse current negative
trends and advance towards the implementation of
a two-State solution. We also draw attention to two
important events held last month to discuss strategies
to revitalize the peace process: a ministerial meeting
in Paris, hosted by the Government of France, and a
multilateral conference organized by the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, in Geneva.

Brazil expects that those developments will
inspire the Security Council to fully exercise its
responsibilities and actively lead international efforts
to pursue, without further delay, the creation of a
free, independent, sovereign and viable State for the
Palestinian people within its 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace and harmony
with Israel. Regrettably, it has been more than seven
years since the Council last adopted a resolution on this
paramount issue.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation in Gaza
remains dramatic, and acts of violence, which Brazil
rejects unequivocally, continue to be committed by
both sides. Brazil strongly condemns the recent wave
of attacks in Israel and in the occupied territories,
which have targeted mainly innocent civilians over the
past several weeks. We join the Secretary-General in
condemning and expressing disappointment over the
recent announcement by Israel of its intention to expand
the construction of settlement units in both the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. Over the past few years, the
international community has been given compelling
evidence that such negative cycles of violence and
retaliation against innocents will not contribute to
fulfilling the aspiration of the majority of the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples for sustainable peace.

In Libya, the Government of National Accord is
still challenged by the need to consolidate its political
authority and territorial control. Brazil urges all parties
that have yet to comply with the Libyan Political
Agreement to do so as early as possible in order to
allow the restoration of the national unity of Libya. We
reiterate our support for Special Representative Martin
Kobler in these complex circumstances and express our
hope that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
will soon be able to re-establish its presence in Tripoli.

While the humanitarian situation in Yemen
remains dire, we are hopeful that ongoing negotiations
between Yemeni parties in Kuwait, facilitated by the
United Nations, will soon lead to a positive outcome.
Brazil took note with interest of Special Envoy Cheikh
Ahmed's peace road map, as well as his proposal to
strengthen the Office of the Special Envoy in order
to advance towards a comprehensive settlement of the
conflict. We encourage all parties and their external
supporters to cooperate in this endeavour and join
efforts to restore peace and stability in Yemen, thereby
leading to a draft Constitution, electoral reform and
timely general elections, as determined by resolution
2201 (2015).

