Ms. Liivin (Sweden): I have the honour of speaking
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland and Norway - and my own country, Sweden.
These remarks are in addition to the statement that will
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, with which we align ourselves.

To begin with, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important open debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Peter Maurer
and President Touadera for their contributions this
morning and the Council for its efforts to strengthen
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

As outlined in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/447), the protection of civilians is at the core
of our common purpose. The heroic efforts of United
Nations personnel and the commitment of troop- and
police-contributing countries are a testament to this.
They deserve our deepest respect, recognizing that
their mission may also entail sacrifice.

Let me highlight three ideas that we believe should
underpin the protection-of-civilians agenda of the
twenty-first century.

First, peacekeepers and peace operations must be
properly resourced to protect. Governments have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians. But while we
recommit to enhancing national efforts, United Nations
peace operations must be able to assist in fulfilling this
responsibility. All peacekeepers need to be properly
prepared, trained and equipped.

We must therefore ensure that all United Nations
personnel, at all levels and in all functions, receive
adequate training on the protection of civilians, child
protection and preventing conflict-related sexual
Violence before deployment, and that continual training
is provided in the field.

The Nordic countries commit significant resources
to capacity-building, across the board, from military
to civilian personnel, from local authorities to civil
society, and States to regional organizations. We do so
in a wide variety of contexts, ranging from the coalition
against Da'esh, to support for the Eastern African
Standby Force.

In addition, Sweden is supporting the development
of pre-deployment training standards for United
Nations corrections officers. Over the last 11 years,
the Swedish prison and probation service has provided
pre-deployment training to more than 400 corrections
officers from all over the world.

Secondly, prevention contributes to protection.

By increasing our efforts in the field of prevention
and peacebuilding, and addressing the root causes of
conflict, we foster sustainable peace. Important joint
steps towards this have been taken through the recent
resolutions on the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We believe that a shift towards prevention,
underpinned by local perspectives, should be seen as an
antidote to atrocities.
Needless to say, the protection of civilians includes
the protection of women and children, in particular girls.
Furthermore, women and girls need to be considered
as powerful agents for prevention and protection. We
therefore need to ensure women's and girls' influence
and meaningful participation. One tool in support of
United Nations mediation activities is our Nordic
Women Mediators' Network.

Our experiences in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) have taught us that the efficient
protection of civilians requires close cooperation
among military, police and civilian components within
the United Nations system, as well as successful
coordination with local authorities, humanitarian
organizations and civil society. MINUSMA has
also demonstrated the importance of strengthened
situational awareness to the effective protection of
civilians as well as peacekeepers. We welcome the
development of a policy framework for intelligence in
support of United Nations peace operations.

Seeking national and regional perspectives is
key, and enhanced and more dynamic partnerships
are critical, including with regional and subregional
organizations. More predictable, sustainable and long-
term financing is also essential in this regard. The
Nordic countries provide long-term financing for peace
and development in a wide variety of ways, including
through significant non-earmarked contributions to
different parts of the United Nations system.

Thirdly, and lastly, we need norms that
safeguard humanity. Humanitarian organizations and
humanitarian and medical personnel play a crucial
role in the protection of civilians, both through active
efforts and through their very presence. They must be
respected and given swift and unimpeded access to
those in need. Their facilities and transports must be
protected, and they must never be targeted, harmed
or prevented from saving lives in contravention of
international law.

The very purpose of international humanitarian
law is to protect civilians in armed conflict. These
norms, which safeguard humankind, must be upheld.
We therefore commend the Council for its adoption of
resolution 2286 (2016), which strongly condemns acts
of violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
sick, medical and humanitarian personnel and hospitals
and medical facilities. We also need to increase our
humanitarian efforts to respond effectively to crises.
The first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, held in
May, provides an excellent point of departure for our
intensified efforts and the way forward. The Nordic
countries have long been among the top financial and
political supporters of the humanitarian agenda. We
intend to maintain our high level of support.

Let me conclude by honouring the legacy of an
individual who I believe embodied the courage that
defines the proud mission carried out by United Nations
peacekeepers all over the world, every day: the late
Captain Mbaye Diagne, who saved hundreds of lives,
perhaps as many as 1,000. His heroic deeds illustrate
the fact that the protection of civilians is within the
scope of our common action. Because the protection of
civilians needs to be pursued in partnership, we need to
listen to the voices of the vulnerable, we need to ensure
the dignity of the defenceless, and we need to keep
civilians safe - together.

