Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes your
presidency of the Security Council for June, Sir, and
congratulates you thereon. Turkey's commitment to
peace in the world and its unequivocal support for
developing countries reflect its genuine desire to
promote truly global multilateralism. My country, the
Central African Republic, thanks the Turkish
Government for the multifaceted assistance it has
provided to the Central African Republic and will
continue to provide in the future.

The Central African Republic also thanks the
Secretary-General for his recent report (S/2009/309) on
the situation in the Central African Republic and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office (BONUCA) in that country. We commend
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for presenting
the report and his informative briefing. We cannot fail
to note the full role that Mr. Sammy Kum Buo,
Director of the Africa II Division in the Department of
Political Affairs and Officer-in-Charge of BONUCA,
has played in recent months. His interim term was
noteworthy because he was able to address all the
thorny issues with the managing authorities and key
actors of the Central African Republic.

We also wish to congratulate Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde on her appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of BONUCA beginning
15 June 2009. We appreciate her appointment, which
was completed after a rigorous selection process. Her
experience is reassuring because she is already familiar
with the problems of the Central African Republic,
having worked on the subject within the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. My country
offers her its full support during her term in office. Our
hopes have been fulfilled and we thank the Secretary-
General most sincerely.

We must also pay well-deserved tribute to her
predecessor, Mr. Francois Lonseny Fall, for his
dedication and determination to move the Central
African Republic issue forward.

2009 is a key year for the Central African
Republic, which must now take courageous measures
to determine its future. The implementation of the
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue,
and in particular the establishment of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
the organization of general elections in 2010 and the
mobilization of resources, are the challenges to be
taken up in the coming months.

My delegation notes the progress achieved after
the holding of the political dialogue, including the
establishment of the Follow-up Committee for the
implementation of the dialogue recommendations, the
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Steering Committee and the High Court of Justice. Any
apparent delay in the implementation of those
programmes is due to a lack of financing, which has
yet to be mobilized.

At the political level, there is a genuine resolve to
move towards reconciliation, even if a few political
and military actors seem to be choosing the path of
force. My Government recognizes that the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement launched an
irreversible peace process. The Government is striving
to make its influence felt in everyday affairs, as it has
informed the Council on several occasions.

President Bozize met with the Libyan leader and
current Chairperson of the African Union and asked
him to support the cause of comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Central African Republic. The return to
the country of one of the political and military chiefs,
Abakar Sabone, is a good sign that the country is
progressing little by little along the path towards true
reconciliation. The DDR programme is advancing
slowly but surely. Working documents have been
created and lists of political and military groups
drafted, and a team has been established to manage and
mobilize contributions from the Peacebuilding Fund.
However, that programme must be brought into line
with security sector reform and the development hubs.
If they are to be reintegrated into civilian life,
ex-combatants must have training to allow them to
make a living. It is therefore important for the
development hubs to become a reality in due time.

Security and defence forces must also be
deployed in tandem with those programmes. At the
same time, that deployment is of major concern of the
Government of the Central African Republic, which is
doing its best to find financing because it wants DDR
to be implemented as quickly as possible. Funds
already collected by the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community will be allocated exclusively to
the peace process. We wish here to pay a well-deserved
tribute here in memory of His Excellency El Hadj
Omar Bongo Ondimba, President of Gabon, for his
personal involvement in helping to resolve the crisis in
the Central African Republic and for being a mobilizer
of funds to contribute to peacebuilding and
disarmament.

The issue of elections in 2010 is not problematic,
because the Government intends to respect the
electoral timetable. Thus, the draft electoral code to
launch that process remains under consideration by the
National Assembly. The Government is counting on the
support of the United Nations to successfully complete
the process.

With respect to humanitarian issues, it is
regrettable to note that, in the northern part of the
country, clashes between certain rebel groups -
including the Front democratique du peuple
centrafricain and the Convergence des patriotes
centrafricains pour la justice et la paix - with the

Forces armees centrafricaines (FACA), have displaced
Central Africans inside and outside the country. We
also note a new manifestation of Violence in the
northern part of the country - inter-community
violence. But the Central African Republic is also a
welcoming country, and has received Sudanese
refugees who have fled the violence in Darfur since
2007. Thanks to the joint action of the United Nations
Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and other
humanitarian agencies, as well as the National
Commission for Refugees and the local population,
refugees and displaced persons are receiving
assistance.

Where there is violence, human rights violations
are inevitable and we bitterly regret that. The Central
African Republic is emerging painfully from a long
period of crisis and the deployment of its defence and
security forces is occurring gradually in areas where
violence persists because of the actions of rebel groups
and widespread banditry. Nevertheless, the authorities
of the Central African Republic have taken measures to
prevent all acts of violence in conformity with the law.
Thus, new penal and military codes are being finalized.
A national human rights commission will be
established to address all human rights issues in the
Central African Republic, including the rights of
women and children in armed conflict, as well as the
rights of refugees.

In the context of restructuring the army and
raising the moral standards of the military, on 11 June
the National Assembly enacted a military training law
for FACA and the police for the period 2009-2013. The
law is aimed at consolidating and conditioning the
necessary personnel for FACA and the national police
in the areas of recruitment, training, retirement and
career management, and at identifying the budgetary
contributions of the State and the international
community that are necessary in order to achieve the
objectives set for 2013.

Since our country has been on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the authorities of the
Central African Republic have cooperated fully with
the country-specific configuration on the Central
African Republic, chaired by Ambassador Jan Grauls,
Permanent Representative of Belgium. In his
determination and ardent desire for us to succeed, he
has taken a series of measures that have moved the
situation in the Central African Republic decidedly
forward. His many missions to Bangui and throughout

the world to plead the case of the Central African
Republic plainly demonstrate that he is a staunch
defender of those in need. The Central African
Republic is very grateful for his commitment.

The strategic framework adopted on 6 May 2009
resulted from intensive consultations among all
stakeholders in the Central African Republic and the
international community. That document, which will be
revised every six months, was presented officially to
the Central African Republic parties by Ambassador
Grauls when he visited from 21 to 23 May 2009. That
Visit was truly successful in that it brought together
many members of the Government, civil society and
other stakeholders, including the media, which duly
disseminated the message of the Chairman of the
configuration on the Central African Republic.
National ownership remains the leitmotif of the
strategic framework's success. However, the
international community should also demonstrate its
flexibility by lending its unconditional support to
achieving the set objectives.

The Government supports that programme and is
ready to invest in its success. May we all support the
configuration's Chair in his determination to meet the
schedule for the best results. The fight against the poverty
afflicting most of the Central African Republic's
population requires respect for the established
programmes. The political will of the authorities has
already been confirmed by its simple resolve to hold
elections in 2010 and to complete the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme as soon as
possible.

We welcome the decision to transform the United
Nations the Peacebuilding Support Office into the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BINUCA). That new
structure will allow the activities of the United Nations
system to be coordinated on the ground as it supports the
political, socio-economic and sustainable development
activities in the Central African Republic. The future
BINUCA will have the advantage of being deeply
involved in implementing the strategic framework.

While we generally accept the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General, we nevertheless have
an objection to raise with regard to paragraph 74. The
information contained in that paragraph, in our
opinion, is not in line with the history of the Central
African Republic. Contrary to what is written, the
national day is celebrated solemnly and j oyously by the
people each 1 December, except for one period only
when there were repeated mutinies. That celebration
takes place throughout the territory, without exception.
The Republic's fiftieth anniversary, like those of
previous years, was greatly appreciated, and we expect
the same for the fifty-first anniversary in December
2009.

Lastly, we would like to reiterate our full support
for the activities of the United Nations in the Central
African Republic, which, we hope, will continue in the
future. The recent visits of Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe, head of the Department of Political
Affairs, were well received by the authorities in the
Central African Republic, which had not been visited
by a United Nations high official since the country
emerged from the crisis. Mr. Pascoe went to the
09-37565

Central African Republic without preconceptions and
to listen to the authorities. In that visit, we felt the
United Nations presence even closer to the Central
African Republic.

We also thank all other bilateral and multilateral
partners that are contributing effectively to the cause of
stabilization and sustainable peace in the Central
African Republic. They can rest assured of the full and
good cooperation of our Government.

