Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his insightful
briefing today on the outstanding work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo, who is participating for
the first time in a public meeting of the Council on
Colombia since the new President of Colombia was
inaugurated in August.

The implementation of the historic Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace between the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Eje'rcito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is now entering a new
stage. In the wake of the political changeover following
the legislative and presidential elections, whose
organization we have already commended, the new
Colombian authorities must now continue to implement
the commitments made in the framework of the peace
agreement, in particular the reintegration of ex-
combatants and security guarantees, as monitored by
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

Like previous speakers, France welcomes the recent
decision of the Government of President Duque to fill
key positions in institutions in charge of reintegration,
in accordance with the peace agreement. In the context
of that the change of Administration - a sign in
and of itself of the vitality of Colombian democracy,
independent of the positions adopted by the political
parties - I wish to make three observations.

First, I want to note the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is the pillar of transitional justice. The
independent Jurisdiction has the responsibility of
giving assurances both to victims and to participants
in the conflict in the framework of a comprehensive
system of justice, truth, reparation and non-repetition.
The ambitious choice of signatories of the agreement,
which is an important innovation and could ultimately
be transposed or adapted to other conflicts, requires
judges to be allowed to carry out their juridical duties
independently and, above all, that the Jurisidication's
operational rules not be changed.

France has had the opportunity on several
occasions to demonstrate its commitment to the pillar
of transitional justice, and I believe it important to
stress that the new Colombian authorities, who have
shown their determination to keep Colombia on the
path of peace and prosperity, continue to preserve the
independence of the Special Jurisdication for Peace and
to do their utmost to bolster the system ofjustice, truth,
reparation and non-repetition.

My second point has already been raised in
previous meetings but remains relevant. I refer to
the deterioration of the security situation in former
conflict zones. That insecurity affects former FARC-
EP combatants, who are now the targets of criminal
groups seeking to extend their area of influence. It also
affects social leaders, human rights defenders and those
who participate in coca crop substitution programmes.
Their murders must be vigorously condemned.
Improving the security situation in zones previously
controlled by the FARC-EP is a major challenge that the
new Colombian Government must address in order to
reap the dividends of peace. Although some measures
have been taken in that regard, France encourages
the Colombian authorities to redouble their efforts to
provide public services in those areas and thereby build
long-term peace. In that connection, we welcome the
national pact for life and the protection of social leaders
and human rights defenders, adopted on 23 August.

Thirdly and finally, the successful implementation
of the peace agreement will depend on the success of
economic reintegration. Too many revenue-generating
projects initiated by ex-combatants have failed for lack
of support. All relevant State services must therefore
be mobilized to give ex-combatants the opportunity to
contribute to the economic development of their country.
Key elements for development and reintegration include
access to land. Progress in this area in particular is
anticipated following the commitments undertaken
by the Government of Colombia, because it is those
lands that will definitively turn the page on 50 years of
conflict and testify to the commitment of ex-combatants
to improving their country.

The people of Colombia and their new Government,
represented today by the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
can count on the full and fraternal support of France in
this period of building a historic peace.

