Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic and the briefing by General Cisse'.
The report is sobering, yet it impels us and the
international community as a whole to be more
committed to the aims of post-conflict peace-building
and economic recovery in the Central African
Republic. We cannot allow the gains achieved so far to
be eroded and the society to slide into conflict and
chaos.

The Jamaican delegation has asserted time and
again the importance of an effective peace-building
strategy that embraces a fully integrated programme
involving the United Nations and its organs, the
Bretton Woods institutions and, where necessary,
regional organizations. A successful peace-building
strategy must include indispensable elements, such as
programmes promoting democratic governance, respect
for human rights, the rule of law and justice, and
sustainable economic and social development. Let me
emphasize the need for emerging democracies in post-
conflict situations to have sustained programmes that
foster long-term economic prosperity and social
development.

I was impressed by the observation made by Mr.
Calderisi that the Prime Minister and his colleagues
have kept their sights trained on medium- and long-
term issues, which will be important for strengthening
growth and reducing poverty. The Secretary-General
referred to these efforts to bring about economic
recovery as courageous. Such commitments deserve the
support of the international community.

It is in that context that we are concerned that the
situation in the Central African Republic since the
failed coup in May of this year has been marked by
sharp political tensions, further economic decline and a
troubling lack of security. We commend the efforts
made thus far by the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) to bring about political dialogue and
reconciliation among the parties. The report outlines
the formidable challenges faced by the Government of
the Central African Republic and its administrative and
technical institutions, as well as the lack of access to
overseas funding. This situation is an untenable one
that has the potential to erode the very economic and
social fabric of the society.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his report,
it is regrettable that the response of the international
community is not yet commensurate with the
challenges faced by the people of the Central African
Republic; and more so that the policies and
conditionalities imposed by the Bretton Woods
institutions have had a negative effect on the
development of the Central African Republic. My
delegation has in the past cautioned against the
possible negative effects of structural adjustment
programmes, which often follow old prescriptions
while not taking into consideration the special
conditions present in post-conflict peace-building
situations. The Bretton Woods institutions are
important partners in post-conflict peace-building, and
hence in conflict prevention. They must assume a
constructive role. We join the appeal made by others to
these institutions to take into account the specific
nature of the case of the Central African Republic in
the implementation of programmes with the
Government.

The regional dimension of the crisis is also of
paramount importance. The flow of weapons across the
porous borders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo poses a direct threat to the peace-building
efforts in the Central African Republic. That is further
exacerbated by the flow of refugees from the Central
African Republic into the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. All this points to the fact that sustainable peace
in the Central African Republic remains a distant
reality. Much needs to be done.

The Secretary-General has made a number of
proposals for strengthening the role of BONUCA. My
delegation stands ready to support consideration of
those proposals.

