Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's briefing. We are grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov and Executive Director Coninsx
for their briefings. We believe firmly that productive
cooperation with their entities will guarantee progress
in the work of combating terrorism under the auspices
of the United Nations.

We share many of the views expressed in the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat (S/2019/103).
For our part, we would like to note the following.

In our view, the reports' central focus should
continue to be on providing information on terrorists'
resource bases and efforts to undermine them. We want
to emphasize once again that any trade or economic
relations with individuals or organizations involved
in the activities of members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) represent a gross violation
of Security Council resolutions. All the essential
resolutions on this issue were adopted long ago. They
must be conscientiously implemented, not considered
as something meant for somebody else.

Despite significant successes in combating
terrorism in Syria and Iraq, the Middle East continues to
be a stronghold for ISIL's leadership. Their attacks have
continued, including on civilians. As they lose ground,
they continue to attempt to establish close collaboration
with their brothers in arms - the same kind of
terrorists, still operating in the Middle East, just under
different names. The efforts to crush ISIL in Iraq and
Syria continue. We are pleased that the stabilization of
the military and political situation in both countries has
helped to shrink the channels and volume of financing
for illegal armed groups. In Syria in particular, having
lost control over enormous amounts of territory, the
terrorists have also lost a source of income in the
form of the various ways they have been extorting
the population. Russia has helped to normalize the
situation in Syria and Iraq through its cooperation on
counter-terrorism cooperation, including through the
Baghdad coordination centre. The de-escalation efforts
undertaken by the country guarantors of the Astana
process have had a positive effect in Syria. We are also
concerned about the unresolved problem of repatriating
foreign terrorist fighters who fought for ISIL and are
still in Syria to their countries of origin and bringing

them to justice.

We would like to stress the need to invite the
representatives of the States that have suffered the most
from terrorist activity, foremost among them Syria
and Iraq, to the relevant briefings on ISIL, and the
importance of obtaining information from the conflict
zones. For that it is essential to work directly with the
Governments of those countries.

A major focus for us has been the movements of
foreign terrorist fighters seeking to continue their
terrorist activity in other conflict zones, such as
countries in Africa, particularly in the Sahara-Sahel
region, and Afghanistan. Despite the undoubted losses
it has suffered in the north, the Afghan wing of ISIL
remains one of the key destabilizing factors in the
country. Its expanding ideological, propaganda and
recruitment activities, which make intelligent use of
information and communications technologies, present
an additional danger. Its activities in Afghanistan
are fuelled by foreign terrorist fighters with combat
experience from Syria and Iraq. In our view, the
continued presence of this group in Afghanistan
represents a threat to the States that are its neighbours
in Central Asia. The high number of suicide bomber
attacks also suggests that the group possesses serious
human resources.

We have seen a certain amount of progress in
the work being done by neighbouring States to block
terrorism financing channels. For understandable
reasons, ISIL's revenue from smuggled petroleum
products has also continued to dwindle. Last autumn,
however, fighters seized several oilfields in Deir ez-Zor
governorate, which for several months enabled them to
resell a certain amount of fuel for between $30 and $35
a barrel through intermediaries.

On the whole, since the previous report
(S/2018/770) was issued, the key areas of revenue for
the major terrorist groups in the region have not seen
significant changes. Fighters continue to take hostages
for ransom, traffic in drugs, agricultural products and
human organs, and sell looted cultural heritage objects
on the black market. They are also filling their coffers
by trading in industrial products such as sulfuric
and phosphoric acids and cement, investing in fish-
farming in Iraq, speculating in stock markets, profiting
from cryptocurrencies, online-casino gambling and
e-commerce scams and supplying counterfeit medical
products. In some cases fighters have been compelled
to sell their weapons and ammunition to support
their activities.

However, we should not assume that ISIL and
Al-Qaida's leaders are content with the resources they
have. Together with their accomplices in organized
criminal groups they are constantly seeking new
financing sources for their activities. For example,
they have attempted to establish control over drug-
trafficking and mineral-smuggling routes from Asian
countries. As I mentioned earlier, Afghanistan is of
particular interest in that regard. Illegal enterprises
mining, processing and shipping abroad iron, copper,
gold and precious and semi-precious stones have been
established in a number of Afghan provinces. In that
context, we want to once again draw the Council's
attention to the research on ISIL-related financial flows
that since 2016 has been conducted on Russia's initiative
within the framework of the Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) on money laundering. To date, the FATF
secretariat has received information from more than
40 jurisdictions that has enabled it to compile a broad
picture of the ISIL financial and economic machine.

Unfortunately, despite our repeated appeals, the
crucial task of cutting off supplies of military-related
products to terrorist organizations has taken a back
seat in the United Nations. It is no secret that the grey
market for arms export is frequently exploited in order
to supply militants with weapons. When the deals are
relatively transparent, terrorist groups often operate in
the guise of so-called opposition movements in order
to get access to such products. We urge all States to
pay special attention to the issues of regulating the
activity of middlemen, criminalizing illicit brokering,
developing flexible systems for risk assessment for
exports, improving information-sharing between
Governments and creating monitoring and control
mechanisms for arms transfers. For our part, we intend
to continue to play an active role in global anti-terrorism
efforts and in supporting United Nations activity in the
area, including by assisting foreign partners, and we
affirm our interest in constructive dialogue with all
interested parties.

