Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting today. Let me join everyone else in
welcoming Judge Jorda to the Security Council.

Judge Jorda, I would like to thank you for your
presentation. I apologize for being unable to hear all of
it, but I will read it carefully. I already have the
highlights, and I want to begin by expressing my
Government's strong support for your efforts and to
take note of the fact that, like our President for the
month of June, you come from France, and I am
therefore doubly delighted to be bracketed between two
such distinguished representatives of the international
community and of the Government of France.

At the outset, I would like to talk about four
things: your work in general, and the Balkans, Rwanda
and Sierra Leone specifically, because these issues
embrace a core goal of the United States, which is to
find every means possible to bring to justice people
who might sometimes escape the law if it is left only to
domestic purposes. So important is this issue in the
eyes of my Government that Secretary of State
Albright has created a special position simply for this
issue, filled by my friend and old colleague, David
Sheffer, who has come up from Washington again
today to join us at the Council for the second time in
two weeks. He is seated behind me to my right, and I
welcome him back to the Security Council again today.

The United States remains committed to bringing
to justice those responsible for war crimes in the
former Yugoslavia. Creating these Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda is an historic
achievement. Perhaps they were not perfect in every
respect, because they were setting new precedents at
every stage, but they are historic, and they must
succeed. Our Government is committed to that. Any
criticisms we may make- in terms of operations,
management, budgets, processes - must be understood
at all times within the context of the fact that this is
criticism from friends, designed to improve operations.

The objectives of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
now almost five years old, cannot be fulfilled until the
people responsible for these crimes are in the
jurisdiction of the war crimes Tribunal and prosecuted.
I am delighted that Mr. Krajisnik is now in The Hague,
and I await the day when Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Miladic
and others will be delivered to The Hague. I also want
to point out in the clearest possible terms that long-
term peace and stability in the Balkans will not be
possible as long as the current leadership in Belgrade is
in power. Those people who have been indicted also
should be brought to justice.

My Government welcomes Judge Jorda's
proposals on ways to streamline the Tribunal's
operations in order to reduce the current backlog and
improve the efficiency of the Court. This is vitally
important. Much of the criticism that has been directed
at the Tribunal's operations has validity. Let us not
shrink from the truth, even when it is critical, because
we must deal with the problems in order to make the
process work. In particular, we support his two
principal recommendations, on the delegation of pre-
trial management responsibilities and the designation
of ad [item judges to increase trial capacity.

Above all, we must ensure that any reforms
reinforce rather than distract from the core mandate of
the Council. Our task is to strengthen the Tribunal's
ability to bring criminals to justice. We would oppose
any changes that would weaken the Tribunal's capacity
to do the important job set before it. We must ensure
that our efforts to streamline the Tribunal do not in any
way complicate the ability of the Prosecutor to
apprehend those at large.

President Jorda, while I know that your primary
responsibility in addressing us today is to discuss your
work in the former Yugoslavia, your presence here
reminds us of the important role that justice and
reconciliation play in peace processes around the
world. Nowhere is this need greater than in Sierra
Leone.

Mr. President, with your permission, I would like
to address that issue, because it is directly related to the
subject that we are here to talk about today. As we have
discussed in this Council before, no mistake should be
made about our Government's attitude towards the
leaders of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), who
have created this terrible tragedy in Sierra Leone. We
do not believe that Sierra Leone can have a peaceful
and stable future until they are brought to justice. In
recent weeks, and in recent days, I have had talks with
many members of the Council, members of the
Secretariat and Carla del Ponte about this important
issue. We take note of the fact that, according to well-
confirmed press reports, President Kabbah has already
addressed communications to the Secretary-General on
this issue and that he has asked for the extension of
some international war crimes umbrella to cover the
people about whom we are talking, the leaders of the
RUF.

We look forward to hearing the expert views of
the Secretary-General and of the experts in the Legal
Division on how to proceed. Some form of extension of
the international war crimes umbrella to cover these
odious people must be undertaken. The actual details,
as we have heard in this Council from Mr. Zacklin,
who I see is with us today, are something that we need
to learn more about. I look forward to hearing a
serious, sustained discussion of the options before us.
My Government would like to do whatever is to be
done swiftly and efficiently. Creating a new tribunal
probably would not fulfil that criteria, as Mr. Zacklin
himself has indicated previously, but some form of
international umbrella, as suggested by the President of
Sierra Leone and as proposed by many other people
here. This is something that I believe must be looked at
very positively and with a view towards action at the
earliest possible opportunity.

I want to also note with very high approval that
when the Lome Agreement was signed last year the
Secretary-General of the United Nations noted in a
reservation, as the Secretary-General's representative
witnessed the Agreement, that Lome could not be
considered an obstacle to the prosecution of those
charged with fundamental violations of international
humanitarian law. That was an important and far-
sighted reservation set down by the Secretary-General
and his staff in the Office of Legal Affairs. I commend
them for their foresight, and I take note of that
reservation with the highest approval from my
Government.

Our Government is committed to the rapid
creation of a vigorous internationally backed
mechanism, or the extension of existing mechanisms,
to address these grave acts of inhumanity. We look
forward to hearing the views of the Secretariat, the
views of Judge Jorda and Carla Del Ponte, and those of
other members of the Security Council. We look
forward to working in partnership with the Government
of Sierra Leone to move forward in this direction.

Finally, let me turn to the question of Rwanda.
This Tribunal has obviously moved more slowly than
any of us are satisfied with, but it has moved, and
although we are concerned about some inefficiencies in

it - inefficiencies that we have addressed and will
continue to address directly with the people
responsible- I want to reaffirm our Government's

support for it.

Mr. President, I thank you for calling a meeting
on this issue of immense importance. You will recall
from our previous work in regard to ending the war in
Bosnia that France and the United States never
wavered in their support of the war crimes Tribunal,
and that without that Tribunal the Dayton Peace
Agreement would not have been possible in its present
form. I am deeply concerned at attacks on it that have
been uttered here today by other delegations. While
specific criticisms are always welcome, the charges of
bias are not only not proven, they are not accurate. The
countries uttering these criticisms were full participants
in the Dayton process. They agreed to what was being
done, and I do not think that the criticisms are justified,
valid or productive.

Again, Mr. President, thank you very much for
the opportunity to address you and Judge Jorda. I
welcome him, on behalf of our country, to this great
Chamber to share his views.

