The Secretary-General: Nearly a year and a half ago
I submitted to the Security Council a report on one of the
most pressing challenges of our times: how to achieve
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

I have been encouraged by the lively response to the
report, within and outside the United Nations system. The
Security Council established a Working Group to review
the report's peace and security aspects and has adopted a
number of significant resolutions and statements. The
General Assembly, too, has established a Working Group
to monitor implementation of the report's recommendations.
Research and academic institutions, civil society groups and
individuals have joined the debate. But, then, a shortage of
proposals and ideas has never been the problem. The need
is for real results that bring positive change into people's
lives.

My follow-up report is in the Council's hands. Today
I would like to offer some general observations, in the hope
of assisting the Council as it considers the new report and
grapples with the crucial question of what more the Council
can do to enhance peace and security in the African region.

As befits a continent of such great human, cultural and
natural diversity, a snapshot of Africa on the eve of the
new millennium reveals a combination of accomplishments
and unresolved problems, of opportunities seized and
chances missed. There are places where the Governments
and rebel groups persist in spending money on weapons
they can ill afford for wars they should not fight. There are
places where whole economies have come to depend on the
perpetuation of war; where political power has been
attained by Violent, undemocratic means; where poor
governance deprives people of basic needs; where silence
about AIDS exacerbates the epidemic; where corruption
thwarts economic growth; and where crushing debt burdens,
trade barriers and declining international aid make it
extremely hard for African nations to attract investment and
stave off marginalization from the global economy.

There are, in short, places where the widely held View
of Africa as a region in perpetual crisis is not just an
image, but an all-too-grim and painful reality. But there are
also places - more than is commonly recognized - where
we are witnessing dramatic changes for the better.

Many African nations are liberalizing trade and
exchange controls, privatizing moribund State industries,
building up communications infrastructures and reforming
their legal and regulatory frameworks. Africa possesses
land and labour resources that foreign investors find
attractive. The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) recently published a study
showing that investment in Africa brings a higher return
to American and Japanese companies than any other
region of the world.

Africans are also taking charge of their political
fortunes, and they are willing to acknowledge past
mistakes. A majority of Africans now live under
democratic systems. South Africa has just seen its second
peaceful and democratic presidential election, and
Mozambique will have its second presidential poll next
month. The return to civilian rule in Nigeria has
transformed that nation's prospects. Both Liberia and
Mali have recently carried out the large-scale destruction
of small arms. Algeria is taking important steps to move
away from the civil strife that has paralysed its
development and caused so much suffering.

And at this year's Organization of African Unity
(OAU) summit in Algiers, Africa's leaders insisted - in
a welcome change from an earlier era - on the principle
that Governments which came to power through
unconstitutional means could no longer expect to be
received as equals in an assembly of elected heads of
State. I am sure that the day will come when the General
Assembly of the United Nations will follow Africa's lead,
and apply similarly stringent standards to all its members.

But until Africa gets a handle on its conflicts such
progress will remain tenuous, even in nations far from the
fighting. Few African countries can match Angola's
natural wealth, or, sadly, the poverty of its war-weary
people. Yet the parties there persist in fighting long past
the time when either should be placing faith in a military
solution.

The people of the Sudan have also suffered far too
much and far too long, yet there are few signs that their
ordeal will end any time soon. Ethiopia and Eritrea have
allowed their new enmities to shatter what had been a
very promising break with the past. We must ensure
access for humanitarian relief to victims of all these
crises. But this is no substitute for the political and
military engagement, both African and international,
needed to bring stability and to address the root causes of
these upheavals.

 

Sierra Leone provides an important example of
Africans taking the lead in conflict resolution. The
Economic Community of West African States sent
peacekeepers to Sierra Leone and patiently brokered the
Lorne Agreement bringing an end to the conflict there. The
agreement is far from perfect, but it responds to the real
desire for peace in that country and gives it a new lease of
life following some of the most stark and brutal human
rights violations the world has seen in recent years.

Another successful, albeit fragile, African-led
mediation effort has resulted in the signing of the Lusaka
peace agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Last week, President Chiluba of Zambia provided the
Security Council with a comprehensive briefing on that
effort, which he carried out on behalf of the States of the
Southern African Development Community.

The parties to both of those agreements must now live
up to their commitments. The United Nations facilitated this
diplomatic work. Last week, I proposed to the Council the
deployment of an up-to-6,000-strong peacekeeping
operation to Sierra Leone. With the initial deployment of
liaison officers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I am now studying further steps that could be taken to
encourage peace in that country.

I should also like to mention the situation in Somalia.
In my report to the Council last month, I stated that, as a
country without a central government, Somalia remained
unique. Yet anarchy does not reign in much of Somalia.
There are areas where the absence of law and order has
attracted criminals and subversives. A United Nations
Children's Fund doctor was murdered recently, and
humanitarian agencies temporarily suspended their
operations. But there are also areas where ordinary Somalis,
tired of warlords and of the violence they breed, are
seeking reconciliation. Regions of relative stability and
coherent leadership are emerging in the north-west and the
north-east.

The international community is beginning to
acknowledge these gains. Indeed, they are examples for
other regions to follow, and if carefully nurtured they could
lead to broader national reconciliation.

Members of the Council will not be surprised to hear
me say that many Africans, remembering the failure to
intervene effectively in Rwanda to stop the genocide, at
times regard the Security Council as indifferent to the
continent's plight. They are closely watching the Council's
deliberations on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and on Sierra Leone.

In recent weeks, Africans have seen the Council
approve a far-reaching operation for Kosovo and respond
to the Violence in East Timor. They have listened while
many world leaders, as well as myself, have welcomed,
albeit cautiously, an evolving understanding of
sovereignty that allows the international community to
intervene more readily to halt massive and systematic
violations of human rights.

As members move closer to a decision on these
situations, I hope they will also keep the broadest possible
picture in view. Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo need more than humanitarian
palliatives. Each crisis situation in the world is different
and must be decided on its own merits. But for the
United Nations and this Council in particular to retain
their credibility and the support of the world's peoples,
the commitment to peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance
and other such action must be applied fairly and
consistently, irrespective of region or nation.

Whether we are speaking of peace and security
issues or of closely related questions such as social
development, environmental protection, human rights and
human resources, it is essential to think in terms of
partnerships with Africa: partnerships with the OAU, with
other regional and subregional organizations, with civil
society groups and individuals.

Those nations making good-faith efforts and
adopting enlightened policies deserve much greater
support than they are now getting. Where the international
community is committed to making a difference, it has
shown that significant transformation can be achieved.

There is no excuse for not doing what is reasonable
and doable. It is reasonable, for example, to provide more
resources for humanitarian assistance and post-conflict
peace-building. It is reasonable to act more rapidly and
more decisively on debt. It is reasonable to increase
official development assistance.

But what is reasonable and doable is far from a
question of money alone. Training, technology, political
engagement: there are many paths for partnership to
follow. The over-arching point is that, by combining
African efforts with those of the international community,
we can give the cause of peace and development in
Africa decisive new momentum.

 

"Afro-pessimism" is a dead end. "Africa fatigue" is an
affront to the very idea of a responsible international
community. I said in my report last year that our work in
Africa was both a process and a shared partnership.
However imperfectly, Africans have provided many
important signs of their own yearning for peace, stability
and development and of their willingness to work for it.
The right kind of support now, carefully directed to those
best able to use it, could help Africans turn a corner and set
the stage for a brighter future. Let us seize this moment.

