Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the 90-day update report and
a job well done in leading the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) since January - an
experience that will certainly help as you, Sir, also
preside over the Council for the month of September.
We also appreciate the support that the Panel of Experts
continues to provide to the Committee and we stress
the importance for the Panel to follow the principles of
objectivity and impartiality.

We would like to reiterate our belief in the
application of the three pillars of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, namely,
non-proliferation, disarmament and the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. It is therefore our View
that every country has the right to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. In that respect, we are
concerned by the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of28 August (GOV/2013/40), in
which the Agency's Director General states that Iran's
activities reflect no willingness to stop its proliferation
activities. We hope, however, that the talks scheduled
for 27 September in Vienna between Iran and the IAEA
will be an opportunity to strengthen cooperation and
build confidence among all parties.

In that context, we regret that Iran has yet to
collaborate with the 1737 (2006) Committee and did
not reply to the letters sent in April and May related
to last year's launches of Shahab-l and - 3 missiles
and the seizure of a vessel suspected of violating the
arms embargo against Iran. However, we remain
hopeful that the new Government will bring more
diplomatic openness to discussing and resolving the
current nuclear crisis. As such, we believe that at
this time, and especially due to the tense situation in
the region, it would be prudent for the Committee to
refrain from taking any further action against Iran. In
that regard, we call on the Council to engage with the
new Iranian leadership in order to ensure transparency
on the nuclear programme in Iran. We believe that it
is in the interests of the new Government of Iran to
quickly show willingness and openness and allow the
1737 (2006) Committee to carry out its mandate.

Let me conclude by reiterating our firm belief that
the current Iranian nuclear crisis can be resolved only
through diplomatic and political dialogue, including
with the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany. As a member of the 1737 (2006)
Committee, Rwanda is committed to continuing to
work with Iran and all countries in the Middle East
towards the denuclearization of the region.

