Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation shares the deep concerns over systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law. In
that regard, we fully support the continued attention of
the Security Council to that issue.

Indeed, the Security Council has made good
normative progress on that issue over the past 10 years.
Now, it is time to raise the urgency to translate that
normative progress into concrete implementation on
the ground. We therefore welcome and concur with the
five core challenges identified and the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/277) to address that urgency. Hoping
that those challenges and recommendations will serve
as a good basis to further our endeavour to translate
normative discussion into action, I would like to
highlight the following points.

First, no violators of international humanitarian
law should go unpunished. As the Security Council
reaffirms in resolution 1674 (2006), ending impunity is
essential. When it is clearly established that there is no
escape for a violator, compliance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
will be accordingly enhanced. Such law is respected

and complied with when the consequences of egregious
violations are clear. As stated in the latest presidential
statement on protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/PRST/2009/1), protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the parties to the armed conflict. In
this regard, we fully endorse the Secretary-General's
emphasis on accountability for those who commit mass
atrocities, as well as the responsibility of States to
prosecute those suspected of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. Recognizing the
responsibility of States, my delegation also wants to
emphasize that the role of the International Criminal
Court should be respected in upholding the concept of
"no impunity" when there is clear evidence of inability
or unwillingness by States to prosecute criminals.

Secondly, the proliferation and fragmentation of
non-State armed groups deserves special attention. As
traditional States see little profit in war in the
globalized world and thus try to avoid war, the intra-
State wars that involve non-State armed groups have
increased drastically. Usually, these intra-State wars
are based on ethnic, religious and cultural differences,
which often give rise to genocide and atrocities against
civilians.

Thirdly, sexual violence against women and girls
in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible forms of
violence against civilians and must be stopped. Women
and girls are the most vulnerable, and sexual violence
has a devastating and corrosive effect on society as a
whole. The unanimous adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) was very encouraging, but considering that
horrific sexual violence against women continues to be
committed in many conflict situations, we need to
strengthen our efforts to protect women and girls in
conflict areas.

Finally, timely, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access is a cardinal rule and should always be ensured.
My delegation fully agrees with the findings and
suggestions of the Secretary-General on this issue. As
the source of lifesaving activities, the humanitarian
response should be driven exclusively by the
humanitarian needs of the affected populations,
irrespective of any political grounds. Preventing access
will only increase unnecessary casualties involving
civilians, and States and non-State actors that employ
accession prevention as a tactic should be held
responsible. I look forward to further discussions at the
Security Council on the Secretary-General's
suggestions with a view to their full implementation.
My delegation appreciates the continuing efforts
of the Security Council to protect civilians in armed
conflict and has been rendering its full support. The
Republic of Korea also believes that these efforts to
protect civilians should be an integral part of all United
Nations peacekeeping missions, and we welcomed
resolution 1674 (2006), in which the Council stated its
intention to include clear guidelines on civilian
protection in the peacekeeping operations mandates.
We expect the continued efforts of the Council to
define and elaborate protection mandates, strategies
and plans of action.

