Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): On
12 September, President George Bush outlined to the
General Assembly the history of Iraq's defiance of
Security Council resolutions, listed the steps that Iraq
must take if it wants peace and stated that the United
States would work with the Security Council to hold
Iraq to account.

President Bush's speech was a declaration of
purpose, not a declaration of war. It put the United
Nations in the spotlight and challenged the
international community to restore the Security
Council's relevance on this issue by confronting this
threat to international peace and security and 11 years
of failure by Iraq to accept the demands made of it
after its invasion and destruction of Kuwait.

The threat today is serious and unique, and it
arises directly from the Iraqi regime's own actions: its
history of aggression and brutality, its defiance of the
international community and its drive towards an
arsenal of terror and destruction. This is a regime that
has invaded two of its neighbours and tried to
annihilate one of them; a regime that has used chemical
weapons on its neighbours and its very own citizens; a
regime that has lied about its development of weapons
of mass destruction; a regime that signed the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and then proceeded to
develop a major nuclear weapons programme.

Eleven years ago, as one of the conditions for
ending the Persian Gulf war, the Security Council
required the Iraqi regime to destroy its weapons of
mass destruction and cease all development of such
weapons. As President Bush noted yesterday when
signing the Congressional resolution on Iraq, at that
time Iraq was given 15 days to fully disclose its
weapons of mass destruction. The Baghdad regime has
defied this obligation for 4,199 days.

The Security Council also demanded, 11 years
ago, that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait and
other lands and renounce all involvement with
terrorism. Iraq agreed to these demands and more at the
time, and these are commitments with which Iraq must
comply. The Council has tried in every way to bring
Iraq to peaceful fulfilment of the Gulf war ceasefire,
yet the Iraqi regime has violated all of its obligations.
As President Bush said earlier this month in Cincinnati,
"the entire world has witnessed Iraq's 11-year history
of defiance, deception and bad faith".

The Security Council is not the only international
body that has focused on the behaviour of the Iraqi
regime. Last year, a year when the United States was
not a member, the Commission on Human Rights,
based in Geneva, adopted resolution 2001/14, which
strongly condemns the

"systematic, widespread and extremely grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq,
resulting in an all-pervasive repression and
oppression sustained by broad-based
discrimination and widespread terror".

Today, exactly five weeks after the President
spoke, we meet for the first time to publicly discuss the
message that the Security Council will send to Iraq and
to its leader, Saddam Hussein. Our view of that
message has been clear from 12 September. There can
be no more business as usual or toothless resolutions
that Iraq will continue to ignore. Our intent is that the
Council should meet the challenge and stand firm,
resolute and united in adopting a draft resolution that
holds Iraq to its commitments, lays out clearly what
Iraq must do to comply and states that there will be
consequences if Iraq refuses to do so.

We expect the Council to act, and when the
Council adopts a draft resolution that sends a clear and
united message to Iraq that it must fulfil its obligations,
Iraq will have a choice. It will have to decide whether
to take this last chance to comply. We hope that it will
choose to comply. If it does not, we will seek
compliance and disarmament by other means.

This is not an easy issue for any of us on the
Council. The world's united response to aggression by
Iraq in 1990 and 1991, expressed through a series of

unique, ground-breaking Security Council resolutions,
brought the world body closest to the visions of its
founders. The Council's requirements were far
reaching, commensurate with both the threat and the
Council's determination that Iraq never again possess
the means to threaten and even destroy its neighbours.
In the ensuing decade, however, Iraq's failure to
implement this body's peace terms became for the
United Nations a question of enormous significance.
The challenge now is whether the United Nations can
perform the function its founders envisaged. We very
much hope the answer will be, "Yes".

The five weeks since the President came to the
United Nations to discuss the threat posed by Iraq have
passed quickly. We have seen signs of emerging
Council unity during intensive discussions here and in
capitals, involving the highest levels of our respective
Governments. We have also seen clear signs that Iraq is
reverting to form. We have seen Iraq invite inspectors
to return without conditions, and then immediately
place conditions. We have seen requests for clarity
from the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
practical arrangements met by Iraqi obfuscation and
multiple answers, which in fact avoid answering at all.

Not surprisingly, in the first test of the so-called
new Iraqi cooperation, Iraq has shown that it hopes to
return to the word games, ephemeral commitments and
misdirection of the past, while continuing to develop
the world's deadliest weapons.

That is why a clear, firm message from the
Council is so important. Miscalculation by Iraq will be
dangerous. This body and, indeed, the entire
membership of the United Nations do no favour to the
people of Iraq, do no favour to those who seek a better
future for Iraq, do no favour to the countries of the
region and do no favour to the credibility of the United
Nations if they create the impression that an outcome
in which Iraq retains its chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons programmes is an acceptable or
possible outcome.

Over the past five weeks, a consensus has been
forming in the Council that the time for denial,
deception and delay has come to an end and that Iraq
must be verifiably disarmed. There is growing
agreement that there must be immediate, unconditional
and unrestricted inspections of all Iraqi facilities that
may have a role in the development of weapons of
mass destruction.

The United States, together with the United
Kingdom, has shared with the other members of the
Council the elements of our vision of a resolution that
will address Iraq's material breach of its obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions, specify the
types of access and authorities that UNMOVIC and
IAEA must have to be able to effectively verify Iraqi
disarmament, make clear Iraq's obligations and
articulate to Iraq that there will be consequences to
non-compliance.

The United States believes that the best way to
ensure Iraqi compliance is through one resolution that
is firm and unambiguous in its message.

We are considering the reactions we have
received and will be placing before the Council, in the
near future, a resolution with clear and immediate
requirements - requirements that Iraq would
voluntarily meet if it chooses to cooperate.

We have also shared these elements with the
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC and the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
While they can and should speak for themselves, both
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have made it clear that they
would welcome a new Security Council resolution that
strengthens their hands and allows for more effective
inspections.

While all this diplomatic activity has been taking
place, in the United States we have been having our
own great national debate. Last week, the House of
Representatives and the Senate passed a joint
resolution that expressed support for the
administration's diplomatic efforts in the Security
Council to ensure that "Iraq abandons its strategy of
delay, evasion and non-compliance" and authorized the
use of United States armed forces should diplomatic
efforts fail. This resolution tells the world that the
United States speaks with one determined voice.
Yesterday, when President Bush signed this resolution,
he said that he had not ordered the use of force. The
United States hopes that the use of force will not
become necessary. But the President also said that the
choice for Iraq is straightforward: "Either the Iraqi
regime will give up its weapons of mass destruction,
or, for the sake of peace, the United States will lead a
global coalition to disarm that regime."

Now, the spotlight is back on the Security
Council. We hope and expect that the Council will act
and play its proper role as a safeguard of our common
security. If it fails to do so, then we and other States
will be forced to act.

The approach of the United States and the United
Kingdom aims at clarity - clarity with respect to what
Iraq must now do to fulfil its 1991 obligations to
restore peace and security in the region; clarity with
respect to what inspectors must be allowed to do; and
clarity with respect to our seriousness. Without such
clarity, there is too high a danger that Iraq will
miscalculate. And miscalculation by Iraq will lead to
precisely the military action we all hope to avoid.

The Security Council faces a defining moment.
The Council works best on Iraq when it works together.
As we witnessed last spring with the successful
passage of resolution 1409 (2002) and the
establishment of the Goods Review List, when the
Security Council is resolute and united, its actions
produce results. We must stand together and show Iraq
that its failure to comply will no longer be tolerated.

