Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the organization of this
debate of the Security Council on small arms, the first
of its type since 2006, on a subject which is of such
key importance and thanks you, Mr. President, for
having undertaken this initiative.

This question, as we are all well aware, is at the
core of the Security Council's mandate, since efforts to
contain the uncontrolled spread of light weapons today
are fundamental to conflict prevention and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I would therefore like to thank Ms. Hannelore
Hoppe for her comprehensive presentation of the
Secretary-General's report.

The struggle to contain the proliferation of small
arms is one of the most complex tasks and therefore
one of the most difficult, because the need to save
human lives, to maintain territorial integrity and the
3
stability of countries, to put an end to serious
violations of human rights and to support development
efforts puts it at odds with economic and trade
interests.

The report of the Secretary-General clearly shows
that the conflict between development and the spread
of small arms is not an illusion, since security and
economic and social development are so closely linked.

Faced with such a situation, efforts at
strengthening the legal framework and cooperation at
the national, regional and international levels must be
stepped up.

In this regard, the United Nations has developed a
programme of sustained action that has contributed to a
better awareness of the magnitude of the phenomenon
of the spread of small arms and to better organize
initiatives designed to cope with it.

Here, we can cite, inter alia, the entry into force
of the Protocol of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime - the Palermo
Convention - on firearms; the adoption of a
Programme of Action in 2001 and of a decision of the
General Assembly on the identification and tracing of
small arms; and the regular evaluation of embargoes
imposed by the Security Council.

However, these efforts have turned out to be
insufficient to halt, let alone put an end to, the spread
of small arms, which continue daily to claim victims,
above all among civilian populations.

We therefore urge the United Nations to step up
its efforts in this area by placing particular stress on
concerted action, coherence and coordination, as stated
in the relevant observations and recommendations of
the Secretary-General.

It also seems important to us to highlight the
subregional aspect in the struggle against illicit
trafficking in small arms, given our view that all
conflicts hold the potential of becoming subregional
conflagrations.

West Africa, which is paying a heavy price as a
result of the devastating effects of small arms, has
established a legal and institutional framework to
better combat this scourge, and has launched
programmes for the collection and destruction of
surplus stocks of small arms.
The United Nations, and specifically the Security
Council, must support this kind of effort. In particular,
the structures and missions of the Security Council
must pay greater heed to these regional and
subregional organizations, as was correctly emphasized
in the 16 April debate in the Security Council.

Moreover, the regional offices of the United
Nations and the representatives of the Secretary-
General can also play a significant role in the field by
supporting and assisting the efforts deployed.

Burkina Faso has subscribed to the Declaration
on an African Common Position on the Illicit
Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small
Arms and Light Weapons, adopted in Bamako on
lDecember 2000. It has also established a High
Authority to control the import of weapons and their
use and formed a national commission to combat the
spread of light weapons. It has strengthened its
national legislation and adapted it to the relevant
regional and international instruments.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
underscore the following requirements which we
believe are indispensable for an effective struggle
against the spread of small arms. First, the
international legal framework must be strengthened
through the adoption of a legally binding international
instrument on the subject of tracing and marking of
small arms, which would also have provisions on
brokering. Secondly, country capacity must be
strengthened, particularly in the area of border control.
Thirdly, all surplus stocks must be destroyed. Fourthly,
international cooperation must be strengthened and
synergy of action established among all the major
players, including the regional and subregional
organizations, INTERPOL and the World Customs
Organization, among others. Finally, the Security
Council must impose an embargo on small arms and
light weapons and bring about increased vigilance in
the verification of end-user certificates.

