Mr. De Mistura: I am pleased to appear before
the Council today, just over a year since I assumed my
duties in Baghdad, to present the fifth quarterly report
on behalf of the Secretary-General (S/2008/688).

With a robust mandate reconfirmed by resolution
1830 (2008) and at the request of the Government of
Iraq, the focus of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in 2008 has been in the
areas that could support Iraq's efforts towards political
dialogue and national reconciliation. That was largely
achieved in recent months by supporting electoral
preparations, sowing the seeds for a resolution to
disputed internal boundaries, supporting the national
development strategies and facilitating Iraq's
partnership with the international community and,
indeed, its neighbours.

The past year was dedicated to identifying
opportunities in the priority areas where we would
most likely be able together to achieve timely results.
Next year will be the time to consolidate the progress
that has been made so far. We have to move forward
from the initiatives that, as a matter of urgency, have
served as an entry point for those in going forward to
solidifying longer-term gains.

Let us for a moment look at the context in Iraq
these days. The summer and fall have witnessed,
despite some occasional spikes - and we have again
seen some in the past few days - a steady reduction in
the levels of violence in Iraq. That is unquestionable,
in spite of the spikes, and we may see more in the
forthcoming months, but we should look at the broader
picture, which is that security has improved. A handful
of rockets have impacted on the International Zone
since last May, whereas in May there were 30 blasts a
day. The truce declared by Moqtada al-Sadr has been
observed and extended. The reported Iraqi casualties
for October 2008 throughout Iraq were the lowest since
March 2003 - and, of course, they are never too low.
Any level of civilian casualty will always remain
condemnable, regrettable and sad, but the fact remains
that it is now at its lowest.

The Government of Iraq has taken over
responsibility for many issues in Iraq, including the
Awakening Councils and payment of tens of thousands
of their members. Some sectors of the Iraqi security
08-60200
forces have greatly improved - we have seen it with
our own eyes when we have been travelling in Iraq -
in their professionalism and performance. However, the
reporting period saw also some political tensions as a
result of the initial stalemate over the provincial
elections law in July and the issues of minority
representation in the elections.

Iraq is now entering a very delicate electoral
period, in which every small security gain likely to
give space to political dialogue should be built upon, in
order to avoid any Violence linked to the provincial
elections of 31 January 2009. The confrontation in
Khanaqin during the summer months and the spike in
anti-Christian violence in Mosul are only two examples
of a situation that could have undermined the hard-
earned progress made by the Iraqi leadership to bridge
their differences and further an Iraqi-owned and Iraqi-
led democratic process.

Electoral assistance has been our flagship in
recent months, and, of all our activities, is likely to be
so in the forthcoming ones. It is our firm duty as the
United Nations and an integral part of our mandate to
assist the Iraqis and the Independent High Electoral
Commission, the Iraqi institution responsible for
preparing and conducting the elections, with a series of
electoral events, starting with provincial elections in
the immediate future - January 2009 - and
culminating in the parliamentary elections between the
end of 2009 and early 2010. The elections law,
providing for countrywide elections in 14 out of 18
governorates, is the most important piece of legislation
enacted in that period. The law was adopted on
24 September and required a major push by UNAMI to
break the impasse in Parliament over the inclusion of
an amendment on Kirkuk. Finally, it was possible to
broker an even-handed resolution.

The Government of Iraq and the Parliament of
Iraq should be commended for that, because it is a
major achievement. Even following its ratification, the
election law suffered a second difficult moment when
the article accounting for minority representation of
Christians, Yezidis, Shebek and Sabean Mandeans in
some provincial councils was dropped at the last
minute. That unfortunately produced intimidation and
tension - particularly in the context of the volatile
area of Mosul - and risked unravelling both the
electoral law and the electoral timelines, and ultimately
jeopardizing the principle of minority rights, which in
Iraq is an important principle recognized by everyone.
08-60200

With the aim of reducing growing tension and the
temptation to resort to intimidation or to force
displacement of minority populations, UNAMI put
forward a proposal on the allocation of seats for
minorities in provincial councils. The proposal also
provided for political recognition of some groups
which have undergone severe campaigns of targeted
violence and assimilation in the past. It is important to
remember what happened to the Yezidis in 2007 or to
the Christians very recently.

Following several rounds of consultations over
the span of two weeks, the Council of Representatives
decided on 3 November to allocate specific seats for
representatives of Iraq's minority components on the
provincial councils in Baghdad, Ninawa and Basra.
The decision to secure minority representation in Iraq
is a positive achievement in its own right. Although it
must be admitted that the adopted amendment to the
electoral law did not entirely reflect UNAMI's
formulation of numbers, it did include some of its
crucial elements. Its adoption by a majority open vote
was a demonstration of democracy in action - in Iraq
that is a very positive development - and contributed
to furthering respect for human rights and democracy.
Both principles are strengthened through the
commitment of Iraqi institutions to recognize and
guarantee minority representation in their elected
governing bodies. That is only a "seed representation"
which can open the door for improved guarantees of
minority rights in the future; but the door has been
opened.

The Presidency Council's green light - a
decision taken recently - completed the elections law
without either compromising or endangering their
overall timetable. In other words, the electoral law is
confirmed, including its minority component.

Public interest in the voter registration update in
September and general satisfaction with the passage of
the elections law appear to confirm a grassroots desire
to have a say on who should be represented on the
provincial councils. The Iraqi people want the
elections. The forthcoming elections are rightly Viewed
as an opportunity to establish a more inclusive
sectarian balance and shape a new political landscape.
They represent the most significant political event in
the forthcoming months. It is therefore all the more
important to ensure that they be perceived as free and
fair, and that the Iraqis, with the support of the United
Nations and the international community, will be able
3
to ensure respect for operational timelines and that the
Electoral Commission will be free of political pressure.

The good news is that the electoral timelines are
now broadly on track, with candidate nomination
concluded on 2 November and the swift inclusion of
minority candidates in the Electoral Commission ballot
lottery having taken place on 6 November. UNAMI
continues to support the Electoral Commission in
technical preparations, including the printing and
procurement of materials, planning and logistics,
public outreach, consultations with security forces to
ensure that governorate elections are conducted in
safety, putting anti-fraud measures in place, and
training national staff. We are working to remove any
outstanding operational hurdles, and that will be done.
Our job is to assist in those efforts together with the
Iraqi authorities.

All sides should be encouraged to avoid the
temptation to manipulate the electoral process or to
create any incentives for intimidation before or during
the polling day. The Electoral Commission, supported
by UNAMI, has trained 42,785 local observers and is
working with the Minister of Education to employ
approximately 270,000 teachers, clerks and
headmasters to assist on polling day. The Prime
Minister has wisely decided to postpone school
examinations in order to allow the schools and the
teachers to be available on that important day.

Mitigating measures to reduce the potential for
electoral fraud should ideally be matched by some
form of close monitoring, particularly in sensitive areas
of the north, and we are currently exploring some
feasible options. Security, of course, will also be an
element we cannot ignore. However, the main burden
for ensuring transparency of the elections rests with the
Iraqi national observers and party agents. They have
been invited to be present at polling stations on the day
of the elections.

Concerning Kirkuk and the so-called disputed
internal boundaries or territories, the recent targeted
killings and the displacement of Christians in the area
of the northern faultlines illustrate the complicated
connections between minority rights, the electoral
process and disputed boundaries. UNAMI is pursuing
its work on those issues in accordance with the
mandate given to it by the Security Council.

In Kirkuk, which has been under relative calm in
recent weeks, our activities have been wide-ranging.
They comprise research on conditions in the area and
include various possible options for its future
administrative status, humanitarian, reconstruction and
human rights programmes and, at the request of the
Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Mashhadani, technical
assistance to a Committee that has just been
established by Parliament to make recommendations
on special arrangements for future Kirkuk elections.
Those elections will not take place in January with the
other elections, but later on after the Committee has
finished its job, which is expected to be at the end of
March. At that time UNAMI will assist with the Kirkuk
elections at the request of the Iraqi Parliament.

In parallel, we have advanced our analysis on the
last phase of all of the other 15 faultline districts in
northern Iraq - from the Syrian to the Iranian border -
concluding our community consultations in the Ninawa,
Diyala and Salahaddin governorates,

We believe that UNAMI's analysis will provide
options for intercommunal confidence-building
measures. We are probably now considered, through
that research and in that context, to be the most
detailed experts on those areas because there has been
a lot of work. Seventeen of my colleagues have been
working on a full-time basis for the last eight months
on that project. Confidence-building measures should
be in place in order to facilitate an overall political
agreement between the various affected communities.
This is not a referendum or a fait accompli, but a
political agreement.

UNAMI supports renewed efforts by the
Constitutional Review Committee to enshrine an
agreement dealing with competing visions of Iraq's
federal framework, as well as with hydrocarbons and
viable revenue and water-sharing agreements. While
we remain poised to present our work to the Iraqi
leadership, we are mindful not to complicate matters
by presenting the results of our work prematurely,
since the elections are drawing closer and are a
priority. Later we can come up with our proposals. Let
us first complete the elections.

As to human rights, the UNAMI Human Rights
Office continues to balance its ongoing monitoring and
protection activities with emerging human rights
challenges arising from elections, the resolution of the
disputed territories, including the recent displacement
of Christians, the forcible sale of property in Ninawa,
or minority representation. We will continue to devote
08-60200
significant attention to the legislative process related to
human rights and the rule of law, and to establishing
important institutions related to human rights, such as a
national human rights commission in Iraq. We will also
maintain our strong support, in the form of capacity-
building, for the work of the Ministry of Human Rights
of Iraq, led by a very courageous woman.

In the area of international partnership, Iraq has
made important strides in its re-engagement with the
international community, primarily through the
International Compact with Iraq - which is strongly
supported by my friend and colleague Ambassador
Gambari - and the ad hoc support mechanism within
the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Both are
facilitating venues for cooperation on concrete issues,
such as refugees, the resumption of diplomatic
relations and anti-corruption measures, in a spirit of
partnership and equal standing.

The very successful Stockholm meeting - and
we should thank the Government of Sweden for having
facilitated it - ended with a message on the need for
partnership and co-financing. Greater Iraqi ownership,
the fact that the Compact has drawn the attention of the
Prime Minister - who attended the meeting and, I
understand, was impressed by its results - and the
Prime Minister's appointment of his own Adviser as
part of the Advisory Committee have created additional
impetus to the follow-up to the Compact. Iraq has also
become a signatory to the Paris Declaration, signalling
its desire for more transparent management of its aid
strategy. Meanwhile, donors are increasingly focusing
on reducing aid budgets - Iraq is a rich country, a fact
of which it is aware and proud - in favour of
capacity-building aimed at Iraqi self-reliance.

The regional dialogue front is a promising area
for 2009 and has seen signs of very promising
movement in 2008. We have seen considerable
progress in view of the fact that several Arab countries
have reopened their embassies in Baghdad and that a
number of high-level visits have taken place in recent
months. UNAMI continues to be engaged through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs' ad hoc support mechanism
unit, which is building its institutional capacity to
support those processes. Planning is under way for
ministerial meetings in the coming weeks. Meetings of
the working group on energy and of the ministers of
the interior have taken place in Istanbul and Amman,
and preparations are under way for meetings of the
working groups on refugees and border security, to be
08-60200
held in November in Amman and Damascus,
respectively.

Good-faith initiatives to support Iraq's bilateral
relations, on issues such as technical border
demarcation, security, de-mining and missing persons,
go a long way, in terms of political mileage, towards
restoring a spirit of cooperation. UNAMI has been and
will continue to be proactively involved in assisting
and facilitating such goodwill measures.

Iraq is reaching a critical point in its recovery and
reconstruction. Unavoidably, with improved security
comes a growing demand from the people to meet the
basic needs of ordinary Iraqis, including jobs and
services. It is on that basis that the Iraqi people will
judge their own authorities and that the electorate will
hold local representatives accountable.

Across Iraq, signs of normal daily life are
increasingly visible; I myself see them every time I
cross into what we call the "red zone" in Baghdad. In
Baghdad, once the site of some of Iraq's worst
Violence, we see shops and businesses reopening and
even remaining open at night. More than 60,000 Iraqis
have returned home this year. Food insecurity has
declined from 15 per cent in 2005 to 3 per cent in 2007
and 2008. In other words, there is much less food
insecurity now than there was just one year ago.

However, let us also be frank: life is not
improving equally for all Iraqis. Many still feel the
impact of the past conflict and of Chronic neglect
dating back to the 1990s. Major infrastructure and
service delivery problems are still challenging.
Employment opportunities have not grown along with
oil revenues, keeping some Iraqis in poverty. In
pockets of Iraq today, less than a third of the
population receives basic water services and not
enough children attend school. But we know that the
Government is seriously focusing on those areas and
planning to use its increased resources for them.

A rising number of internally displaced
persons - increasing from 16,000 in June to 35,000 in
August - are beginning to return home, signalling
increased confidence in Iraq's stability. However,
Government action is still required in order to make
sure that conditions are in place to guarantee safe
returns, in which case we will probably see more of
them. In order to fill critical humanitarian gaps in-
country and to support Iraqi refugees abroad until the
necessary conditions exist for returns in safety and
5
dignity, a subregional humanitarian appeal for Iraq in
2009 will be launched next week.

Better security and high oil revenues mean that
the Iraqi Government is increasingly able and willing
to address national development issues. I would
therefore urge the Government to continue its effort to
allocate national resources in 2009, even in the current
uncertain financial climate worldwide - which also
applies to Iraq - in order to maintain the momentum
for recovery. Iraq has entered into a new cooperation
framework for United Nations assistance through 2010,
shifting the focus from investing in infrastructure to
helping to mobilize its own substantial resources.

Whereas the Government of Iraq is hindered by a
large public sector, which has grown from 1 million to
2.5 million people since 2005, the private sector, which
could become a thriving backbone for the Iraqi
economy, is still dormant and requires assistance, and
there continues to be an insufficient budget execution
capacity. In other words, there is a lot of money, but it
is not percolating into operational projects. The
remainder of the funds of the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq will therefore be
specifically invested in three United Nations
initiatives, aimed at public sector reform, private sector
development and the decentralization of essential
services. The United Nations is also supporting Iraq in
reforming its costly public distribution system - food
coupons - which consumed $5.9 billion in national
resources in 2008 and can be reformed.

In terms of its footprint, UNAMI has explored
ways to increase its level of support for provincial
authorities by applying the principles of integrated
United Nations missions and an enhanced presence
throughout the country, starting with new presences in
Najaf, Ramadi, Mosul, Kirkuk and Basra. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the World Health Organization, the World
Food Programme, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for
Project Services and the International Organization for
Migration are the latest agencies to have a permanent
senior-level international presence within the country,
bring the number of agencies there to more than nine.
That is complemented by national staff whom we have
appointed as Governorate Liaison Officers and
co-located in governors' offices in 10 locations.
6

In order to pursue and sustain the level of its
presence and the extent of its activities, UNAMI
obviously requires both security support and protection
from the host country and sustained financial and
logistical backing from Member States, because
security is costly.

The construction of a new integrated compound
in Baghdad is key to the continued presence of the
United Nations in Iraq. I would therefore like to thank
the Government of Iraq for providing a site for the new
integrated United Nations compound in Baghdad and
particularly welcome the decision taken by the Prime
Minister and the Iraqi Council of Ministers on
2 November to make what I understand to be an initial
contribution of $25 million for 2009 towards an
estimated total cost of $89 million for the compound.

Finally, where does all this leave Iraq and its
friends? Iraq faces some critical months ahead. In spite
of a reduction in the levels of violence, the potential
for a flare-up remains a possibility, particularly with
regard to the January elections in a year of elections.
Iraqis should not relent in seizing the momentum in
order to build on the gains attained in 2008.

The Government of Iraq should be commended
for the progress achieved so far. It will now be called
on to deliver services, security guarantees, conditions
for free and fair elections, credible and independent
institutions, and to resolve tensions among its various
communities. The international community - all of
us - should stand firm in its support and constructive
re-engagement in this critical period. The United
Nations will continue - as the Secretary-General has
confirmed - if the Council allows it, to be by the
Iraqis" side in this delicate and challenging transition
towards stability.

This year is the fifth year since what happened at
the Canal Hotel. Many of my friends 4 our friends -
and colleagues died. I think that, for us, it is a matter of
principle to prove that we are back and that Iraq is not
alone.

