Mr. Rahal (Algeria) (spoke in French): I am
addressing the Security Council on behalf of Mr.
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the People's
Democratic Republic of Algeria and the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).

I avail myself of this opportunity to welcome your
initiative, Mr. President, under the presidency of your
country, to focus the Security Council debates for the
month of January on issues that are matters of great
concern to the African continent. Moreover, the year 2000
was declared by the OAU summit at Algiers a year of
peace, security and stability in Africa.

Your recent trip, Mr. President, to several countries
in Africa, has enabled you to accurately assess the gravity
of the situation. You were able to gather the opinions of
the various parties in situ on ways and means of
contributing to an effective implementation of the Lusaka
peace Agreement.

At this meeting, I welcome the heads of State and
high-ranking African political authorities who have been
good enough to travel to demonstrate their interest in a
satisfactory settlement of the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

 

Our countries, and the OAU, understood full well the
seriousness and complexity of this crisis. The countries of
the region, which are naturally more sensitive than others
to the threats it poses, have done a great deal to try to
create the conditions for a peaceful settlement of this
fratricidal crisis. Since the beginning of the crisis, Algeria
has called for restraint and wisdom.

Encouraging results have come about with the signing
of the Lusaka peace Agreement, which through dialogue
and cooperation has created the heartening prospect of a
final settlement of the conflict. All States members of the
OAU, and the international community at large, have
welcomed that significant progress towards the restoration
of peace and harmony in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which enjoys unanimous moral support.

The thirty-fifth OAU summit, which was held at
Algiers in July 1999, welcomed that progress and called
upon the parties to the conflict to work harder to implement
the Lusaka Agreement fully and genuinely. In our view, the
Agreement constitutes an important achievement and
remains the proper framework for settling the conflict and
restoring peace and stability throughout the Great Lakes
region.

As current Chairman of the OAU, Algeria has worked
since the Algiers summit to implement the decisions
adopted by African heads of State or Government. President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika has appointed a special envoy to
follow the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and throughout the region. The efforts of the current
Chairman of the OAU have three focuses. First, he is
striving to encourage the initiatives of the countries of the
subregion, and to urge the parties concerned to respect
commitments undertaken in the framework of the Lusaka
Agreement and to engage in frank and honest cooperation
in its implementation. He has also worked with the
countries of the region to overcome difficulties with respect
to representation for rebel movements in the mechanisms
envisioned in the peace Agreement.

Secondly, in coordination with the Secretary-General
of the OAU, President Bouteflika has turned to all the
countries of Africa with the purpose of strengthening their
unanimous support for this endeavour and of creating
support for implementation efforts. This made it possible to
convene the OAU Central Organ of its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, which
agreed to OAU financial support for the Joint Military
Commission and to the deployment in the field of African
monitors.

Thirdly, the Chairman of the OAU has endeavoured
to make the international community more aware of this
African peace effort. He has called upon all members of
the international community to make a meaningful
contribution to implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
Unfortunately, that appeal has met with meagre response,
and we hope that this meeting of the Security Council, by
highlighting the threat posed to all by the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, will give rise to a
more tangible commitment to an endeavour which lacks
the means for its achievement.

Moreover, also in coordination with the Secretary-
General of the OAU, President Bouteflika has been
ceaselessly working with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations with a view to creating the conditions for
prompt and effective United Nations involvement in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. Thus far it has
not been possible to obtain United Nations involvement
commensurate with African expectations or with the
challenge posed by the crisis in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. But this is an urgent situation that
genuinely threatens to spill over. Delay or hesitation in
deploying a United Nations peacekeeping operation is of
concern to the peoples of Africa, which need support
from the international community to make the Lusaka
peace process a success.

The presence at today's meeting of the signatories of
the Lusaka Agreement is a sign of their readiness, of
which we must take due note. Their presence attests to
their desire to promote dialogue as the means towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

While it is true that progress to date has not met our
expectations, the Lusaka Agreement still constitutes a
valuable achievement that should be protected from any
sudden challenges. It is the irreplaceable framework
within which we must strive to solve the problems before
us. The Agreement is intended to make yesterday's
adversaries into partners determined to implement a
peaceful solution, as shown by their cooperation with the
Joint Military Commission, which was established
following the signing of the Lusaka Agreement. All are
aware of the important progress made by this
Commission, which, however, continues to face enormous
material and financial difficulties. We hope that the
Commission, which has proven its effectiveness on the
ground, will be encouraged to continue its work.

Some countries responded positively to the appeal of
the current Chairman of the (OAU) and have given

 

equipment or financial support to the Joint Military
Commission. The Chairman of the OAU thanks them and
urgently appeals to other countries who have not as yet not
done so to also demonstrate their support for the
Commission.

We deeply deplore the recent confrontations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which have once again
claimed civilian victims. These regrettable events fly in the
face of the legitimate hopes of the Congolese people and of
other people of the region who hope to regain peace in
trust, harmony and as good neighbours.

President Abdelaziz Bouteflika has exhorted the parties
in conflict to abstain from resorting to arms and to work
resolutely with the Joint Military Commission to create
conditions for implementing the Lusaka Agreement. The
Agreement is a structure built on a balance of interests and
on a fair sharing of sacrifices. If it does not satisfy all,
neither does it privilege any of the parties. All new recourse
to arms will irreparably destroy the efforts for peace
undertaken up to now.

The current Chairman of the OAU welcomes the
designation of Sir Ketumile Masire, former President of
Botswana, as facilitator for the inter-Congolese dialogue.
His great qualities as a statesman, his extensive experience
and his personal engagement will help the Congolese
parties come together and find the elements of national
reconciliation.

This is not the first time that the Security Council is
considering the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Since the first warning signs of the crisis, the
Council understood the magnitude of the danger threatening
all countries of the region. In several successive and
repetitive resolutions, the Council called upon the parties to
the conflict to settle their disputes by peaceful means and
committed itself to provide them with military aid,
equipment and financial support. Despite delays and
hesitations in their progress, the African parties nonetheless
responded to the appeal of the Security Council and, not
without tremendous difficulties, arrived at the Lusaka
Agreement.

Implementing this Agreement, as we said previously,
requires ways and means that go beyond their own
capabilities. For its part, the Security Council has only
partially met its commitments by sending 79 liaison officers
to the field. At other times and in other places, the Council
has become involved far more energetically in the
settlement of crises that threatened peace in other regions
of the world. On those occasions, it made available
considerable resources, even going to the extent of
military action not without inevitable risks.

The African continent wishes to benefit from similar
concern on the part of the international community. You
wished to impart to this meeting of the Council an
exceptional and solemn nature; it would be difficult to
understand if the meeting did not lead to very firm
commitments and if the actions and calendar for
implementing them were not clearly defined. This is what
we Africans expect of the United Nations, that is to say
of the States of which it is made up, and particularly of
those which have the equipment and the financial and
military power.

