Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman and Special Representative
Patten for their briefings.

Italy remains committed to supporting Myanmar
in overcoming the crisis in Rakhine state and in its
democratic transition and peace process. In that spirit,
we have worked to contribute constructively to the
Council's work, in particular through the presidential
statement on the subject (S/PRST/2017/22) adopted
during our presidency of the Council last month, as
well as in the Third Committee and the Human Rights
Council. We moved immediately to respond to the
humanitarian situation and announced a pledge of
637 million at the recent donors' conference in Geneva.
I would like to make three main points.

First, despite some apparent easing of tensions
and the efforts of the Government of Myanmar, the
situation in Rakhine state is still of serious concern.
The violence must stop and all civilians, regardless
of their status, ethnicity or religion, must be assured
security and respect for their human rights. All those
in need must receive humanitarian assistance without
discrimination. Once again, we urge the authorities to
ensure full and unhindered access for humanitarian and
human rights actors and the United Nations specialized
agencies. At the same time, the humanitarian situation
of those who have fled to Bangladesh is rapidly
deteriorating. We once again commend Bangladesh
for its solidarity with the refugees and express our
gratitude for the burden it is bearing. The international
community should scale up its assistance before
the conditions worsen in the camps, where a large
percentage of those being sheltered are children with
no access to food, sanitary, health care or other basic
services. Besides this, and beyond the response to the
immediate emergency, it will be crucial to establish a
more comprehensive strategy for assisting the refugees.
Secondly, a safe, dignified and voluntary return
is key to normalization. We are pleased that Myanmar
and Bangladesh have concluded an agreement on
repatriation and look forward to its implementation.
We call on both countries to continue cooperating with
each other and the United Nations, especially the High
Commissioner for Refugees, whose capacity in this
field is unparalleled. The return must be sustainable.
Proper conditions must be put in place in Rakhine
state to allow refugees to return to their places of
origin and rebuild their lives there. Security, freedom
of movement, respect for human rights and access to
services and livelihoods are crucial to that end. We
welcome the steps that the Government has taken in
that regard, including through its establishment of the
Union Enterprise Mechanism and the appointment of
an interministerial committee advisory board. But
there is still much to be done in the short, medium and
longer term. The recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State chaired by Kofi Annan
represent a road map that must be operationalized
through the authorities' consistent commitment. The
international community stands ready to support
that process.

Thirdly, with regard to reconciliation, intercommunal
and interreligious dialogue is crucial at this stage. We
welcome the initiatives that the Government has taken
so far, and encourage it to ramp up those efforts with a
view to restoring a spirit of understanding and mutual
trust among the various communities. The visit by Pope
Francis was a landmark event. We fully endorse and
echo his plea for justice, human rights and respect for
every ethnic group and identity. In that regard, ensuring
accountability remains fundamental. We continue to
be deeply concerned about reports of grave human
rights violations and abuses in Rakhine state, including
serious allegations of sexual- and gender-based
violence, especially against the Rohingya community.

Those responsible must be identified and brought
to justice. We urge the authorities to make concrete
commitments in that regard. We believe the United
Nations can play an important role in helping them to
make an impartial assessment of the events that have
occurred and reiterate our call to them to cooperate
with the Human Rights Council's fact-finding
mission. We welcome Special Representative Patten's
forthcoming visit to Myanmar. While we commend
the authorities' support for her mandate, we encourage
them to step up their dialogue with her, particularly in
the area of legal reform and capacity-building, as well
as with Ms. Yanghee Lee, the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in Myanmar.

Thanks to Myanmar's commitment, promising
steps have been made in the past few weeks, but
additional efforts will be required to address the
situation in Rakhine in a comprehensive and effective
manner as provided for in the presidential statement,
which we look forward to seeing fully implemented. We
encourage Myanmar to strengthen its cooperation with
the United Nations system, which is the best way to back
up the actions of the parties and regional stakeholders,
as well as with a View to seeing the appointment of the
special envoy provided for in the recent resolution of
the Third Committee, which the General Assembly will
consider in the next few days.

The international community and the Security
Council should continue to maintain their focus in
order to ensure united and continued support to peace
and reconciliation in Myanmar. As we have done this
year as a member of the Council, Italy will continue to
do its part at the bilateral and multilateral level.

