Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this Security
Council briefing to update us on the most recent
developments in the Yemeni conflict, in particular the
continued fighting between Government forces and the
Houthi rebels, the political process for exiting the crisis
and the humanitarian situation. My delegation thanks
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, for his excellent briefing.

Despite the calls of the international community
for an immediate end to hostilities, fighting continues,
in particular in the strategic port city of Al-Hudaydah,
which since 8 September has been the theatre of violent
clashes between pro-Government forces and Houthi
rebels. According to corresponding reports from
medical sources and hospitals, the toll includes 84
killed combatants, of whom 73 were Houthi rebels and
11 were members of pro-Government forces. Overall,
the United Nations estimates that the conflict claimed
6,660 civilian victims from March 2015 to August 2018,
although the levels of Violence during the clashes and
the sophisticated nature of the weapons and methods
deployed by the belligerents would lead us to believe
that the number of victims could be higher. With regard
to the atrocities committed throughout Yemen since the
beginning of the conflict in 2014, C6te d'Ivoire calls for
those responsible for those acts to be held accountable
and for all parties to respect international humanitarian
law. My country also urges them to refrain from
hindering the delivery of humanitarian aid in any way,
which, under international law, can be prosecuted
before the relevant international competent courts.

In addition to the heavy toll caused by the clashes
and their humanitarian consequences, the impasse
of the Geneva talks between Houthis and Yemeni
Government representatives is a source of great
concern to Cote d'Ivoire. Hope for the resumption of
dialogue among the Yemeni enemy brothers quickly
faded owing to the absence of representatives of the
rebel forces at the negotiations held on 6 September
in Geneva. Despite that failure and the widespread
pessimistic about the prospects for a rapid resumption
of negotiations, my delegation believes that the United
Nations must use every means at its disposal within
the framework of preventive diplomacy to bring the
parties to the conflict together to resume talks. To that
end, my delegation encourages the work of Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and urges him to pursue his mediation and his
good offices in his contact with Houthi and Yemeni
Government representatives. We take this opportunity
to call for a greater role in this effort to be played by
regional actors, in particular regional organizations, in
working harder to advance dialogue aimed at achieving
a solution to the Yemeni crisis.

My country's faith in dialogue as the peaceful
means of settling conflicts and the most effective tool
of preventive diplomacy leads us to believe with firm
conviction that there will be no lasting peace in Yemen
without an inclusive political process. Cote d'Ivoire
calls once again on the warring parties to lay down their
weapons so as to establish an environment conducive
to resuming talks, which is the only way to exit the
current impasse and turn hopes for lasting peace into
the reality dearly sought by millions of Yemenis.

