Mr. Danforth (United States): Here is the state of
the world today. Early last month, masked gunmen
seized a school in Beslan, Russia. They forced over
1,000 children and their teachers into a sweltering
gymnasium, with virtually no food or water. They
wired the gym with explosives. They terrorized the
children, shooting those who disobeyed them. After 52
hours, the terrorists detonated explosives. They shot
children in the back who tried to run away. In a
ruthlessly executed operation, the terrorists murdered
more than 300 people, most of whom were children.

On 30 September, in Baghdad, children gathered
near a ceremony marking the opening of a water
treatment plant. They were bunched together to get
candy soldiers were handing out. Seeing them bunched
together, terrorists drove two explosive-laden cars into
the midst of the children, detonated the cars and
deliberately murdered 34 children and 7 adults; 130
other civilians, many of them children, were injured.

On 1 October in Pakistan, a bombing at a Shi'ite
mosque killed dozens of worshippers. Just yesterday,
three terrorist bombs exploded at resorts in Egypt,
killing at least 35 people, injuring 100. These people
were on vacation. Workers are still pulling them out of
the rubble as I speak here today.

In each case, the terrorists believed that they were
acting in the service of a cause. These were not random
acts of violence; they were cause-driven acts of
violence. Some say that such murders of children are
justified by "root causes". Supporters of the murder of
civilians sometimes say that these are justifiable acts of
national liberation or of self-determination. Some
claim that exploding bombs in the midst of children is
in the service of God. That is the ultimate blasphemy.

The most significant paragraph in the resolution
before us is operative paragraph 3. It states quite
clearly that acts that intentionally target civilians for
death or serious bodily injury are criminal and never
justifiable. It calls for States to punish those who target
civilians. We do this through our courts or pursuant to
extradition treaties.

The resolution states that these acts of terror are
never justifiable - not by political, or philosophical,
or ideological, or racial, or ethnic or religious reasons.

We emphasize that, in addition to the acts
proscribed in paragraph 3, there are other acts, also
terrorist acts, that cannot be justified by political,
philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or
similar considerations. Nothing in operative paragraph
3 should be construed as creating any implication to
the contrary. For example, there are terrorist acts
covered by the existing terrorism conventions, for
which an element of intent is not required.

Let me emphasize the precise issue we decided
by our vote, because for some there is an alternative to
the principle set forth in this resolution. The alternative
position is that, while the deliberate massacre of
innocents might often not be justifiable, sometimes it
is. The alternative position is that some "root causes"
may from time to time justify terrorists in detonating
bombs in crowds of children. The alternative position
to the resolution before us is to say that circumstances
may be sufficient to justify such terrorism. Such
justification, the theory goes, might include self-
determination, national liberation or one's own
perception of the will of God. The resolution which we
have adopted states very simply that the deliberate
massacre of innocents is never justifiable in any
cause - never.

Either terrorism is never justifiable, or it is
sometimes justifiable. Either the massacre of innocents
always deserves punishment, or it is sometimes
absolved from punishment. Believing that the murder
of civilians can never be justified, we also agree that
the working group should consider the possibility of
drawing up a comprehensive list of terrorists.

I congratulate the Russian Federation for putting
this fundamental question of principle so squarely
before the Council. We have decided this question by
our unanimous vote.

