Mr. Lowcock: As Martin Griffiths just mentioned,
while the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah has largely held, as
he also indicated we have seen a pronounced escalation
of violence in other parts of the country. In Hajjah,
just north of Al-Hudaydah, the conflict has intensified
in several areas. Fierce fighting in Kushar district
displaced up to 50,000 people in February and March,
and was marked by continuous reports of shelling and
air strikes causing scores of civilian casualties. In the
Bani Hassan area of Abs district, over the last two weeks
fighting has forced nearly 100,000 more people from
their homes. About half have fled to other areas in Abs,
which is an extremely poor and water-scarce district and
now hosts upwards of 300,000 displaced people. The
active front lines are now just a few kilometres from
Abs district's main water source, which serves about
200,000 people. If fighting damages or cuts off that
facility, we could very quickly see a major catastrophe.
If fighting moves south to the Al-Hudaydah border,
up to 400,000 more people could be displaced. Fierce
fighting in Taiz in March among different factions in
a Government-controlled area resulted in numerous
casualties. Conflict has also intensified on established
front lines in Al-Dhale'e and along the northern
border in Sa'ada and Al-Jawf, displacing thousands of
more families.

On 26 March, an air strike in Sa'ada landed close
to a hospital supported by Save The Children, killing
eight civilians, including five children. On 2 April,
armed men broke into a hospital supported by Medecins
Sans Frontieres in Aden, kidnapped a patient and killed
him outside the hospital. On 3 April, three women
were reportedly killed and two children injured by an
artillery shell that land near a school in Al-Hudaydah.
On 7 April, large explosions at a warehouse in Sana'a
killed 14 children attending school nearby. Sixteen more
were critically injured. Most of them were not even
9-years old. As the international community continues
to support the Stockholm Agreement, it is critical that
we not lose sight of escalating violence elsewhere. In
my briefing to the Council on 14 December 2018 (see S/PV.8424), I called for a cessation of hostilities across
Yemen. I am reiterating that call today. All the men
with the guns and the bombs need to stop the Violence.
We once again remind the parties that international
humanitarian law binds them in all locations and at
all times.

Humanitarian agencies are also confronting an
alarming resurgence in the cholera epidemic, which we
had successfully rolled back last year. After two years
and more than 1.5 million suspected cases, cholera has
affected nearly every Yemeni family in some way. Two
weeks ago, Dr. Mohammed Abdul-Mughni, a highly
respected paediatrician treating cholera patients at a
public hospital in Sana'a, died ofthe disease himself. He
had just described the outbreak as "disastrous", telling
journalists that, "We are working to the extremes of
our strength".

So far in 2019, nearly 200,000 suspected cases of
cholera have been reported. That is almost three times
as many as in the same period last year. About a quarter
of cases are children under five. That spike has come
months before the usual increase during the main rainy
season in August. That means that, if not brought under
control, current trends could quickly result in mass
morbidity and death. Early rains are partly responsible,
but the major drivers remain forced displacement and
conflict-induced collapse of public infrastructure,
including the country's water and sanitation systems,
and the public institutions that provide basic services.

We have seen the consequences of the destruction of
the health system elsewhere too. More than 3,300 cases
of diphtheria have been reported since 2018 - the first
outbreak in Yemen since 1982. Earlier this year, new
measles cases surged to nearly twice the levels reported
at the same time in 2018 - itself a record-breaking
year. As Mr. Griffiths just recalled, about 2 million
school-age children remain out of school, and some
2,000 schools are unusable because they have been
damaged, are hosting displaced people or have been
occupied by armed groups. Overshadowing everything
is the continuing and very real risk of famine. In the
past four years, millions of families in Yemen have
been reduced to paupers. They have little or no income,
even as the prices of basic commodities that they need
to survive increase relentlessly.

Humanitarian agencies are doing everything that
they can to save lives and protect people across the
country. Last year we reached an average of 8 million
people a month, making Yemen the world's largest aid
operation. This year, we are doing more. The World
Food Programme has so far delivered emergency food
assistance to more than 9 million people every month.
It intends to increase that to 12 million people in the
coming months. Thousands of humanitarian personnel
are staffing approximately 1,500 cholera treatment
facilities in 147 districts across the country. Emergency
response teams are treating patients, distributing
hygiene kits, chlorinating water sources, sponsoring
clean-up campaigns and educating the public. They are,
as Dr. Mughni said, working tirelessly.

Humanitarian agencies have kept millions
of people alive so far, but we still face two major
challenges. The first is access. We still encounter far
too many restrictions on humanitarian action. The Red
Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, about which we have talked
to the Council previously, are a compelling example.
The Mills contain enough grain to feed 3.7 million
people for a month, and they became inaccessible
in September 2018, as coalition forces advanced
into the city. Ever since then, we have faced serious
challenges in accessing the Mills, which Mr. Griffiths
and I both addressed in public statements in February
(see S/PV.8464). A United Nations team was able to
conduct a one-day visit - finally - on 26 February.
That mission allowed us to establish that most of the
grain could still be salvaged if it were immediately
fumigated. Efforts have repeatedly been made since
then to cross the front lines to bring in workers to do the
fumigation and start milling the grain ~ a process that
would take several weeks. We continue to work with all
the parties to find the safest, most efficient way to get
that food to millions of desperately hungry people who
need it as soon as possible.

The litany of other problems involving access
that we have reported to the Council before continue.
Movement and customs clearances are withheld,
visas are denied, project agreements are side-tracked
and missions are delayed at checkpoints. Most of the
restrictions that we are currently facing are imposed
by Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities in the north. We
appreciate their recent decision to grant additional visas,
and we hope that that will lead to further improvements
in the access situation. In Government-controlled
areas, we also continue to engage the coalition with
regard to requirements introduced in December 2018
at Al-Dhubab checkpoint, which have caused delays
for agencies seeking to deliver aid in Government-
controlled areas along the west coast. Commercial
food imports through Al-Hudaydah and Saleef in the
first quarter of the year were about 40 per cent lower
than the previous quarter, and average food prices were
more than twice the pre-crisis level. Commercial fuel
imports are only 30 per cent of estimated requirements.
Correspondingly, fuel prices have nearly quadrupled
in some places in the past several weeks. People are
waiting for days to secure the very limited supplies of
fuel that are available.

With huge numbers of desperately poor, hungry
families being priced out of local food markets,
decision makers on all sides need urgently to find ways
to speed up the berthing of ships in Al-Hudaydah, ease
credit requirements and facilitate in-country shipments
of fuel. As I discussed with the new Governor of the
Central Bank two days ago, we also need to see the
exchange rate stabilized at a level that, as Mr. Griffiths
alluded to, makes it affordable for ordinary people to
buy food.

We are also increasingly concerned about the FSO
SAFER oil tanker, a floating storage and offloading
facility about eight kilometres off the coast of Ras Issa
terminal in the Red Sea. Used to store and export oil
since 1998, the tanker currently has about 1.1 million
barrels of oil on-board. It is in poor condition and has
had no maintenance since 2015. Without maintenance,
we fear that it will rupture, or even explode, unleashing
an environmental disaster in one of the world's busiest
shipping lanes. We have been working with all parties
to address the risk, supported by funding from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
starting with a technical assessment. Final approvals
for the assessment have been pending since September.
We hope that recent indications that a United Nations
project will soon be able to begin work on this critical
issue prove correct.

The second, potentially insuperable, challenge we
face is funding. In February donors pledged $2.6 billion
for humanitarian action in Yemen this year, including
a further $1 billion joint pledge for the United Nations
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates. Last year's contribution from those two
donors was channelled through the United Nations as
a single, unearmarked grant early in the year, which
I consider a best practice in humanitarian donorship.
That was also a major factor in enabling us last year to
counter the cholera outbreak, roll back food insecurity
in half of the pre-famine districts and help us save
more children suffering from complicated severe acute
malnutrition - more children than we were able to
save in any other comparable operation globally.

While we were encouraged by the pledges made
in Geneva, I need to tell the Council that, nearly
four months into the year, the United Nations Yemen
humanitarian response plan has actually received in
cash only $267 million. That is about 10 per cent of
what was pledged, and 6 per cent of requirements. And
it is 80 per cent less than what we had received in cash at
this time last year. United Nations agencies are rapidly
running out of money for essential relief activities. The
World Health Organization projects that 60 per cent
of diarrhoea treatment centres - the central approach
we have to tackle the cholera outbreak - could close
in the coming weeks, and services at 50 per cent of
secondary-care facilities could be disrupted. The
World Food Programme reports that its pipeline for
food vouchers and the in-kind food pipeline will break
in June, unless they immediately receive new money.
Closing or scaling back such programmes - at a time
when we are struggling to prevent widespread famine
and roll back cholera and other killer diseases - would
be catastrophic. And I therefore implore all our donors
to convert their pledges - the promises they made in
Geneva - into cash as quickly as possible.

We remain keenly aware that f as Mr. Griffiths
said - a sustainable peace would be the most effective
remedy for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Without
peace we will simply go on treating the symptoms of
this crisis instead of addressing the cause.

Let me summarize. Violence has again increased.
The relief operation is running out of money. Barring
changes, the end is nigh.

