Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): Mr. President, let me
at the outset express how pleased we are to see you
preside over our meeting today, and we thank you for
allowing us to participate in it.

We wish to welcome Foreign Minister Omaar
here today and congratulate him on his appointment.
We wish to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his presentation.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132) and
his report pursuant to the Security Council resolution

1846 (2008) (S/2009/146). My delegation noted the
positive developments highlighted in the two reports.
We warmly welcome the strong commitments by the
international community to persevere in the efforts to
resolve the situation in Somalia. But despite these
developments, there remain many more challenges that
need to be addressed.

Malaysia condemns the acts of piracy and armed
robberies at sea off the coast of Somalia. The situation
is a serious threat to the flow of global maritime trade.
It endangers the lives of crew members on board the
hijacked or attacked ships. The situation also causes
serious impediments to conveyance of international
humanitarian assistance to Somalia and of the
projected supplies of United Nations assistance to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Malaysia was directly drawn to the situation of
piracy off the coast of Somalia when three Malaysian-
flagged ships were hijacked in the Gulf of Aden
between August and December of 2008. We dispatched
five Royal Malaysian Navy vessels to the Gulf of Aden
in rotation. The objective then was to render the
necessary assistance in the effort to seek the release of
the hijacked Malaysian ships. Currently, the Malaysian
Navy provides escort and necessary security coverage
to other Malaysian-flagged vessels plying the sea in the
area. Malaysian Navy vessels have also provided
security to vessels of other countries upon request and
have been successful in thwarting a couple of attempts
by pirates to board and hijack such foreign vessels.

Malaysia had raised serious concerns to the
international community over the piracy and armed
robbery off the coast of Somalia. We raised the issue
during the general debate at the sixty-third session of
the General Assembly and also during the meeting of
our Foreign Minister with the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, in September of last year. Malaysia
urged the international community to immediately and
collectively formulate concrete steps and a framework
of cooperation to address the problem. With this
position in mind, we joined other States in
co-sponsoring resolution 1846 (2008) in particular.

Malaysia welcomes the anti-piracy operations
undertaken by Member States and regional and
international organizations, and in particular welcomes
the collaborative efforts by neighbouring littoral States
in that endeavour. We firmly believe, however, that the
United Nations should take a leadership role, including
through establishing a United Nations naval force to
combat piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia.

We share the view that, fundamentally, the long-
lasting solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia can be achieved only with political
stability, the prevalence of the rule of law and an
improved socio-economic situation in the country.
Therefore, the counter-piracy action should be carried
out in a holistic manner that involves political
solutions and reform of the security sector and in the
economic and human rights spheres in Somalia.

Finally, let me reiterate Malaysia's continued
readiness to work and cooperate with others in the
international efforts to resolve the scourge of piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and in the
resolution of the overall situation in Somalia.

