Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal agrees with the
assessment of the political and the security situation in Haiti
made by the Secretary-General in his latest report.

Indeed, despite some progress, the situation in the
country remains fragile, both in political and economic
fields. The continued support of the international
community remains vital for the political stability and
economic development of Haiti. Without it, it would be
much more difficult for the Haitian people to build a
society based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights.

We also believe that the international presence in
Haiti, and the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH) in particular, has been extremely important,
specifically by assisting the Government to form a public
force respectful of legality and by helping to consolidate the
transition to democracy. Had UNSMIH not been there, the
situation would undoubtedly be far worse. It is very
significant in this respect that despite their differences, the
Haitian authorities and the main political leaders have
requested the maintenance of the United Nations presence
in that country. In fact, a self-sustained and fully
functioning police force is essential in order to ensure a
secure and stable environment, economic rehabilitation
and the consolidation of democracy in Haiti.

We concur with the conclusions of the Secretary-
General's report that, so far, the Haitian National Police
has not reached the level of professionalization required
to tackle successfully the problems in fields such as
criminal investigation, narcotics and crowd control,
among others.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us today on the creation of a new
Mission in Haiti, and we consider that the maintenance of
a United Nations presence for a period of four months,
until 30 November 1997, is of the utmost importance.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the nature of a subsequent
international presence in Haiti, in the fields of public
security and judicial reform, as well as in monitoring
human rights, as called for in the draft resolution before
us today. Vitally important to the country's stability is a
sustained long-term effort on the part of the international
community.

I would like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, to the
UNSMIH personnel and to their Governments, for the
positive roles they have played and to the United States
and Canada for their crucial role in ensuring the success
of the Mission so far.

