Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes today's briefing on the latest
developments in Yemen. We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their excellent briefings.
My delegation would also like to warmly congratulate
Lieutenant General Michael Anker Lollesgaard on his
appointment as Chair of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and Head of the United Nations Mission in
support of the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA), and to
wish him every success in carrying out his new duties.
We also want to take this opportunity to pay special
tribute to his predecessor, Major General Patrick
Cammaert, whose commitment and methodical efforts
have helped to advance the peace process in Yemen.

Cote d'Ivoire would once again like to commend
the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts, which
have helped to make it possible to achieve the ceasefire
needed to launch an inclusive dialogue. We also
welcome the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018) and
2452 (2019), which have established a framework for a
sustainable way out of the crisis in Yemen. We believe
that the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
on a ceasefire and of resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019) offers some hope for peace for the Yemeni
people, on whom the years of war have inflicted so
much suffering. That is why we deplore the recurring
violations of the ceasefire, which seriously undermine
the prospects for settling a crisis whose humanitarian
consequences are the worst the world has seen in the
past few decades, according to the United Nations.

In view of the situation, new initiatives, together
with the right confidence-building measures, are
desperately needed in order to enable the major players
to effectively implement the Stockholm Agreement with
the assistance of the United Nations. The Agreement
specifically covers the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah city,
the mutual redeployment of forces outside the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa, the declaration of
understanding on opening humanitarian corridors for
the city of Taiz and the implementation of the agreement
on the exchange of 15,000 prisoners. With respect to the
last point, my delegation calls on the parties to finalize
the provisions of the prisoner exchange mechanism as
soon as possible in order to build confidence between
them and facilitate the comprehensive implementation
of the Agreement. In addition, we urge all stakeholders
to honour their commitments and overcome the
difficulties hindering its implementation.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian crisis that continues to affect about three
quarters of the Yemeni population, or nearly 22 million
people, 14 million of whom are facing pre-famine
conditions. We encourage the international community
to respond as quickly as possible and to adapt its response
to the scale of people's needs. We also urge Yemeni
stakeholders to continue to work to remove obstacles
to the delivery of humanitarian aid and to strengthen
measures to restore activity in the country's ports with
a view to resuming economic and trade activities. We
also call on the warring parties to ensure the safety and
security of UNMHA's personnel and to work with the
specialized agencies of the United Nations to facilitate
the unhindered entry and movement of food and basic
supplies for the affected populations, in accordance
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. My delegation
also welcomes the Council's plan to hold a donors'
conference in Geneva on 26 February under the auspices
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as part of the funding ofthe 2019 humanitarian
response plan, which will provide $4 billion to meet the
needs of approximately 15 million Yemenis.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the operationalization
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
which has resulted in a series of meetings among the
parties concerned, in accordance with the Stockholm
Agreement. We welcome the meetings' constructive
discussions of the Committee's mandate and the main
priorities of maintaining the ceasefire, redeploying the
military forces and providing access to humanitarian
aid. In view of those developments, we urge the parties
to the conflict in Yemen to refrain from any action
that could result in a resumption of hostilities in
Al-Hudaydah or other areas considered critical, and to
continue their cooperation in good faith with both the
Special Envoy and the Head of UNMHA.
In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support for
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and his commitment to
a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis in Yemen,
as well as for Lieutenant General Lollesgaard and his
observation team, whose rapid deployment to the cities
of Aden, Sana'a, Al-Hudaydah and Taiz attests to the
international community's commitment to advancing
the peace process. We reiterate our support for Mr. Mark
Lowcock in his commitment to mobilizing all of his
energies for a successful resolution to the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen. Lastly, my country reiterates its call to
the parties to the conflict to show restraint and to respect
their commitments in the context of the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement in order to give peace and
stability in Yemen a chance.

