I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Ban Ki-moon - and welcome him home - and Ms. Cliffe for their comprehensive briefings (annexes 1, 2 and 3, respectively). We would also like to express our appreciation to Foreign Minister Marsudi for her leadership on this issue and for organizing today's debate. As the Secretary-General has pointed out, coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is more than a health crisis. It is a multidimensional occurrence, with complex and intertwined consequences and challenges for peacebuilding. It could, unfortunately, exacerbate drivers of conflict. As resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes, peacebuilding and development gains made by post-conflict countries and countries in transition could be reversed as a result of the pandemic. COVID-19 has triggered a devastating human toll well beyond challenges to public health. In fragile, conflict-affected countries, it is upsetting economies and societies by aggravating the causes of conflict, and the shrinking of the humanitarian space is worrisome. Gender-based violence is escalating, as is the number of human rights violations. The foregoing illustrates the significance of this debate while we are also getting closer to the 2020 peace architecture review. This pandemic has uncovered both structural inequalities within societies and existing disproportionalities in access to basic services, including education. People affected by conflict are among the most vulnerable and the most at risk. Of particular importance is the strengthening of international cooperation, including South-South and triangular cooperation, work across the humanitarian- development-peace nexus and putting into practice what the Secretary-General set forth in his report entitled "Shared responsibility, global solidarity: responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19". Sharing lessons learned and good practices within and across countries and regions is key. In this context, one of the main concepts that needs to be incorporated in any recovery and response to COVID-19 is the peacebuilding dimension. The Dominican Republic has consistently stressed how crucial a global, coordinated and unified response among countries and regions is. Partnerships for peacebuilding and sustaining peace is also crucial, precisely with civil society, international financial institutions, academia, the private sector, donors, decision makers and local communities. All these actors must come together to better articulate their comparative strengths and develop mechanisms that will ensure a strong peacebuilding capacity. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has served as an exemplary platform in this regard. It is constantly brainstorming with different actors on how to enhance a response and support specific countries and regions. We reiterate the importance of the PBC's advice to the Security Council in this area, as well as the importance of amplifying the United Nations system-wide engagement. Funding partners must aim at achieving the long-term benefits of peace, and not at offering mere short-term support. We commend the work of many international financial institutions in supporting risk mitigation in the most fragile settings. We commend the Peacebuilding Fund for providing timely assistance through its interventions to support countries in addressing COVID-19. Part of the solution to the pandemic is responsive programming that is sensitive to conflicts and informed about risks. It should be context-specific and in line with the needs of local communities, in particular of the most vulnerable and marginalized. This is crucial to keeping the pandemic from bringing detrimental consequences to peacebuilding efforts and from letting gains in this respect be undermined. Responses that are excessively focused on security must not be deployed, nor should any measures that curtail or shrink civic space. Every approach should be undertaken in the spirit of doing no harm and reflect conflict- and gender-sensitivity. While they must also be people-centred, they should take advantage of the expertise arising from civil society, particularly women's groups and youth groups. Women's participation is central to achieving sustainable solutions. The pandemic has shed more light on how critical the women and peace and security agenda is to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. As we celebrate International Youth Day today, under the theme of youth engagement for global action, it is relevant to recall in the Security Council that, as reaffirmed in resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2535 (2020), young people play a vital role in building and sustaining peace. Their vision is not to bounce back from this pandemic but to build back better. Following this approach, learning from past examples that opened up spaces for actors to achieve central peacebuilding objectives, for example, the Ebola crisis, we should view COVID-19 as presenting a window of opportunity for peacebuilding, identifying pathways to be reinforced and ways to make the pandemic contribute to strengthening peace and social cohesion.
