Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): It is not with pleasure
that I take the floor for the second time today. But I
cannot let some parts of Serbia's second intervention go
unanswered. To reply to some of the comments, I will
use the European Parliament resolution in the Seselj
case. The resolution states as follows:

"whereas in his public statements Seselj
repeatedly called for the creation of 'Greater
Serbia', publicly stating claims on neighbouring
countries, including EU Member State Croatia, and
inciting hatred against non-Serb people";

"stresses that Seselj's recent statements could
have the effect of undermining the progress made
in regional cooperation and reconciliation and
subverting the efforts of recent years";

"reminds the Serbian authorities of their
obligations under the framework for cooperation
with the ICTY and of Serbia's obligations as an
EU candidate country; notes with concern that
the absence of an adequate political reaction and
legal response by the Serbian authorities [and]
encouragestheSerbianauthoritiesandthedemocratic
parties to condemn any public manifestation of
hate speech or wartime rhetoric and to promote
the protection of minority and cultural rights [and]
asks the Serbian authorities to investigate whether
Seselj has violated Serbian law and to strengthen
and fully apply the legislation outlawing hate
speech, discrimination and incitement to violence".
The European Parliament is the pivotal institution

of the European Union. Its documents represent the
highest authority to the European Union, of which
Croatia is a member State and Serbia is a candidate for
membership. The resolution perfectly encapsulates the
core of the problem in the Ses'elj case and outlines the
way out.

Finally, let me conclude by saying that it is
deplorable, to put it mildly, that the issue of the
Serbian minority in Croatia has been opened today.
The Security Council is the last place where such an
issue should be debated. There is no reason at all to
do so, especially during a debate on the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. I see no reason to
explain or to justify the Croatian position in that regard,
because in doing so I would be conferring on the matter
importance it does not at all deserve.

On the other hand, Seselj concerns an issue that
must be discussed. Making any connection between
the Serbian minority in Croatia and the absence of
any reaction on the part of the Serbian authorities to
the Seselj case is not only grossly misplaced, but also
demonstrates the inability of Serbia to understand the
seriousness of the Seselj problem and to deal with it.
Some lessons from the past, it seems, Serbiajust refuses
to learn.

