I thank Judge Agius, President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings. We congratulate Judge Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz on their reappointments. We also congratulate Mr. Abubacarr Tambadou on his appointment as the Mechanism's new Registrar. As we approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1966 (2010), which established the Mechanism, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its unwavering support for that important pillar of the international criminal justice system. The critical role that the Mechanism continues to play in the fight against impunity for mass atrocity crimes and its contribution to reconciliation is irrefutable. The Mechanism has also substantially developed jurisprudence and continues its effective and efficient work in other practical aspects, such as witness support and protection and multifaceted assistance to Member States. We continue to applaud the Mechanism's commitment to maintaining operational continuity while ensuring the health and safety of staff, witnesses and persons in detention, despite the challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are pleased to note that courtroom proceedings have resumed, with the implementation of special arrangements, and we commend the Mechanism's use of virtual processes in its adjusted working methods. The Mechanism's success is greatly dependent on the full cooperation of Member States, without which the Mechanism cannot achieve the Security Council's vision of being a small, temporary and efficient structure. The arrest of Felicien Kabuga in May after 23 years as a fugitive is a testament to the effectiveness of international cooperation, which is the only path towards the tracking, apprehension and prosecution of the remaining six fugitives of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. International cooperation also enables the search for missing persons and the enforcement of judgments, as well as assisting with witness protection and relocation. On the point of witness relocation, there remains the unfortunately unresolved matter of those individuals who have been acquitted and released and are currently residing in Arusha, Tanzania. It is our hope that a sustainable solution will swiftly be found, and we welcome the Registrar's proactive efforts in that regard. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphatically denounces all forms of genocide denial and the glorification of convicted war criminals. Genocide denial promotes dangerous ideologies, impedes the fight against impunity and hinders reconciliation. It further delegitimizes, and shows wanton disregard for the suffering of, the victims of such horrendous crimes, the facts of which have been incontrovertibly determined. The recognition, education and remembrance of painful periods in history are critical in preventing the re-emergence of hateful rhetoric and ensuring that such crimes are never repeated. The Mechanism continues to effectively fulfil its obligation to uphold the principles of international law, even in the face of a global health crisis. However, that is a Shared responsibility, and we urge Member States to intensify their cooperation with the Mechanism. We must remain committed to the pursuit of international justice and the protection and strengthening of the rule of law.
