Mr. Dauth (Australia): Mr. President, it is a
pleasure to be here under your watch. Forgive me, I
had understood that the Council was resuming at
3 p.m., not 3.30 p.m.; I apologize for having got that
time wrong.

Let me say also that I was somewhat disappointed
not to have been able to speak before lunch. I had
thought that those of us who were prepared to give
statements within the prescribed limits should be
rewarded, not punished. So I gave some thought over
lunch to expanding my three-minute statement from
three minutes to 30 minutes, to see how that would fly.
But out of concern for my reputation - which I hope
is well established - for giving very short statements,
and out of my deep affection for you, Mr. President, I
will stick to the three-minute version.

Australia welcomes the Council's ongoing
consideration of small arms and light weapons issues.
The Secretary-General's latest report is a solid
assessment of the Council's efforts over the past
12 months to address small arms issues within its
mandate, highlighting achievements and gaps. We urge
the Council to continue actively considering the
security and humanitarian dimensions of the illicit
small arms trade and their impact on stability in
conflict and post-conflict situations.

In particular, when imposing United Nations arms
embargoes and establishing United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the Council must be attuned
to the impact of illicit small arms transfers. The
Council's continued attention to small arms issues,
particularly in the regional context, will strengthen the
international community's resolve to increase pressure,
through embargoes and monitoring mechanisms, on
those responsible for illicit transfers.

The Council cannot work on its own, alone, of
course, in addressing the small arms threat. It is highly
incumbent on Member States themselves to strictly
enforce United Nations arms embargoes and to
implement strong national export controls, including
systems of end-user certification, to prevent the
uncontrolled spread of small arms.

Australia has been active in promoting effective
measures against the illicit small arms trade in our
region, including by co-hosting, in August 2004, with
the Governments of Fiji and of Japan and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in
Asia and the Pacific, the Third Pacific Islands Small
Arms Workshop. The Workshop's practical focus on
the implementation of model weapons control
legislation endorsed by Pacific Island Forum leaders in
2003 is helping materially to institute a common
regional approach to weapon control. The Workshop
also promoted regional adherence to the United
Nations Programme of Action.

At the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, Australia led the adoption by consensus in
the First Committee of a new resolution on preventing
the illicit transfer of, unauthorized access to and the
use of Man-Portable Air Defence Systems
(MANPADS), creating the first international standard
on MANPADS. Australia urges Member States to
implement the resolution by taking practical measures
to control the production, stockpiling, transfer and
brokering of MANPADS, and to enact or improve
legislation to ban the transfer of MANPADS to non-
State actors.

Australia welcomes recent progress at the second
session of the open-ended working group on the
marking and tracing of small arms and light weapons
and looks forward to the conclusion of an international
instrument at the final session in July. A marking and
tracing instrument will be a further concrete step in
international efforts to better understand and control
illicit transfers. Australia encourages Member States to
take a pragmatic approach to the final round of
negotiations to construct an instrument that is credible
and implementable.

