Mr. Ipo (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's briefing on the situation
in South Sudan. We thank Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), and Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, for their excellent
briefings. We also thank Ms. Lydia Minagano of South
Sudanese civil society for her inspiring statement.
Finally, I welcome the participation of Ambassador
Akuei Bona Malwal, Permanent Representative of
South Sudan to the United Nations, in today's meeting.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the delays
in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, signed on 12 September 2018, referred to in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/49l). We recall
that the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), had raised many hopes,
especially since it had made it possible to significantly
reduce the level of political violence and had brought
about intranational rapprochement and the return
of refugees. However, it must be noted that those
achievements, while significant, fall short of the
expectations of the international community.

The lack of progress in the implementation of
some important provisions of the agreement in the
pre-transition phase, which should have led to the
formation of a Government of national unity, is a perfect
illustration of this situation. My country therefore
encourages the South Sudanese parties to seize the
opportunity offered by the six-month extension
period of the Revitalized Agreement, concluded by
the parties themselves, to make decisive progress. It
is on this condition that they could hope to maintain
and strengthen the multifaceted support of the United
Nations and the international community for a peaceful
way out of the crisis in South Sudan.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore strongly encourages the
parties to rise above partisan interests and make the
compromises needed to implement the key steps
required for the success of the transition phase. In that
regard, my country hopes that the efforts of the South
Sudanese parties will focus on determining the number
of states and their borders, reviewing and drafting
laws, incorporating the agreement into the interim
Constitution and providing for the billeting, training
and redeployment of the armed forces.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire echoes the Secretary-
General's call for operationalization of the transitional
security arrangements, security sector reform and
the facilitation of the activities of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. In that regard, we welcome
the commitment of the Government of South Sudan to
disbursing $100 million to finance the reforms provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement.

An inclusive political dialogue that takes into
account the contribution that South Sudanese women
can make in the crisis-recovery process is essential
for achieving lasting peace and stability. cote d'Ivoire
would also like to stress the importance of strong
regional ownership of the Revitalized Agreement. We
also welcome the continued involvement of the African
Union and IGAD's initiatives. The meeting held in
Addis Ababa on 2 May upon the initiative of the IGAD
Special Envoy enabled all stakeholders to identify the
major obstacles to progress and propose the extension
of the pre-transition period.

Despite the persistent challenges in South Sudan,
the multidimensional contribution of UNMISS to
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts in the country
is well established. Cote d'Ivoire joins the support
expressed for the Mission and urges the Special
Representative and his entire team to persevere in
their daily efforts so as to fulfil the deep aspirations
of the people of South Sudan for peace and security.
Nevertheless, the efforts of UNMISS will be
unsuccessful if the will of the South Sudanese parties
does not evidence a real commitment to emerging from
the current crisis and writing a new chapter in their
country's history.
Accordingly, my country hopes that the unity
displayed by the main political actors in South Sudan
in the context of the spiritual retreat organized on 9 and
10 April upon the Vatican's request will be translated
into concrete action on the ground. There are human
and moral dimensions to the unspeakable distress of the
people of South Sudan, as Ms. Minagano pointed out,
which must challenge all the actors in the country and
lead them to make the sacrifices necessary to put an end
to it. The people of South Sudan and the international
community fervently urge them to do so.

