Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I have the honour to
deliver this joint statement on behalf of the delegations
of Egypt, Spain and Ukraine. For the purpose ofbrevity
and efficiency, a more detailed written version of this
statement will be circulated.

We would like to commend you, Mr. President,
for having organized this debate on the theme "Post-
conflict peacebuilding: review of the peacebuilding
architecture", at a critical juncture in the
intergovernmental process of the peacebuilding review.
The ongoing review ofthe United Nations peacebuilding
architecture takes place at a defining moment for the
Organization. With the increasing number of violent
conflicts and their changing nature, the existing tools
and approaches that the United Nations uses and applies
in its response are being called into question. Hence
the need for Member States and the United Nations
leadership to consider measures leading to real change
in the prevailing mindset within the United Nations,
and also for strengthening the capacity of the broader
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We hope
that this debate will contribute to reaching consensus on
such measures through the intergovernmental process.

The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture, prepared under the leadership of
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, concludes that, unless we
succeed in breaking the barriers within the Organization
between the principle organs of the United Nations and
between and within the Secretariat, agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations, we will fail
the people that we have been mandated to serve. It
is in the Council's interest to consider, with urgency,
measures to discourage the division and fragmentation
of approaches, in order to protect the multi-billion
dollar investment we have in peacekeeping missions
against the risk of lapse or relapse into conflict. In
recent memory, the tragic cases of South Sudan and the
Central African Republic serve as stark illustrations of
such risks.

The United Nations system must give priority to
enabling countries to put in place effective and inclusive
national and local mechanisms and institutions that can
address the socioeconomic and political root causes and
drivers of violent conflict, including issues related to
the promotion and protection of human rights and the
assignment of a prominent role for women in all stages
of peace consolidation. That will be the most effective
way to pursue prevention. It is therefore imperative
to introduce policies, structures and mandates that
primarily cater to the development capacity of
national stakeholders.

Preventive diplomacy also represents a major
tool of deterrence that the Security Council should
deploy more frequently. It should do that by utilizing
the good offices of the Secretary-General and his
mandated responsibility to draw the Council's attention
to situations that could threaten international peace
and security, and by utilizing partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations. To that end,
we believe that the Council must recommit to the spirit
of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, thereby making a critical contribution to the
building and sustaining of peace. In that vein, the
Council should consistently respond to the requests of
parties for assistance in the implementation of peace
agreements. The most recent response to the request
from Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia serves as a good example for future Council
contributions to the prevention of relapse into conflict.

Despite the commendable contributions made over
the past decade by the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office to maintaining our attention on situations and
needs that would otherwise have fallen off the radar, we
must plead guilty to having underutilized those tools.
We must seize the opportunity offered by the three
reviews of United Nations peacekeeping operations
to ensure that the three components of our broader
peacebuilding architecture play a more central role in
catalyzing political commitment on the part of Member
States to promoting coherence within and beyond the
United Nations system and in mobilizing human and
financial resources.

With the reforms proposed by the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts with regard to the
working methods and functions of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Security Council should draw upon the
Advisory Group's advice when a situation with which
the Council is seized is no longer characterized as a crisis
but should still be considered fragile and deserving of
more dedicated, targeted and sustained attention.

Peacebuilding-related investments should start
early as the opportunities emerge throughout the arc
of a crisis. That will help build the foundation for an
inclusive political settlement and for key institutions
early on. More predictable funding for a broad range
of early and targeted engagement remains critical for
building and sustaining peace. In that regard, we believe
that the recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Group deserve greater circulation and serious
consideration on the part of Member States.

We truly hope that we can soon reach consensus
on a draft resolution that will formalize the review
and authorize efforts to effect the needed changes.
However, no resolution stands a chance of making a real
difference unless all Member States and the seniormost
leadership of the United Nations stand ready to renew
their commitment to saving this and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

As we recently paid tribute to Boutrous Boutrous
Ghali, I will conclude with a quote from his 1992 "An
Agenda for Peace: Preventive Diplomacy, Peacemaking
and Peacekeeping":

"Reform is a continuing process, and
improvement can have no limit The pace set
must therefore be increased if the United Nations
is to keep ahead of the acceleration of history that
characterizes this age. We must be guided not by
precedents alone, however wise these may be, but
by the needs of the future and by the shape and
content that we wish to give it." (S/24H], para. 85)

