Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Since this is the second time in 12 days that I
am addressing the Council, I should like to once again
commend you, Mr. President, for the skill with which
you are guiding the work of this important United
Nations organ during this month of January.

The adoption of resolution 2088 (2013) on the
situation in the Central African Republic and the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA) give me an opportunity to make
some brief comments on that important decision.

My country, which was made fragile by the sad and
painful events that began on 10 December 2012 but are
thankfully in the process of being resolved, took the
opportunity of the Libreville discussions, held on 10 and
11 January 2013, to once again lay the groundwork for
a return to peace through dialogue, thereby affirming
the common faith of the women and men of the Central
African Republic, despite their differences and the
diversity of their cultural mosaic, wherein lies the
wealth of our nation, to live in perfect symbiosis in a
unified country.

In Libreville, decisions were made for the good
of the country and for the happiness of the people.
All that is required now is genuine political will by
all parties to translate them into reality. The much-
longed-for Government of National Unity, which is
currently being formed, will have no alternative but
to move in that direction, pursuant to its terms of
reference, focusing increasingly on bringing peace to
the country, restructuring the defence and security
forces, relaunching the social and economic sectors,
and convening the upcoming legislative elections.

However, we can see, even before a post-crisis
assessment has been undertaken, that the scope of
the damage is immense. Everyone - the President,
the Government and the women and men of our
country ~ will have to work hard to rebuild the State,
whose foundations have been so seriously undermined.
They have no doubt that all elements of the international
community, including the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States, the International Organization
of la Francophonie and all friendly countries, which
have always been by our side, will support our country
in its quest for peace and development.

Here I wish to thank in advance all bilateral
and multilateral partners and non-governmental
organizations that will support the country during this
process, which will be so crucial to helping the Central
African Republic to be reborn.

That is why we welcome the justified extension
of the mandate of BINUCA, a partner with which the
Government of National Unity wishes to work in a
concerted and harmonious manner. That cooperation
will be launched in the next few days, beginning with
a quick assessment of post-crisis realities so as to
identify the measures necessary to move ahead with
reconstruction.

Our country, which has suffered greatly from
recurring conflicts that have stymied its efforts towards
growth and development, has made the decision to
leave behind a sad chapter of its history, take control of
its destiny and move ahead with great hope.

Together, let us give the country the opportunity
and the means to move ahead, as that is what it wishes
to do. The country yearns for lasting peace for itself,
for the Central African subregion and for all of Africa.

