Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we still face enormous challenges in ensuring that women fully participate in all areas of society on an equal basis. Over those 20 years, we have seen a fundamental shift from considering women as victims of armed conflict, in particular sexual violence in conflict, to seeing them as essential actors in conflict prevention and resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. The path that we have already travelled should encourage us, but there is still work to be done in the coming years. Spain is determined to fulfil its commitments to gender equality and the women and peace and security agenda, both at the national level and in the context of international multilateral initiatives. We are aware of the many difficulties in implementing the resolutions and the women and peace and security agenda in terms of security and women's participation in all stages of conflict and peacebuilding. But we cannot forget that there can be no sustainable peace without the participation of women, in all their diversity and without discrimination of any kind, both in its definition and agreement and in its implementation. The number of women participating in peace processes and the commitment of the negotiating parties to women's participation clearly remain insufficient. We know for sure that in many countries of the world women are making significant efforts to lead their societies towards peace. Their voices show us that our action and support are even more pressing. Placing women's organizations and women peacemakers and mediators at the centre of decision-making must be a genuine and cross-cutting priority for all. That is what the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/946) on this issue points out, seeing that as one of the obstacles to the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. That is the underlying reason that Spain is a member of the Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action Compact of the Generation Equality Forum. It is also the reason that, in 2015, Spain launched several international initiatives, including the Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network. In 2019, together with Finland, we launched the Commitment 2025 initiative to ensure that the inclusion and meaningful participation of women in peace processes becomes a reality by 2025. Political, operational and financial commitments are directly linked to women's effective participation in peace processes. We must follow up on those ambitious commitments if we are to ensure that transformative and genuine change takes place in peacebuilding and negotiation processes. In that conviction, together with Australia, Finland, Azerbaijan, Tunisia, Argentina and Iraq, Spain submitted at the Human Rights Council resolution A/HRC/45/28, entitled "Promoting and protecting the human rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)", which was adopted by consensus at the 45th session of the Human Rights Council. Finally, we firmly believe that the women and peace and security and the Safe Schools agendas are closely linked. That is why Spain organized, in 2019, the third International Conference on Safe Schools, which addressed the gender impact of attacks on access to education, since girls and women are especially vulnerable to such attacks and their effects are particularly harsh and widespread over time. We have made a joint effort to ensure women's participation in the area of conflict resolution. We strive to incorporate that agenda in each country so that every woman can contribute with her voice and her ideas to building peace and rebuilding their societies wherever they live.
