Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Traditionally, the
month of September at the United Nations has been one
which, with the commencement of a new session of the
General Assembly, rings with renewed hopes for peace.
With the recent developments in the Israeli-Palestinian

 

relationship, however, a sombre shadow has been cast over
this Chamber today.

My delegation, fully recognizing the far-reaching
implications which the Middle East carries for international
peace and security, has consistently supported the peace
process in that region and has closely followed the progress
of its implementation. We consider the latest clashes in the
West Bank, which have been deemed the worst since the
1993 Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements, to be detrimental not only in terms of the
heavy casualties, but also because of the nature of the
fighting between the Israeli military and the Palestinian
police force.
If steps are not taken to curb the fighting, then the
current situation in the West Bank, which has turned into
a grim confrontation between organized forces, may do
immeasurable damage to the already shaky efforts for a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.

As we are well aware, the catalyst for this explosive
and tragic turn of events was the Israeli decision to open a
new entrance to a tunnel that runs under a major religious
site in Jerusalem. Although this decision may have been
based upon practical considerations, the highly sensitive
political factors should have been taken into consideration.
Indeed, given the extremely fragile and sensitive state of
affairs in Jerusalem, opening the entrance was perceived by
Palestinians as a deliberate challenge to the status quo in
that city. In this regard, my delegation believes that the
violence that has ensued from this action could have easily
been anticipated and thus avoided.

As I mentioned at the Council meeting convened on
15 April to discuss Israel's measures to close its borders
with the West Bank and Gaza, it is the wisdom, courage
and patience of both Israelis and Palestinians that will
enable them to overcome the crisis before them. I reiterate
my view that as the problems facing the two peoples are
man-made, so too can a workable solution be forged among
them.

In the face of such crises, one of the highest priorities
for the international community has always been to prevent
the situation from degenerating into further violence. With
that said, perhaps one of the best ways to contain the
situation in the West Bank is to restore the status quo. All
the delicate issues related to the status of Jerusalem could
then be discussed in a reasoned and more dispassionate
manner through the negotiations on final status.

The Republic of Korea, along with the rest of the
international community, still believes that Israel and
Palestine both realize the crucial stake they have in
continuing the peace process, and thus hopes that the
spirit of compromise and cooperation can be revived in
their relations. More specifically, we hope that the current
tensions can be defused in a prompt manner through a
summit meeting between the two parties, and therefore
appreciate the diplomatic efforts currently under way to
facilitate such a dialogue.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to appeal once
again to both parties to implement faithfully the
agreements they freely entered into on the basis of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) so that,
through the exercise of restraint, the current crisis can be
overcome, and the march towards reconciliation can
resume at a full pace.

