Mr. Wali (Nigeria): First of all, I wish to thank
the President of Kenya, President Mwai Kibaki, for
hosting the Security Council in Nairobi. I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month. In the
same vein, I would like to compliment Ambassador Sir
Emyr Jones Parry of the United Kingdom for a
successful presidency of the Council in October. We
also express our appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his initiatives and efforts at conflict
prevention, resolution and peace-building in Africa.

We welcome the decision of the Security Council
to hold this meeting in Nairobi. We recall that the last
meeting of the Council in Africa was about 30 years
ago, when it met in Addis Ababa, when its agenda was
largely on decolonization.

The conflict situation in Africa continues to be
disturbing because the promises and the hope of
prosperity still remain unfulfilled when most African
countries have attained political independence. A
greater part of the continent is characterized by
conflict, poverty, decaying infrastructure and the
scourge of HIV/AIDS. In the face of these challenges,
African leaders have embarked on serious efforts to
find a lasting and sustainable solution to key problems
of socio-economic development. In this regard, we
welcome the efforts of the leaders of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in seeking peaceful solutions to the conflicts in the
Sudan and Somalia.

We commend the United Nations and the
international community for their response to the
humanitarian situation in the Darfur region and urge
that they remain engaged in the situation. I recall that
one President - Olusegun Obasanjo, the current
Chairman of the African Union - addressed the
Security Council in September 2004 in New York on
the state of the peace talks in Abuja between the
Government of the Sudan, the Liberation Army/
Movement and the Justice and Equality Movement.

The parties have since reached an agreement on
both security and humanitarian issues. For instance,
they agreed to maintain the civilian character of
internally displaced persons and reiterated the right of
internally displaced persons and refugees to voluntarily
return to their homes. They also agreed to protect the
human rights of internally displaced persons and
refugees. Finally, they agreed to ensure that all forces
and individuals involved or reported to be involved in
violations of rights of internally displaced persons,
vulnerable groups and civilians would be impartially
investigated and held accountable to the appropriate
authorities.

We welcome Security Council resolution 1556
(2004), which condemns all acts of violence and
violations of international humanitarian law by all the
parties to the crisis. In particular, we welcome the call
on the Sudanese Government to fulfil its commitment
to disarm the Janjaweed militia and bring them and
their associates to justice for any violation of human
rights and international humanitarian law.

We call on the parties to comply with the request
to disarm the Janjaweed and ensure that civilians are
no longer attacked, and that those who attack them
should be prosecuted. We support the recommendation
that those who violate the ceasefire agreement and
international humanitarian law, on both sides, should
be subject to military or civilian prosecution.

In this regard, we welcome the fact that the
Government of the Sudan has continued to fulfil its
commitment under the joint communique regarding
humanitarian access, which has made possible an
increase in humanitarian operations serving internally
displaced persons and refugees. This has enabled 40
international non-governmental organizations, the Red
Cross mission and United Nations agencies to operate
in Darfur.

The international humanitarian operation in
Darfur is a significant testimony to the benefits of
effective cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. In this connection, we commend the
efforts of the Security Council in building the
necessary synergy for the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) in the prevention and resolution of conflicts in
the continent and the subregions.

We urge the Security Council to further intensify
its support for the various regional initiatives for the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa. Nigeria
reiterates its support for the commitment of the African
Union to increase its mission in Darfur to 3,320
persons, including 2,341 military personnel, 450
observers and up to 815 civilian police. We welcome
the African Union's expanded mandate, beyond the
terms of the N'Djamena agreement, to include the
monitoring and verification of the provision of security
for returning internally displaced persons, of
Government-controlled militias and of the protection
of civilians.

The engagement of the Security Council and the
international community in the peace process in the
Sudan should be total and comprehensive. We are
encouraged by the Secretary-General's report that the
political process for addressing the north-south conflict
in the Sudan has resumed and is making progress. We
note that the parties were able to resolve most of the
outstanding issues, including the agreement on the
permanent ceasefire, the deployment of joint integrated
units in eastern Sudan and collaboration in negotiations
with other armed groups.

We urge the parties to resolve their differences on
funding the armed forces of the Sudan, as well as the
integration of other armed groups into the respective
structures of the Sudan Armed Forces and the SPLA/M
during the transition period.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the outstanding issues should not
be allowed to prevent the successful completion of the
peace talks. We recognize that any delay in resolving
them would adversely affect the United Nations pre-
deployment arrangements in southern Sudan and other
conflict areas.

In conclusion, we note that the Security Council
has adopted many resolutions on the situation in the
Sudan and has consolidated its special political mission
in the area. We urge the parties to continue to
cooperate with the Security Council and the
international community to facilitate effective
implementation of the resolutions. By so doing, we
will succeed in ushering in an era of sustainable peace
in the Sudan.

I pledge the continued support of Nigeria, and
indeed of the African Union, for those efforts.

