Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary): I genuinely appreciate
your personal endeavours in this area, Mr. President. It
is great to see you and your wonderful country presiding
over the Security Council. We also appreciate the fact
that you are personally emphasizing a topic that you
have put on the Council's agenda. The world is changing
very rapidly, not just because of the new industrial
revolution we are witnessing but thanks to the many
political changes that are creating a completely new
world order and are definitely increasing the number of
conflicts around the world. Regrettably, when it comes
to the reasons for those conflicts and, more importantly,
to their resolution, we have to admit that there is too
much hypocrisy and political correctness in the air. If
we are to overcome the serious conflicts all over the
world, we will have to restore honesty and mutual
respect to our international discourse. We must address
our major global political dilemma. Honestly, we must
stop bashing, cornering and judging one another.
We should end stigmatization and the spread of fake
news, which can very easily lead to conflicts without
reason and create tensions that result in harmful and
dangerous situations.

I believe that an important precondition for
reconciliation is the recognition of the universal
right of nations and countries to maintain their
national identity and cultural, historic and religious
traditions. Questioning or challenging them can make
reconciliation impossible. Similarly, the idea that the
pursuit of national interests represents an extremist
ideology is also likely to make reconciliation impossible.
The idea that respect for one's religious heritage is
retrograde or that it is acceptable to permit loud and
violent minorities to put pressure on silent, peaceful
majorities also makes reconciliation impossible. We
can help reconciliation happen if we universally and
globally recognize that we all have a fundamental
human right to lead safe and secure lives in our own
homes. We should switch the focus of international
efforts to helping people return home. We should all
focus on creating the necessary conditions to realize
that. We consider the role of moderate and peaceful
religious leaders, and of intercultural dialogue among
young people, to be extremely important in that regard.

In the case of Hungary, we put special emphasis
on support to persecuted Christian communities around
the world so that they are not forced to leave their homes
and can live in peaceful conditions there. We also invite
students from all over the world to study in Hungary,
fully funded by the Hungarian State, to meet other
young people from other parts of the world, encounter
different cultural and religious backgrounds and learn
how to respect one another and live together. This

semester we are hosting 7,440 students from various
countries and cultures studying in Hungary. Next
semester that number will grow to 9,500. We genuinely
believe that if we can provide young people from
different historic, cultural and religious backgrounds
with these kinds of opportunities to meet one another,
that is the best way we can help reconciliation happen.

In conclusion, we are once again grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the United Kingdom for putting
so much effort into promoting reconciliation. Although
we are a small country with very limited resources, I
promise that we will make our contribution so that this
very important goal is met.

