Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this
important meeting of the Security Council. I should like at
the outset to thank your country and delegation for their
wise activities in the presidency of the Security Council,
which they have assumed this month. We also wish to
convey our appreciation to you for having devoted your
attention to a topic of such importance as that before us
today.

Humanitarian issues are not new to the discussions
and work of the Security Council. Indeed, in exercising
its prerogatives as the organ primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has on many occasions addressed humanitarian
aspects of the questions before it, in particular at the time
of the establishment or extension of peacekeeping
operations. Moreover, we have noted in recent years that
the Council has given special attention to aspects as
varied as, inter alia, protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others affected by conflicts,
protection of United Nations personnel, associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel in conflict zones,
protection of children in armed conflicts, protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, refugees and so forth.

I wish to take this opportunity to state the great
importance that my country, Tunisia, attaches to
continued action by the entire international community to
address humanitarian concerns stemming from conflict
situations. The initiative taken by the President of the
Council and the contributions of its members make it
possible for us to discuss a number of issues as
components of a comprehensive humanitarian dimension,
placing them in the context of their relationship to the
Council's responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security and outlining the general framework
within which this body should approach these questions,
bearing in mind certain consensus parameters.

Tunisia wishes to emphasize the following points.
First, humanitarian activities are necessary in armed
conflicts, because, as the Secretary-General himself
clearly underscored in his important statement, this is a
basic and undisputed duty of the international community.
The United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
should therefore shoulder its responsibility in this field.
Second, there can be no doubt about the merit of
highlighting the humanitarian dimension of armed
conflicts and of working to make that dimension an
integral part of efforts aimed at ending such conflicts,
such as negotiations to conclude peace agreements, the
conduct of peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
peace-building activities.

 

Third, we fully concur in the need for real action to be
taken to tackle aspects relating both to access for personnel
responsible for delivering humanitarian assistance and to the
financing of that assistance, and the need for coordination
among the various actors. There is a need for a concerted
and coordinated strategy to enhance the effectiveness and
impact of humanitarian activities and to bolster the role and
the functions of humanitarian assistance as a factor that can
promote rapid normalization in the framework of the
process of settling an armed conflict.

Fourth, the conduct of humanitarian assistance
activities must of necessity strictly comply with the
principles of the sovereignty of States, their political
independence, their territorial integrity and non-interference
in their internal affairs, as articulated by the United Nations
Charter and the international conventions in force, including
those relating to international humanitarian law. These
cardinal principles are still the essential foundation of the
conduct of international relations and will serve to preserve
the noble nature of humanitarian activities.

Fifth, a key factor in the successful conduct of
humanitarian activities seems to be the need to secure the
consent of the parties concerned, in particular the
Governments of the countries affected by conflicts. There
are certainly situations - fortunately, rare - where there
are no central authorities or where the State is virtually
absent. Nonetheless, even in such situations the cooperation
of the parties is still important, for two basic reasons: in
order to give humanitarian assistance activities for the
victims the greatest possible chance of success, in particular
by ensuring the delivery of assistance; and in order to
ensure the safety and security of the personnel performing
those tasks. Such parameters would help ensure that the
international community did not fail to achieve the desired
humanitarian objectives.

Sixth, humanitarian activities undertaken by the United
Nations would gain from being carried out in close
collaboration with the relevant regional organizations and,
where appropriate, with the countries of the region.

Seventh, Tunisia reiterates the appeal it made at the
fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly for the
definition of the purposes and principles of a policy in this
field for the international community. The coordination of
humanitarian activities, whether between the various bodies
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies or
between the United Nations and the other participants,
including regional organizations, is essential so that the
activities may be part of a comprehensive and integrated
approach that will best serve the objectives set for
alleviating the hardships suffered by civilians in times of
war.

Eighth, we must not overlook the crucial issue of
financing for humanitarian activities. In this regard, it is
clear that sustained effort from the donor community is
highly desirable, in particular to meet the real needs of
the hardest-hit regions and countries, in the context of
enhanced complementarity of bilateral and multilateral
efforts.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate our
support for the statement that will be issued at the end of
our debate and reaffirm Tunisia's commitment to
continuing its contribution to the humanitarian activities
undertaken by the United Nations and to augmenting the
resources that are needed for those activities.

