The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States of
America.

I would like to welcome Judge Agius, the new
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and thank Presidents Joensen and
Meron and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
critical contributions to advancing justice for victims of
mass atrocities.
The ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals have played a
central role in both advancing justice and developing
our understanding of international criminal law and
international humanitarian law. They have served as a
demonstration that, indeed, when the Security Council
is united and when we are committed, we can ensure
that those who perpetrate the worst atrocities can be
forced to account for their crimes. Justice, after all, is
not an afterthought to our work advancing international
peace and security; it is the essence of it.

Today, the extraordinary work of colleagues around
this table and in capitals near and far has ensured that
those accused by the ICTY - all 161 out of 161 - were
brought to justice. But just as we recognize the success
in apprehending the ICTY's fugitives, we must redouble
our efforts to ensure that the remaining fugitives of the
ICTR - and now the Mechanism - face the same fate.
It is important to name those men: defendants such
as Fulgence Kayishema, accused of orchestrating the
massacre of thousands; Charles Sikubwabo, accused
of instigating massacres at a church; Aloys Ndimbati,
a former mayor accused of being directly involved in
the massacres; Augustin Bizimana, the former Defence
Minister of the interim Rwandan Government who is
alleged to have controlled the nation's armed forces
in planning and preparing for the genocide campaign
and preparing lists of people to be killed; Charles
Ryandikayo, who reportedly participated in the
massacre of thousands of men, women and children
who had congregated in a church, and directed militias
and gendarmes to attack the church with guns, grenades
and other weapons; Pheneas Munyarugarama, a former
lieutenant colonel in the Rwandan Army who allegedly
helped to direct and take part in the systematic killing
of Tutsi refugees who were fleeing the fighting;
Felicien Kabuga, the alleged main financier and backer
of the political and militia groups that committed the
genocide and who is accused of transporting the death
squads in his company's trucks; and Protais Mpiranya,
commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard, who
allegedly directed his soldiers to kill the sitting Rwandan
Prime Minister and 10 United Nations peacekeepers
guarding her home. While those men are at large, they
should know that they are still at the forefront of our
minds and the Security Council's focus, and there they
will remain until each and every one of them stands to
answer for their actions. We will not forget them, and
we must never forget their victims.

It is that commitment that led just today to the
arrest of Ladislas Ntaganzwa by Congolese national
authorities, who have indicated that they will take
the proper steps to transfer him to Rwandan custody.
Ntaganzwa, first indicted by the ICTR in 1996, is
charged with five counts ofgenocide and crimes against
humanity. He is alleged to have participated in the
planning, preparation and carrying out of the massacre
of more than 20,000 Tutsis at Cyahinda parish, many of
whom had gathered to take refuge from massacres in
the surrounding countryside, as well as the massacres
of thousands of Tutsis at Gasasa Hill and killings
carried out elsewhere. He is also charged with directly
ordering women to be brutally and repeatedly raped.
Today, for the first time in two decades, he is behind
bars - and so he should be.

The ICTR has concluded all trials on its docket
in 2012 and is expected to issue its last appellate
judgement in a few days. As the Tribunal prepares to
close at the end of this month, the United States wishes
to recognize the monumental legacy of the Tribunal and
its many staff, including judges, prosecutors, support
staff, investigators and defence attorneys, who took
care over the past decades to be compassionate with
victims and witnesses, to uphold with integrity the
principles of international law and to ensure that the
Tribunal advanced justice for victims. The Tribunal's
hard work has also ensured that a smooth and efficient
transition to the Mechanism and to national courts,
where proceedings against ICTR indictees who
remain at large will take place when - I use that word
intentionally - when they are captured. The United
States is unwavering in its commitment to ensuring
that the eight remaining fugitives from the ICTR are
apprehended, as Ntaganzwa was earlier today, and
brought to justice. To that end, we continue to offer a
reward of up to $5 million for information leading to
the arrest or transfer of those fugitives.

I would also like to commend the ICTY for a
productive year. The Tribunal has completed almost all
of its cases, with only four cases remaining at the trial
level and three cases on appeal. An important appellate
decision, as we have discussed, in the Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanisie and Franko Simatovic' case is expected
to be issued before the end of this month, and progress
has continued on all of the remaining cases. We
welcome the important efforts by the trial chambers to

expedite judgements and ensure that they are delivered
in a timely manner.

We also again express our deep appreciation and
admiration for Judge Meron, who recently completed
his term as the President of the ICTY, for his judicious
leadership in guiding the ICTY and the Mechanism
during the past few years. His leadership has included
helping to ensure a seamless, in ourjudgement, transfer
of initial functions of both the ICTY and the ICTR to
the Mechanism.

Part ofjustice, of course, is recognizing what has
happened and what has not, recognizing who bears
responsibility for it and who does not. The work of the
ICTR and the ICTY has contributed enormously to our
ability to grapple with uncomfortable and shocking
truths about what human beings have done to other
human beings. In doing so, they have made our world
safer. The importance of that work is rendered all the
more important when, as we have seen in the Chamber,
some continue to resist facts or rewrite history. Twenty
years after the genocide in Srebrenica, the Council was
painfully unable to adopt one simple draft resolution
(see S/PV.7481) recognizing one simple fact i a fact
that has been established by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and a fact that has been
established by the International Court of Justice - that
genocide took place in Srebrenica. While that draft
resolution may have been vetoed, the truth and the
judicial findings of the ICTY and International Court
of Justice cannot be. It is a testament to the enduring
power and the importance of their work.

In conclusion, there is perhaps no more fitting day
than today, 9 December, the date newly designated
by the General Assembly as the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This Crime
to once again focus on the past, the unfinished work
of advancing accountability for the mass atrocities
and genocides committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. But so too must we focus on the future.
Even as we recommit ourselves to advancing justice
for crimes that have already been committed, so too
should we use this moment to reaffirm our commitment
to respond to indicators of realized or potential future
atrocities on a massive scale, whether in Burundi or
Syria or South Sudan or beyond. After all, the ultimate
justice for victims is to ensure that they are never
victimized, that crimes that we have pledged to never
allow again do not indeed occur again and again. It is
our job to find the tools, the unity and, ultimately, the

will to act.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Croatia.

