Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin my statement by welcoming the
presence here of Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy and Secretary-General of
the Council ofthe European Union. I would also like to
thank them for their messages.

Because of its past- but also because of its
present - the Balkan region seems to be synonymous
with war and inter-ethnic conflict. However, we do not
believe that this situation is irreversible. Although it
may sometimes appear very difficult or even
impossible to do, we think it will be possible to achieve
a stable and peaceful region if the members of the
region share the principles of pluralism, respect for
human rights and the rule of law- in a short, an
attachment to the institutions and values considered to
be indispensable for representative democracy. In our
opinion, it would also be necessary for the States of the
region to achieve a level of economic and social
development that they do not have today, and for their
peoples to have the hope of achieving it.

A quick glance at the current situation in the
Balkans demonstrates that positive changes are taking
place in Croatia, while there is still a long way to go in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The future of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is unknown. There are
encouraging signs in Kosovo, thanks to the efforts of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Stabilization Force,
although those signs are sometimes clouded by the
behaviour of those who continue to encourage division
and extreme nationalism.

In this connection, allow me to recall that a few
days ago, when discussing Kosovo, my delegation
pointed out that when Argentina voted in favour of
resolution 1244 (1999), it did so to protect a people
who were being victimized by ethnic cleansing, in
violation of the most basic human values. But this was
in no way meant to permit or encourage those who
were victims of violence at the time to become the
victimizers of another minority on which they were
called on to protect.

Montenegro is in a difficult situation, and its
relationship with Serbia is extremely worrisome. So far
we have seen a totalitarian regime in Serbia that does
not respect human rights. These situations are not
isolated from each other; rather, there is a natural
interrelationship at work between them. The
international community must try to enable the positive
changes we are seeing in Croatia, for example, to have
a positive influence on the other countries of the region
in which there are conflicts, and try to promote a
collective awareness that the peoples and the countries
of the Balkans share a common destiny that transcends
immediate, individual short-term interests.

The transition from authoritarianism to
democracy and a market economy, from being gagged
to freedom of expression, from discrimination to equal
opportunity and from taking justice into one's own
hands to the rule of law can be achieved only through
great effort and sacrifice. These efforts and sacrifices
are not the sole responsibility of the international
community, which gives human and material resources.
They are also the fundamental responsibility of the
Balkan people themselves; the desire for reconciliation
must come from them. Reconciliation can be
encouraged, but it cannot be imposed.

The goal of achieving a stable and peaceful
Balkan region will become a reality when the idea of
that common destiny prevails over ethnic and religious
differences, when corruption and crime cease to be a
way of life, when respect for one's neighbour becomes
more important than hatred and violence and when the
justice of judges becomes more important than the
justice of revenge. We have hope that the countries and
peoples of the Balkans will be able to achieve
coexistence in the framework of the democratic values
that prevail today in Europe, a region to which the
Balkans belong because of geography, culture and
history.

To this end, the totalitarian obstacles that still
exist will have to be eliminated. This seems to be a
sine qua non for the beginning of the process of
reconciliation and tolerance.

Before concluding, I wish to reaffirm the support
for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia that we expressed when Judge Jorda and
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte were here with us.

