At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Dominican Republic's successful presidency of the Security Council despite the difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We thank Under- Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their comprehensive briefings. We also welcome the presence of our brother the Permanent Representative of the Sudan. Following the adoption of resolution 2497 (2019), my Government continued to meet its commitments with regard to the deployment and mandate delivery of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). The new political dynamics in the Sudan and South Sudan have created an encouraging atmosphere for all of us. Ethiopia greatly appreciates the two Governments for their continued support to UNISFA's leadership and peacekeeping force. The mission faced serious difficulties over the past year, especially after the two unfortunate helicopter accidents in 2019 and the subsequent suspension of those operations by the United Nations Secretariat, which has significantly constrained the mission's air operation capability. As we all understand, UNISFA is one of the most remote peacekeeping missions, but it continues to rely solely on civilian helicopters. I want, therefore, to draw the attention of the Council to the fact that our contingents are often exposed and overstretched in their efforts to cover the vast territory, including in the context of the work of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Reviewing the conception of operations in the dry season and increasing foot and mobile patrols alone cannot prevent threats or secure every inch of the Area. Furthermore, we are extremely concerned that armed groups and individuals remain present in the weapons-free zone. The security situation continues to suffer from the failure to stop murders, livestock rustling and intercommunal clashes. The lack of respect and serious observance of the weapon-free-zone provision is becoming dangerous, especially in the volatile migration season. We are encouraged by the political will and support of the leadership of the two countries. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, the joint military observer teams and the joint community peace committee are also showing progress in their respective tasks. However, more needs to be done to ensure the success of UNISFA and its continued ability to fulfil its heavy responsibility. In that regard, more concrete actions by the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as by the United Nations and the African Union, are needed to expedite a resolution of Abyei's final status. To put things into perspective, UNISFA was facing security challenges one month after the adoption of the current mandate, with troops subjected to active fire, including by well-armed groups. The challenge was further aggravated by more volatility in the Abyei box, and, as noted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/308), incidents on 19 and 22 January regrettably claimed 36 lives. Following the Kolom incident, my Government encouraged UNISFA to rigorously conduct wider discussions and engage with the Dinka and Misseriya communities with the objective of curbing the escalation of violence. Late this month, UNISFA forces were engaged in ambushes and armed assault incidents in Nainai and Alal, where two assailants lost their lives. The troops abided by the rules of engagement and acted in self-defence. Again, on 24 April, three armed Misseriya men riding a tricycle opened fire at the UNISFA team operation base in Alal. In response to those seemingly connected incidents, UNISFA has intensified ground patrols, including search and recovery operations in the Kolom and Youra bridge areas. It is extremely worrisome that the mission has so far recovered 27 assault rifles, 48 magazines, 1,220 rounds of ammunition and seven war-like equipment kits, in addition to similarly worrisome quantities since 28 November 2019. UNISFA troops remain on high alert in anticipation of additional attacks. The mandated protection of the Abyei Area from aggressive armed attacks and different forms of crime is becoming a daunting task that requires an organized response by the mission, the host countries and the United Nations. Ethiopia recognizes the importance of strict compliance with international humanitarian law by all parties. We uphold the role of the monitoring and reporting mechanism in tracking grave violations against women and children in the context of UNISFA's mandate and pledge our full support. In the same vein, the authorities, including the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, must intensify their outreach to the communities in Abyei and assist UNISFA in ensuring that the Abyei box remains a weapons-free zone as required by the Security Council. In view of the above, I wish to highlight the following four critical measures that are instrumental to the delivery of the mission's mandate. First, UNISFA-facilitated meetings between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya leaders in Diffra should be complemented by maintaining momentum on the discussions in order to reach an agreement on the final status of Abyei and to resolve the stalled southward movement of herders. That will help in easing the current high level of tension. Secondly, the troop cuts in favour of the planned deployment of three formed police units (FPUs) is impacting UNISFA's capabilities. Its forces are overstretched, especially in the light of the increase in crime. In that regard, we wish to emphasize the need to suspend the withdrawal of the additional 295 troops scheduled for 15 May until restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic are lifted and the planned FPU replacements are on the ground to assume the security responsibilities. We expect that UNISFA will be adequately resourced, including funds for preventive and preparedness measures in relation to COVID-19 and the desperately needed funds for quick-impact projects. In that connection, alleviating the situation of arrears remains not only a matter of principle but also a moral obligation. Thirdly, we trust that all the relevant authorities will be continuously consulted regarding the decision of the Council on the appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission and the operationalization of the Anthony airstrip, the latter being very important to improving UNISFA's medical evacuation capability, particularly in this difficult time of global pandemic. Fourthly, it is important that the tragic events in the Kolom area and several other criminal cases be jointly investigated with a view to bringing the perpetrators to justice. That will not only help with remedial actions, but it will also contribute to trust- and confidence-building measures between the two communities and ensure long-term interdependence and fraternity. Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating the firm commitment of the Government of Ethiopia to ensuring that UNISFA succeeds in delivering on its mandate. In that regard, we will further strengthen our close coordination with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as with the United Nations.
