Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having agreed to
the request of eight members of the Security Council,
including Senegal, to allow this organ, charged by the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, to be able to discuss in an open
meeting today the situation generated by the decision
taken by the United States announced on 6 December.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing today.

Our meeting today is all the more important
given that it makes it possible for us to reiterate the
international consensus on the status of Jerusalem,
which the Israeli and Palestinian parties, supported by
the United Nations and, in particular, by the Security
Council, have reserved for final-status negotiations.

There is no need to dwell on the particular
importance of the city of Jerusalem for the Israeli and
Palestinian parties, nor on the symbolism that this holy
city represents for the three monotheistic Abrahamic
religions, and therefore for the entire world. Therefore,
Senegal, in its capacity as Chair of Committee on the
Exercise of Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
calls for strict respect for the status quo concerning
Jerusalem, in line with the international parameters
established by General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
as well as Security Council resolutions 476 (1980), 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016). The question of Jerusalem lies
in a final status.

All of us should work towards a climate of peace
and bear in mind the violence of recent days, which has
unfortunately claimed Palestinian and Israeli victims.
My delegation reiterates its condemnation and rejection
of violence, extremism and terrorism, whomever the
perpetrators and whatever the justificaitons. The
violence brings to mind the extreme volatility of the
security situation in Jerusalem, and should therefore
prompt all stakeholders to act with restraint and, above
all, to safeguard the current status of the city pending
the outcome of negotiations, which all of us fervently
hope for.

Senegal once again reiterates its thanks to Jordan
for its ongoing important role as custodian of Christian
and Islamic holy sites, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

Lastly, my delegation calls for a return to the
spirit of sharing that prevailed 70 years ago at the
establishment of two States, Israel and Palestine, both
of which have a right to Jerusalem as their capital.

