Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their very precise and enlightening briefings, as well as
for their exemplary commitment and that of their teams.

First, I would like to talk about the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which led
to the rapid deployment of the advance team of the
United Nations monitoring and oversight mission. On
that basis, the Redeployment Coordination Committee
held its first meetings in late December and early
January, which enabled discussions between the parties
on the implementation of the truce and the planned
withdrawals. That is a first concrete step towards
de-escalation, which we welcome. Discussions must
continue to build on what has been achieved and make
progress, in particular on the redeployment of forces
from the city and port of Al-Hudaydah in order to
strengthen trust between the parties and generate a
virtuous cycle. To use a sports metaphor, we must now
score a goal.

Secondly, despite that positive momentum, we
must not forget that, as Mr. Lowcock rightly said, the
humanitarian situation is still very worrisome and there
is an urgent need to help the Yemeni population. Yemen
is currently facing the most serious humanitarian crisis
of our time. More than 24 million people depend upon
humanitarian assistance and there are very high risks
of famine and epidemics. It is therefore crucial that the
positive momentum in action following the Stockholm
talks now be translated into action on the ground. That
is necessary in itself, but it is also a precondition for
success so that the people concerned take ownership
of the process that has begun. We recall that all
parties must respect international humanitarian law, in
particular as it pertains to the protection of civilians, as
well as international human rights law.

We welcome Saudi Arabia's deposit of $200 million
in the Central Bank of Yemen. However, the riyal has
once again plummeted, as Mark also reminded us. We
must therefore continue our efforts on the economic
front. That is essential.

Humanitarian and commercial access, as my
colleague from the United Kingdom recalled, must
also be guaranteed, including the lifeline between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a. We call on the parties
to demonstrate responsibility in the discussions
on the reopening of that axis, which have not yet
borne fruit.

Finally, access to the Red Sea Mills for the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the World Food Programme is also crucial, as is the
unhindered and undiverted flow of foodstuffs to
populations in need. By reducing the level of hostilities
and strengthening the functioning of the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa, the agreement on
Al-Hudaydah should facilitate humanitarian aid and
access. It is therefore quite literally vital that it be fully
implemented for the benefit of the people concerned.

In that context, and this will be my last point, with
regard to the Security Council our immediate priority is
to ensure that the observation mission has the mandate it
needs to function. In that respect, we echo the sentiments
just shared by my British colleague. We support the
efforts of the United Kingdom's efforts in that regard,
along with the prospect of the Council's speedy adoption
of a draft resolution that will enable the mission to
fully achieve its deployment. In that context, it is more
important than ever that the Council demonstrate its
unity and responsiveness in support of the efforts of
Martin Griffiths and the effective implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement on Al-Hudaydah. Confident
in its unity, the Security Council must bring all of
its weight to bear. At the same time, we also call on
the parties to do their part to facilitate the work of
the United Nations mission, including by issuing the
necessary visas and authorizations and ensuring the
safety of United Nations personnel on the ground.

The considerable progress made in Stockholm and
endorsed by resolution 2451 (2018) is a breakthrough.
For it to be a genuine turning point in ending the conflict
in Yemen, we call for further political discussions
to be held as soon as possible under the auspices of
Mr. Griffiths, in order to build on the momentum
generated in Stockholm and resume discussions on a
comprehensive political framework, because we know
that that is the only possible lasting solution to the
conflict in Yemen. France will continue to extend its
full support to that effort, including within the Council.

