Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
convey Palestine's congratulations to Germany on its
presidency and skilled stewardship of the Security
Council this month. I am personally delighted to see
you, Mr. Minister of State, presiding over the Security
Council as an indication of the importance that
Germany places on this debate.

We laud your efforts in leading the Council,
particularly in the proceedings on the application for
full United Nations membership by our brotherly
country of South Sudan. Palestine reiterates its
warmest congratulations and full solidarity and support
to South Sudan in this new chapter of independence for
the people of South Sudan, wishing them all success
and prosperity.

We express appreciation as well to the Gabonese
Republic for its wise guidance of the Council in June. I
also express appreciation to the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing today and for all of
his serious efforts on the ground on behalf of the
Secretary-General. I must add that I was extremely
delighted to meet with him a few weeks ago in his
office in Jerusalem, an office that is so beautiful and
evokes many optimistic hopes for us, the Palestinians,
that we might have it as the office of our presidents
when we have our own independent State.

The Security Council convenes this open debate
at a moment requiring serious reflection and candid
deliberation about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
the international efforts to resolve it and the Arab-
Israeli conflict as a whole.

We are all aware that the answers to the problem
lie in the legal principles and just positions at the core
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. The missing factor is the political will to
uphold international law and implement those
resolutions. While numerous good-faith regional and
international efforts have been exerted, they continue
to fail owing to Israel's relentless violations of the law
and the general failure to hold Israel accountable for its
illegal actions. Israel needs to change course in a way
that would make the realization of the two-State
solution possible. This is a fact, and it is the major
reason why the Israeli military occupation continues
and why the Palestinian people continue to be denied
justice and their right to self-determination and
freedom.
5

In our letters sent in the recent period, we have
fully informed the Council of the deplorable situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, as a result of the Israelis' illegal policies,
which are destroying the contiguity of the territory and
inflicting more suffering on our people. Such illegal
practices have not ceased for a single moment, and
they include the following.

The illegal settlement campaign continues,
especially in and around occupied East Jerusalem, in
breach of Israel's obligations under international law,
United Nations resolutions and the Quartet Road Map's
demand for a freeze of all settlement activities.
Construction of settlements and the wall and the
demolition of homes continue unabated, as do attempts
to seize and de facto annex land.

Terror attacks continue against Palestinian
civilians by Israeli settlers, clearly emboldened by the
extremist tendencies of the Government, which
continues to protect them and promote their agenda,
with more than 139 attacks documented in the past
month.

Collective punishment of the population in the
Gaza Strip through the illegal blockade and obstruction
of international reconstruction efforts and any
semblance of normal life continue.

Military air strikes continue against
neighbourhoods in Gaza, as do attacks on Palestinian
fishing boats, causing injury to dozens of civilians and
destruction to property.

Military raids and arrests of Palestinian civilians,
including children, and the deterioration of already
harsh conditions imposed on Palestinian prisoners,
particularly following the Israeli Prime Minister's
declaration to "toughen conditions" on them, continue.
The plight of all prisoners, including those suffering
from acute health conditions and those on hunger strike
in protest of Israel's cruel treatment, remains of utmost
concern.

The use of excessive force against Palestinians
and others, including Israelis, peacefully demonstrating
against the Wall and the settlements continues.

(spoke in Arabic)

I would like, in this forum, to salute the people of
Bil'in and their friends for their peaceful struggle. They
have succeeded in defeating Israel one kilometre from

the Green Line. I had the honour to visit Bil'in last
week, and I visited the old track and the new
construction of the wall. In this forum, I would like to
salute Bil'in for this great achievement.

(spoke in English)

In addition, hostile acts and threats continue
against peace activists, especially those protesting the
blockade, human rights organizations and civil society
activists. Israeli aggression against non-violent protest
has also taken a new form in the punitive,
undemocratic boycott law that was recently adopted.

All of these illegal actions and provocations are
indicative of the Israeli Government's extremely right-
wing and anti-peace agenda. Israel, the occupying
Power, is obstructing peace in both word and deed,
sabotaging the small opportunity remaining to achieve
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders for the realization of peace and coexistence
between our peoples.

These facts must be faced head on, and all empty
excuses and illogical pretexts for such illegal actions
must be rejected. The fragility of the situation and
rapid rise in tensions require immediate redress by this
Council, in line with its Charter obligations. Continued
appeasement of Israel's expansionist agenda runs the
risk of and bears the responsibility for further harming
the prospects for peace and security, with serious short
and long-term consequences.

In this regard, we are heartened by the fact that
neither the Palestinian people nor their Arab brethren,
nor even the international community, have given up
on the pursuit of a just peace. All remain resilient in
their calls for an end to the Israeli occupation, the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and a just solution for the Palestine refugees
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of
1948. Current opportunities to advance these noble
objectives must be seized, specifically in light of the
critical situation on the ground and in the context of
the ongoing and very relevant Arab spring.

To continue to deny the appeals of the Palestinian
people for independence in their State of Palestine in
exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination
is unjustifiable. The Palestinian people must live as an
independent, free and dignified people in peace and
security, and Palestine must be allowed to prosper and
contribute as a full member of the community of
nations. This is the goal to which the Palestinian
leadership is fully committed and which we seek to
achieve with the invaluable support of all concerned
States and peoples from around the globe.

We are determined to overcome the obstacles in
the way of peace. However, that will require both an
honest assessment of the situation and the
determination of an appropriate course of collective
action to deal with those obstacles and to truly advance
just and lasting peace, security and coexistence.

In that regard, the failure of the Quartet to adopt
clear and fair parameters for the solution to allow for
the resumption of credible negotiations between the
two sides was a serious missed opportunity. It was a
setback for the Quartet's efforts to shepherd the peace
process towards its objective of ending the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and the conclusion of a
peace treaty that would end the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in all its aspects, including the just resolution
of all final status issues: Jerusalem, Palestinian
refugees, settlements, borders, security and water.

That failure of the Quartet was caused by Israel,
which refused to accept the legitimate and
internationally supported basis for negotiations,
including the elements contained in the bold speech
made by United States President Barack Obama on
19 May and the positions taken by the European Union
and the Quartet as a whole. Held hostage to such
intransigence, the Quartet was regrettably unable to
endorse the parameters and to call upon the parties to
return to the negotiating table on that basis.

Here, it must be clarified that the Palestinian side
abides by its commitments and is ready to resume
serious negotiations, within a limited time frame, based
on clear parameters, including the understanding that
the pre-June 1967 borders must be the foundation on
which any negotiations proceed. President Abbas has
been clear in that regard. Israel, however, continues to
arrogantly and dangerously reject that basis, making
the revival of peace negotiations impossible at the
present time.

The aim is not to place blame, but it is necessary
to confront the truth in order to act collectively to
overcome the impediments to achieving a peaceful
solution. If the international community continues to
absolve Israel of its unilateral and illegal behaviour,

there will be no incentive to change that behaviour.
Permitting the occupying Power to continue to breach
the law without consequence will completely destroy
the two-State solution as a viable option, ushering in
yet another period of turmoil, insecurity and suffering,
and a search for alternative solutions. If we are serious
about opening the doors to the two-State solution,
Israel must be held fully responsible for its actions.

The decisions that must be made at this moment
are critical to reviving the failing peace process and to
changing the destructive course on which the
occupying Power has put us all. However, the decisions
to be made are not difficult, for they are logical,
justified and rooted in international law, United
Nations resolutions and the international consensus
solution to the conflict, namely, the two-State solution
based on the pre-1967 borders, which is a historic
compromise agreed to long ago by the Palestinian
leadership.

The Palestinian leadership remains committed to
the terms of reference of the peace process: the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. We are determined to
remain proactive and to make a positive contribution
towards ending the conflict and achieving the national
aspirations and rights of our people. Any steps taken by
the Palestinian leadership will be fully transparent and
consistent with the goal of the peace process. Through
legitimate political, diplomatic and legal means, and
with the support of the international community, we
believe that it will be possible to achieve peace.

The coming months will be critical. September
2011, the date set by the Quartet and endorsed by the
international community for concluding a peace
agreement, remains a target date for effecting a change
that can create the positive dynamics and momentum
necessary to achieving a breakthrough.

Next month, the Palestinian National Authority
will complete its implementation of the two-year plan,
launched by Prime Minister Fayyad, to build the
institutions of the Palestinian State, end the occupation
and achieve independence. With international political
and financial support, that plan - a complementary
track to the peaceful platform on which President
Abbas was elected - has reached its objectives, as
acknowledged by the international community. We
have fulfilled our responsibilities and are ready to

govern ourselves. The only remaining obstacle is
Israel's 44-year military occupation.

Our people have legitimate rights, needs and
demands, and it is our duty to listen and to act
responsibly to advance their just cause. We cannot keep
waiting for Israel to negotiate in good faith - an
almost impossible matter as long as the occupier
continues to be absolved of its obligations under
international law and might is permitted to trump right.
A new process - awakened by the failings of a
20-year process since Madrid and an 18-year process
since the signing of the Oslo Accords due to Israel's
refusal to end its occupation, its illegal settlement
activities and its human rights violations and to commit
to peace- has been set in motion. The time for
change is now. There is no justification for the denial
of the rights and the freedom of the Palestinian people.

We thus continue to appeal for the recognition of
the State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders.
We are convinced that the more than 120 bilateral
recognitions of Palestine to date are each a
reaffirmation of our inalienable right to self-
determination and our natural and legal right to
statehood and to be a part of the international
community. We recognize the important respective
roles played by Governments, parliaments, civil
society and all the world's citizens in that regard. We
renew our gratitude for their vital support and
solidarity.

Further, we believe that actions undertaken at the
United Nations - the centre of multilateral activity -
whether in the Security Council or the General
Assembly, can contribute towards achieving the peace
that we all seek, and that they will not obstruct the
realization of that objective. That is not a unilateral
action. On the contrary, it is multilateral. The
consecration of the two-State solution in bold
resolutions, including recognition of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, and its admission as a
full Member of the Organization, will help to make the
two-State solution more inevitable.

That decisive measure could finally convince
Israel, the occupying Power, that its occupation and
oppression of the Palestinian people are completely
rejected by the world and that it must abandon its
destructive course, including its greatest unilateral
illegal action - the settlement campaign, which has
been rejected by the entire international community,
including all members of the Council. We believe that
that is what will ultimately lead to a change in the
status quo and to peace.

We are thus hopeful that the international
community, including the Council, will uphold the
legal, political and moral responsibilities towards the
question of Palestine that have remained unfulfilled
since the General Assembly's adoption of resolution
181 (II), which partitioned Mandate Palestine, and for
which there is now an historic opportunity to finally
fulfil towards ensuring justice and freedom for the
Palestinian people.

Why should the Palestinian people be forced to
languish yet another year - or even one more day -
under foreign occupation? They should not and they
must not. This is the time to end the Israeli occupation.
This is the time for Palestine's independence. This is
the time for Palestine and Israel to live side by side in
peace and security, and this is the time for a new
Middle East. We believe that the international
community is ready for that, and we trust that the
appropriate actions will be undertaken soon to make
this a reality.

