Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (Spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the timely convening of this meeting and
the important briefings delivered by Mr. Jean Pierre
Lacroix and Mr. Andrew Gilmour.

The Government of Peru has strongly condemned
the recent acts ofviolence and the excessive use of force
by the Sudanese military forces against the civilian
population, which resulted in numerous casualties in
Khartoum, and conveys its full support for the decision
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
to suspend the Sudan's participation in all its activities
until a transitional civilian Government is established.
In that regard, we believe that it is crucial for human
rights and fundamental freedoms in the Sudan to
be respected.

While the latest reports of the Secretary-General
showed gradual improvements in safety and security
in Darfur and relative stability, today it is not possible
to continue with that same optimism. The current
uncertain political situation in the country has a definite
direct impact and poses new challenges for Darfur.
That is why a reassessment is needed of the timing and
the most appropriate strategy for the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), so that it takes place in a careful
and responsible manner and does not jeopardize the
gains that have been made.

With regard to the reconfiguration and downsizing
of UNAMID, it suffices to mention that the special
report (S/2019/445) indicates that human rights
violations and abuses continue to occur in areas from
which UNAMID has already withdrawn, such as Jebel
Moon, where an attack in January led to deaths and new
civilian displacements.

Also, as Mr. Gilmore mentioned, human rights
violations continue in Darfur, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area. The main victims of the frequent cases of
conflict-related sexual violence have been internally
displaced persons, especially women and girls. An
aggravating circumstance is that many of those attacks
are organized by Government forces and affiliated
forces, especially the Rapid Support Forces.

Faced with the difficult political situation in the
Sudan, we believe that it is essential to return to the
agreements reached and put a stop to the violence.
In that regard, we welcome Ethiopia's mediation
efforts for the Transitional Military Council and the
opposition to resume negotiations on the creation of a
transitional authority.

We welcome UNAMID's work and collaboration
with national and local authorities, the country team
and other partners aimed at facilitating mediation
mechanisms and seeking sustainable solutions to
the root causes of the conflict, such as access to land
and resources. We also condemn the looting that
occurred at the UNAMID West Darfur headquarters in
El Geneina on 14 May, and we reiterate the importance
of the mission being able to exercise its mandate
throughout Darfur, especially in the area of Jebel
Marra.

On the other hand, we welcome the work of the
State liaison functions in the UNAMID transition
process. We highlight their importance in maintaining
the progress achieved in the areas of protection, rule of
law, human rights and lasting solutions for internally
displaced persons and communities throughout Darfur.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the United Nations system and UNAMID.
We encourage them to join efforts to help the people of
Sudan to shape their own future. It is equally important
that the countries of the region continue to support the
peace process in Darfur, avoiding the proliferation of
initiatives and deterring disruptive elements, with the
ultimate goal of achieving the sustainable peace and
stability in Darfur that we all desire.

