Ms. Lovin (Sweden): I would like to align itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union later this afternoon, but I would
like to take this opportunity to make a statement in my
national capacity.

Let me begin by encouraging the Yemeni parties to
engage without delay in the United Nations-facilitated
peace talks, which were scheduled to begin today in
Kuwait. Those talks will hopefully bring us closer to
a political solution in Yemen. Sweden welcomes the
cessation of hostilities in place since 10 April, and we
urge all parties to respect it. The massive humanitarian
needs must be met. Sweden is among the largest
humanitarian donors in Yemen, with contributions of
over $50 million since the conflict began.

Making the Syria talks in Geneva a success is an
enormous challenge, but the world cannot afford to
fail. Five years of horrific warfare must be brought to
an end. A political transition must be achieved. The
Syrian people deserve to live in peace and democracy.
For the talks to succeed, all the parties must fully
implement the resolutions of the Security Council.
While the cessation of hostilities seems to be broadly
holding, I am gravely concerned by the slowing down
in humanitarian access. In particular, I am appalled by
reports that medicines and medical equipment are being
removed from humanitarian convoys, costing innocent
lives. That is completely unacceptable.

Sweden supports the work of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
not least by funding Syrian women's participation.
Moreover, Sweden is assisting the Syrian people in
three ways.

First, we are stepping up resilience funding through
our new $200 million Syria Crisis Strategy.

Secondly, we are increasing our humanitarian aid,
amounting to over $300 million.

Thirdly, Sweden has received over 120,000 refugees
who have fled Syria, one of the highest numbers
in Europe.

Sweden recognizes that the neighbouring countries,
especially Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, are under
immense pressure. That is why our Syria crisis strategy
includes support for those countries' actions as well.

Next year will mark 50 years of the occupation
of Palestine. All of us are aware of the urgency of the
situation on the ground and the absence of a political
solution. The two-State solution is fading away before
our very eyes. We are seeing continued violence and
the rapid continuation of settlement construction. We
are seeing unprecedented numbers of demolitions of
Palestinian homes and infrastructure.

The settlements are illegal and an obstacle to
peace. Settlement activity in East Jerusalem seriously
jeopardizes the possibility of Jerusalem serving as
the future capital of both States. A fundamental
change in the settlement policy is needed, particularly
in East Jerusalem and Area C. Such a change would
increase economic opportunities, empower Palestinian
institutions and enhance stability and security for both
Israelis and Palestinians.

Sweden stands firmly against terrorism. All acts of
violence against civilians, including the horrific attack
on the civilian bus in Jerusalem today, are despicable
and must be condemned by all. Yet security measures
alone will not end the violence. The underlying causes
of the conflict must be addressed. Only then will the
violence come to an end. Only then will peace and
stability prevail. Only then will the citizens in Israel
and Palestine be able to live their lives in dignity.

The situation in Gaza remains critical. Recent
rocket attacks from Gaza and the Israeli air strike in
retaliation show the urgency of the situation. They
are reminders of the risk of further violent escalation.
In a couple of years, the lack of potable water will be
irreversible. The isolation of Gaza must end therefore,
and reconstruction must be fast-tracked.

The European Union and Sweden have called upon
all the parties to guarantee unimpeded humanitarian
access to Gaza for humanitarian organizations and other
international actors, including State representatives, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.

In order to save the prospects of a two-State
solution and counter the growing hopelessness among
youth, the international community must move from
words to action. We must help the parties to move
forward by creating new dynamics and momentum
for a meaningful peace process to end the occupation.
Sweden therefore fully supports the French initiative
on an international peace conference, as a way for
the parties and the world to recommit to the two-
State solution. Sweden is encouraged by the increased
Quartet activity,and looks forward to the publication of
the announced Quartet report.

The Security Council has a central role to play
and must shoulder its responsibility to uphold its
resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations. If
we, the international community, are serious about
our commitment to the two-State solution, we have
important work to do in the months ahead.

