Regrettably, this meeting of the Security Council on Bosnia and Herzegovina is taking place as the world continues to struggle with the coronavirus disease pandemic. The pandemic has amplified the many serious challenges that need to be addressed, which calls for cooperation among countries in every region worldwide. These difficult times remind us that only through solidarity and mutual support can we overcome the difficulties facing us; here, we believe, good-neighbourly cooperation is but the first step in the right direction. I wish to point out that the crisis has brought to the fore a high level of solidarity and support between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and their citizens, as reflected, inter alia, in the opening of the "green corridor" at the border crossing at Sremska Raca, in line with the Central European Free Trade Agreement decision to establish a system meant to facilitate trade in goods among the countries of the region, particularly in products of humanitarian importance. Serbia has taken every step to provide the necessary assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including in particular medical and personal protection equipment. Bosnia and Herzegovina reciprocated by extending help and assistance to my country, and we are very grateful for that. Serbia continues to be firmly committed to promoting good-neighbourly relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina, aimed at overcoming the negative legacy of the past and forging a common future based on the principles of mutual respect. We are convinced that the two countries should continue to develop cooperation in priority areas, both within bilateral and multilateral frameworks and through regional initiatives and mechanisms. Fostering common values can help us on our road towards achieving the same goals that bring us closer to European Union (EU) membership, which figures high on the agendas of our two countries. Serbia strongly supports the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into the EU and welcomes the progress achieved by that country in this regard. Serbia is lastingly committed to strengthening regional cooperation through numerous activities and by strictly abiding by its commitments. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a key regional partner of Serbia, and the region's economic and other progress is paramount to its overall prosperity. To that end, the progress being achieved at the bilateral level between the two countries in the field of infrastructure projects is particularly important. Equally important in that context was the signing during the reporting period of the agreement on the maintenance and reconstruction of road inter-State bridges and the agreement on the construction and maintenance of a new common border crossing at the Bratunac/Ljubovija location, as well as the interest of our side in financing the construction of a new airport at Trebinje. Serbia took note of the call for regular local elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15 November and is fully supportive of their holding in accordance with the highest democratic standards. We commend in particular the fact that an agreement has been reached among the key actors according to which local elections will be also held on 20 December in Mostar, where no elections have been held in the past 12 years because of the absence of agreement between Bosniak and Croatian representatives. We are pleased that representatives of the Serbian community in that town may win municipal assembly seats as well. Serbia has invested significant efforts in the stabilization of the situation in the region and considers that, in that context, respect for the principle of territorial integrity and sovereignty is of paramount importance. My country's position on the sovereignty and integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Dayton Agreement, of which Serbia is a guarantor, is crystal-clear: we support Bosnia and Herzegovina as one State with two entities, the Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as all decisions taken by that country in accordance with the relevant competencies and agreements reached among its three constituent peoples: Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks. We shall continue to cooperate actively and constructively with the central and entity authorities. We fully respect the right of each and every country to conduct independent foreign policies, including possibly joining military-political alliances, while paying heed, however, to specific individual activities that may or may not be conducive to membership in those alliances. Serbia will respect the agreements and arrangements reached by the two entities, that is, the three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in a legal and legitimate way. Soon it will have been 25 years since the signing of the Dayton Agreement. My country would like to emphasize the need to reaffirm its importance not only in respect ofits significance for ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also in the context of the stabilization of that country and the region as a whole. I would like to recall that the mechanism for a possible change in the Agreement is known and that it implies the reaching of an agreement by the two entities and the three constituent peoples; any insistence on, or imposition of, a solution by anyone inside or outside of Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore unacceptable. We are convinced that the country can function even without changing its fundamental constituent principles by focusing on the reform package needed for Euro-integration, on which consensus does exist. Serbia shares the concern of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina over the destabilizing rhetoric inherent in the statements of many political leaders in that country. We reiterate our principled position against recourse or the threat of recourse to unilateral acts contrary to the letter and spirit of the Dayton Agreement. After all, the Agreement is the result of a compromise and reflects a delicate balance, reached by hard work and dedication, between opposing concepts of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and subsequent attempts to favour any of the models in existence 25 years ago would not help the stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina at all. We know that, regrettably, we cannot bring the victims back to life or undo the destruction caused by war 25 years on. What we can do, though, and what is important for the future is to condemn all crimes and bring their perpetrators to justice; have empathy for all victims irrespective of their ethnic or religious background; and embark upon the road to economic and political stability, lasting peace and common prosperity. Serbia supports the efforts to establish the full truth of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and to bring the perpetrators of crimes to justice, irrespective of their ethnic origins. In that context, my country supports regional cooperation in processing war crimes. It has concluded bilateral agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia regulating various aspects of the issue of legal assistance and procedure in letters rogatory. The cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina under those agreements is at a high level indeed. Serbia calls on all actors included in political processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as those outside of it, to be more responsible and expects international officials to bear in mind, as they assess the political actors of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their reports, the fact that they are legitimately elected representatives of the citizens of that country. My country considers that dialogue within Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions is the only way forward in furthering the level of trust and confidence and reaching compromise solutions to questions relevant to its future development and, by extension, to the stability of the entire region. As in the past, Serbia will continue to make a maximum constructive contribution in that regard. In conclusion, let me point out that my country will not veer away from the road to peace, stability and reconciliation. The solidarity that we have demonstrated in this crisis should serve as a model for our future activities, since there is no alternative to the policy of dialogue and cooperation.
