We would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing on the Syrian political process. I take note of what he mentioned at the start of his briefing, namely, that there is a ray of hope shining from Geneva. We hope that there will be more sunlight and a clearer sky for peace in Syria. In September last year, during the Council's meeting on this issue (S/PV.8628), we welcomed the Secretary-General's announcement regarding the agreement between the Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiation Commission for a credible, balanced and inclusive Constitutional Committee, facilitated by the United Nations in Geneva. We note that since then there have been 3 rounds of sessions in Geneva, including the small body meeting few weeks ago. We have to continue the momentum and more meetings are needed with clear agenda. Clearly, more needs to be done. In this context, while reaffirming Indonesia's commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, my delegation would like to highlight the following points on the Constitutional Committee. First, concerning the importance of a substantive engagement, it is critical for the Syrian parties to continue and maintain their substantive coordination in a constructive manner. A serious political path, with strong commitment on the part of all relevant parties, is needed in order to achieve a sustainable and lasting solution to the Syrian crisis. Secondly, all divergences must be addressed through dialogue. We are all aware that there are concerns and sensitivities among every Syrian party in this entire process. However, we believe that diverging views must always be addressed through diplomacy and other peaceful means. Dialogue is key. This might sound like a broken record, but when dialogue is off the table, the result will be less likely to benefit the future of the Syrian people. Thirdly, we need an intensification of efforts aimed at moving the constitutional process forward, under the facilitation of the United Nations. Indeed, flexibility and strong commitment are needed. We fully support Geir Pedersen in his efforts to bridge differences. We hope that there will be a next round soon, with an agreed agenda, and note that much still needs to be done, taking into account health protocols during these times of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). As many have said, the Constitutional Committee is not an end in itself but a part of a broader Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). And the Constitutional Committee is indeed a work in progress, for which genuine support from the international community is required. Besides the work of the Committee, Indonesia would also like to reiterate the call for a nationwide ceasefire and the urgent need for all parties to respect the ceasefire agreements. Although we have seen relative calm in some areas in Syria, tensions and the risk of escalation remain. Indonesia believes that continued measures must be taken to reduce the level of violence on the ground, encourage and promote confidence-building among the Syrian parties, and alleviate the dire humanitarian situation. Significant progress on the issue of detainees and missing persons is also needed, as is a waiver of sanctions in order to ensure the capacity of Syria to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. In closing, my delegation sincerely hopes that at the Council's meeting next month, we will be able to see progress on this particular issue.
