Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to thank
our briefers: the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr. Matondo and Mr. Vervaeke for
their very comprehensive and enlightening briefings.
And perhaps I should start by saying how strongly we
support MINUSCA and the Special Representative's
work, which are indispensable and much appreciated.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the Central African Republic (S/2019/498) and its
observations. To name only a few, they include, first,
the importance of the full commitment of all parties
to the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, signed on 6 February, and the important role
of the African Union and the region; secondly, deep
concerns about the ongoing violence and the disastrous
humanitarian situation, and the condemnation of the
attacks on civilians and humanitarian aid workers; and
thirdly, the concrete steps taken by the Government
of the Central African Republic in implementing the
peace accord.

The peace agreement signed on 6 February is
a light at the end of the tunnel. At the same time, it
is also true that the situation in the Central African
Republic, in terms of political developments, security
and the humanitarian situation, continues to be very
fragile. The peace agreement has not yet changed those
fundamentals, and that is why we call on all actors
in the Central African Republic, the region and the
international community to help the Central African
Republic in producing peace dividends quickly. To a
great extent the success of the peace agreement will
depend on that.

Germany remains committed to the issue, especially
through its humanitarian efforts - we are the second-
largest contributor in humanitarian terms - and its
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund. Like South
Africa, we believe that the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund can play an important
role in bringing sustainable peace to the Central
African Republic.

We fully support the peace agreement and the
political process and believe that they can bring peace
to the Central African Republic. We commend all the
parties involved at the national level, but also the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the whole region for their
work in this process. It is important that all parties
honour their obligations. The key is mustering the
political will to cease fighting and engage in genuine
and honest political dialogue. At the same time,
the follow-up and monitoring mechanisms and the
formation of the Unite's speciales mixtes de securite will
also be vital. We therefore call on all signatories and the
international community to remain committed. Creating
visible peace dividends is now absolutely crucial. The
African Union and the Central African Republic's
neighbours now have particular opportunities and also
responsibilities. In particular, we welcome the holding
ofthe first cooperation commission between the Central
African Republic and Cameroon since 2010. We also
very much encourage local peace initiatives and young
people and women's active participation and inclusion
in them. We are encouraged by MINUSCA's efforts to
promote intercommunal dialogue and de-escalation at
the local level.

At the same time, we welcome the Government
of the Central African Republic's efforts to push
implementation of the peace accord ahead with
concrete measures, such as consultations on the truth,
justice, reparations and reconciliation commission.
We encourage the authorities to actively pursue the
formation of the Unites speciales mixtes de securite,
along with disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation efforts and the vetting of former
combatants. Questions of accountability will be
crucial to the peace process. We should also strengthen
communication efforts to educate the population
about the next steps of the implementation of the
peace agreement.

I will now say a few words about the situation on the
ground. Despite some positive developments following
the peace agreement, we remain very concerned about
the ongoing violence and attacks on civilians, such as
the attacks by the Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation
movement in Paoua in May. We strongly condemn those
killings, and especially the attacks committed by rebel
groups that were signatories to the peace agreement.
We call on the authorities of the Central African
Republic, supported by MINUSCA, to investigate
rebel attacks and hold perpetrators accountable.
Monitoring mechanisms will remain key to effective
implementation, and bolstering the national justice
system and the Special Criminal Court will be crucial
to ending impunity and ensuring sustainable peace and
institutional trust.

Before I conclude, I have a few final comments
to make on the humanitarian situation, which
unfortunately remains disastrous and of great concern
to us, especially for internally displaced persons and
refugees. A quarter of the population is displaced.
Women and children, as is so often the case, are
suffering the most. The international community must
do more. Right now, the funding for the humanitarian
response plan is only at approximately 30 per cent. We
strongly condemn the violence against humanitarian
aid workers and call on all parties to respect their status
and protection against attacks.

In conclusion, we reiterate MINUSCA's important
role in protecting civilians, especially women,
facilitating the delivery ofbasic services and monitoring
human rights violations.

