The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.

Let me start with expressing our regret that the
representative ofIsrael cannot participate in this debate
because of Passover - an important religious holiday
in Israel.

I will address three points: first, the increasing
tensions around Gaza; secondly, the short-term steps
needed to stop the crisis; and, thirdly, the need for long-
term stability.

Concerning my first point, we are deeply alarmed
by the rising tensions around Gaza. Reports of 15
deaths and hundreds of injured are highly disturbing
and regrettable.

With regard to my second point, concerning short-
term steps to stop the crisis, we call on all sides to
exercise restraint and prevent further escalation and
loss oflives. We call on the de facto authorities in Gaza
to maintain the peaceful character of the protests and
prevent them from becoming violent. We call on Israel
to ensure that its responses at all times are proportionate
and necessary. The use of live ammunition as a crowd-
control effort should be used only as a measure of last
resort. We call on Israel to thoroughly investigate all
incidents in which the use of crowd-control measures
has led to casualties. The incidents of the past week
whereby armed individuals from Gaza have entered
Israel show that Israel's security concerns are real.
We condemn those attacks and repeat that there is no
excuse for terrorism. We call on all parties to refrain
from any action that would worsen the situation by
way of incitement or provocation. We also call on all
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.

With regard to my third point, concerning long-
term stability, the situation in Gaza has been a matter of
concern for a long time. In recent months, the Council
has debated the situation in Gaza several times. We
recall that, in order to achieve a sustainable solution,
a comprehensive approach is required. A political
process, humanitarian aid, economic development and
infrastructure development go hand in hand. We need
the Palestinian Authority as the legitimate Government
to return to Gaza. We call on the Palestinian Authority
and all other Palestinian parties to continue their efforts
to overcome their differences and to genuinely proceed
with reconciliation.

All those measures, together with the two-State
solution as a political horizon, are needed to ensure that
we will not be having the same debate once again next
month, next year or in five years.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

