Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his introduction, as
well as Under-Secretary-General Amos and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie, who spoke on behalf of
High Commissioner Pillay.

Civilians continue to account for the majority
of casualties in armed conflicts. Turkey condemns
any and all deliberate attacks on civilians and deaths
resulting from the indiscriminate and excessive use
of force. We are aware that the primary obligation to
protect civilians lies, as always, with States. However,
the international community also has a responsibility to
help protect civilians in situations where States openly
fail to do so. Therefore, we need to build a collective
awareness of the importance of that responsibility and
must be able to agree on the fundamental guidelines.

We should not fail to recall the plight of the
Palestinian people. Whether in Gaza or the West
Bank, Palestinians continue to suffer under measures
related to the illegal blockade and occupation, and
their fundamental rights are being denied. The illegal
blockade of Gaza, serving as a collective punishment
against civilian Palestinians in Gaza, entered its sixth
year this month. Statistics compiled by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) clearly
show the devastating effects of the blockade and the
occupation on the daily lives of the Palestinian people.

As was also recently noted in the outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, the occupation continues to adversely
affect the economic lives and social development as
well as the environment of the Palestinians living in
the occupied territories. The obstacles created by
the occupation are incompatible with the dignity and
worth of the human person and must be combated and
eliminated.

As regards the situation in Syria, the Syrian
Government has primary responsibility for the
protection of its people and should immediately end
the violence, which has led to thousands of deaths and
a humanitarian tragedy that has affected 1.5 million
people so far, according to OCHA statistics. The
international community must display its resolve to put
an end to the cycle of violence and the deepening crisis
in Syria and to take the necessary additional measures
to that effect. Turkey, together with the rest of the
international community, will continue to support the
six-point plan of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan.

We have carefully read the Secretary-General's
latest, and ninth, report on the issue. While sharing the
Secretary- General's ongoing and emerging concerns, I
would like to underline three issues.

The first relates to dialogue with non-State armed
groups. We understand the rationale of ensuring
humanitarian access to civilians. However, Turkey
believes that in doing so, we should be extremely
careful not to extend any sense of legitimacy to terrorist
organizations. Terrorist organizations in various
parts of the world could attempt to exploit such a
humanitarian approach to gain international acceptance
and recognition. On the other hand, if engagement with
non-State armed groups is contemplated, the consent of
the State in question is necessary.

The second point is that we should make a clear
distinction between the counter-terrorism efforts of
law-enforcement agencies and armed conflict. We
strongly condemn all acts of terrorism in all their forms
and manifestations. As indicated in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/ 19) adopted by the Security
Council on 27 September 2010, during Turkey's
presidency of the Council, and in other relevant United
Nations resolutions, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to the enjoyment of human rights and social and
economic development, and undermines global stability
and prosperity. Therefore, Governments have not only
the legitimate right but also the obligation to effectively
combat terrorism and to fully and effectively cooperate
with other States.

Lastly, we believe that United Nations
documents should not contain positive references to
non-governmental organizations that are known to have
become the instrument of terrorist organizations.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
cause that the international community must pursue
with unwavering determination. We believe that in
order to ensure the long-term and lasting protection of
civilians, human rights, the rule oflaw, democracy and
good governance should be strengthened. We should
also ensure that the perpetrators of violence against
civilians are held fully accountable for their actions, for
sustainable prevention and protection will be possible
only if there is no impunity.

