Mr. Roslan (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on your initiative to organize a
debate on the thematic agenda item, "No exit without
strategy". We are also grateful to your delegation for
the background paper, which provides a sound basis for
today's discussion. The topic of our discussion today
relates to some of the most sensitive and difficult
aspects of the work of the Security Council and of the
United Nations system as a whole. Furthermore, it is
important and useful for the Council to hear the views
of the larger membership on this issue.

When the United Nations was conceived 55 years
ago, this Organization was intended to deal with inter-
State warfare. Today, the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, are being required to
deal with and respond urgently and swiftly to intra-
State instability and conflicts. In these armed and
bloody conflicts, the destruction is not just of soldiers
but also of the innocent and vulnerable populations.
Preventing such wars is now a matter of defending
humanity itself. The Security Council has, since the
last decade of the last century, actively been seized
with humanitarian aspects of conflicts, such as the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts, and children
and armed conflict. It is unfortunate that it still
continues to be seized with these complex and difficult
intra-State conflicts in this new century.

The new dimension of armed conflicts, namely
humanitarian catastrophe involving the exodus of
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons,
requires the urgent and ceaseless attention of the
Security Council and swift action aimed at resolution.
Finding solutions to these armed conflicts is not an
easy task for the Council, as the root causes of these
brutal conflicts are multidimensional in nature -
causes such as political ambition and greed and the
continuing and devastating problems of extreme
poverty, crippling debt burdens and oppression.

Ending and ensuring the end of such military
conflicts represents a major challenge in the
maintenance of international peace and security today.
The complexity and fragility of this process often
requires the assistance of the international community.
As recognized by the Security Council in its statements
relating to this subject (S/PRST/l999/2l and S/PRST/1999/28), an impartial United Nations
peacekeeping operation could play an essential role by
discharging a number of key tasks and by helping to
create an environment for a post-conflict peace-
building operation to be carried out.

Peacekeeping is one of the instruments available
at the disposal of this Council. The number and
intensity of armed conflicts require a comprehensive
response to the complex and intractable problems of
these conflicts. We believe that peacekeeping can
maintain peace in the most challenging environment
when it is deployed with a clear, credible and
achievable mandate and with a deterrent capacity,
equipped with the necessary wherewithal. Above all, it
has to be backed by a sustained political will by all the
parties to the armed conflict, regional actors and the
international community.

To begin with, it is imperative that the parties to
prospective peace agreements, including regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements, engage
the United Nations from an early stage in negotiations.
This is to ensure that any provisions for peacekeeping
operations meet minimum conditions, including the
need for a clear political objective, the practicability of
the designated tasks and timelines and the rules of
engagement in accordance with the principles of
international law. This Council, for its part, must
ensure that the mandated tasks of peacekeeping
operations are appropriate to the situation on the
ground, including such factors as the prospects for
success and the potential need to protect civilians.

My delegation firmly believes that beyond the
deployment of peacekeeping missions in existing
conflict situations, there is a need for the Council and
the United Nations as a whole to develop appropriate
strategies for preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and
post-conflict peace-building to consolidate and sustain
peace in the conflict area. As many of today's armed
conflicts are multidimensional in nature, peace
operations must seek not only to bring stability to areas
of conflict, but also to address the root causes of
conflict. This means tackling a wide variety of needs,
ranging from the political to the social and the
economic.

In many conflict situations, the processes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and national reconciliation are at the heart of these
efforts. In this regard, there is the need for more
effective coordination of the DDR programmes and for
adequate and timely funding for these programmes,
which are vital to the success of peace processes. We
endorse the efforts by the Secretary-General to
formulate a plan to strengthen of the United Nations
capacity to develop peace-building strategies and to
implement programmes in support of them. We look
forward to the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on the basis of this plan.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
intention to spell out more clearly future concepts of
operations, including ways to help strengthen local rule
of law and human rights institutions. There can be no
viable peace in a country if national reconciliation
among the parties does not take place and if those
responsible for war crimes are not put on trial. This
Council has to be actively engaged in all of these
efforts and must lend its full support to the promotion
of sustainable development and a healthy democratic
society based on the rule of law, good governance and
democratic institutions.

As part of the overall strategy for peace
operations, my delegation believes that the current
dispatching of Council missions, with the consent of
host countries, to the conflict areas is a useful means of
reviewing the implementation of Security Council
resolutions.

At the regional level, the Security Council must
acknowledge and support the roles played by regional
and subregional organizations in establishing
appropriate mechanisms for the prevention,
management and resolution of armed conflicts. The
Council must regard these organizations as security
partners in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is imperative, therefore, that the Council
strengthen its cooperation with these regional and
subregional organizations. We believe this is essential
to the success of peace operations.

The Security Council cannot act alone. Other
relevant bodies of this Organization, international
financial institutions and non-governmental
organizations could also play their part so as to allow
for a smooth transition from one type of peace
operation to another - from peacekeeping to post-
conflict peace-building. It is imperative, therefore, that
the Council work closely with those bodies to ensure
better cooperation and coordination in order to achieve
effective results on the ground.

There is no paucity of analysis of the sources of
armed conflicts and the reasons why they persist. The
Secretary-General, various panels of experts and
Security Council debates have produced reports that
contain clear, candid analyses of the sources of
conflicts and recommend actions and goals that are
both realistic and achievable - actions and goals to
reduce conflict and, in time, to help build a strong and
durable peace. Just two days ago, the Council adopted
resolution 1327 (2000), which contains the decisions
and recommendations of the Council in response to the
Brahimi report. We have to ensure that those decisions
and recommendations are translated into action.

This Council has an important responsibility that
it must face. Member States of the United Nations have
conferred on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in order to ensure prompt and
effective action. It is appropriate that the Council adopt
effective strategies to prevent, contain and put an end
to armed conflicts, in conformity with the principles of
justice and international law. The United Nations has
had several success stories in peace operations -
Namibia and Cambodia, to name a few. We see no
reason why they cannot be repeated.

