The President: I have been informed that our
respected colleague Sir John Sawers, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, is today
attending a meeting of the Security Council for the last
time before he leaves for a new assignment. I want to
take this opportunity to express to him, on behalf of the
members of the Council, our appreciation of him both
as a colleague and as a friend.

From the time Ambassador Sawers took up his
present position in the summer of 2007, he has made a
valuable contribution to the work of the Council. His
vast diplomatic skill, demure manner and sense of
collegiality have made him a highly effective and
valued representative of his country. He will be
remembered for many of his astute interventions and
his willingness to rally the Council to consensus when
it was most needed, as well as for his leadership of
various segments of the Council's missions to Africa.
In bidding Sir John a fond farewell, Council members
and I wish him great success and fulfilment in his
future endeavours. We are certain that he will keep an
eye on the activities of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2009/472)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alan Doss,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Doss to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
twenty-ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is contained
in document 8/2009/472.

At this meeting, members of the Council will
hear a briefing by Mr. Alan Doss. I now give him the
floor.


