Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Tom Koenigs to
the Security Council to give his first briefing to the
Council in his capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan. We congratulate
him again on his assumption of this important post.
China will continue to fully support him and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in their work.

Afghanistan has completed the political transition
process stipulated in the Bonn Agreement and has
taken preliminary steps to establish modern institutions
of national authority. The national economy is
maintaining a fairly rapid growth momentum, and there
have been improvements in people's livelihoods. The
reconfiguration and reform of the security sector is
moving forward at a steady pace. The national army
and national police have begun to assume greater
responsibilities in maintaining national security.
Afghanistan is actively seeking international and
regional cooperation to create a favourable
environment for national stability and development.
These achievements would not have been possible
without the assiduous efforts of the Afghan
Government and people, the generous support of the
international community and the hard work of
UNAMA.

At the same time, the peace and reconstruction
process in Afghanistan is still confronting a multitude
of difficulties and challenges. The ability of the Afghan
national institutions needs to be further strengthened.
Economic and social development cannot yet meet the
people's basic needs. The question of narcotics and the
activities of extremists and terrorists remain a threat to
the peace and stability of Afghanistan.

Against this backdrop the London Conference on
Afghanistan signed the Afghanistan Compact and
endorsed the interim Afghanistan National
Development Strategy submitted by the Afghan
Government. It not only embodies the consensus and
determination of the international community, but it
also proposes specific measures and a pragmatic time
frame for peace and the reconstruction of Afghanistan
in the next five years. It also marks the beginning of a
new phase in peace and reconstruction of Afghanistan.

In order to implement the Afghanistan Compact
and consolidate the Bonn Process, the Afghan
Government should first focus, on a priority basis, on
stability and development and should complete basic
reconstruction in the areas of administration, economy
and the rule of law so that the Afghan people can better
enjoy the dividends of peace and stability. Next, the
United Nations should continue to play a central and
coordinating role in the peace and reconstruction of
Afghanistan and in international assistance. In this
connection, China endorses the Secretary-General's
relevant recommendations and agrees to a one-year
extension of UNAMA and adjustments to its mandate
so that it can better accomplish the mandate entrusted
to it by the Security Council.

Thirdly, the international community should
sustain its attention and input regarding Afghanistan
and ensure timely delivery of pledged assistance. At
the same time, it should also carefully heed and respect
Afghanistan's concerns and proposals and encourage it
to continue to enhance its sense of ownership and
assume more responsibilities. Regional cooperation is
an effective way for the international community and
neighbouring countries to help Afghanistan achieve
stability, development and integration with the
international community. We hope that Afghanistan
and the neighbouring countries will fully utilize
existing mechanisms, deepen regional cooperation,
enhance mutual political trust and seek joint
development.

As a good neighbour of Afghanistan, China has
always closely followed the peace and reconstruction
process there. To ensure mutual benefit, win-win
results and joint progress, we stand ready to
scrupulously implement the Declaration on Good
Neighbourly Relations, the Declaration on Counter-
Narcotics, within the framework of the Kabul
Declaration, and the Declaration on Encouraging
Closer Cooperation in Trade, Border Crossing and
Investment, and other major instruments. China is
ready to honour the new pledges made at the
international Conference on Afghanistan and to
continue, as always, to provide long-term cooperation
and support to Afghanistan.

Even though the road ahead may not be smooth,
the Afghan people, who have gone through so many
tribulations, cherish peace and stability and yearn for
security and development. We have every reason to
believe that, with the efforts of the Afghan
Government and people and the support of the
international community, Afghanistan will continue to
achieve remarkable results in the new phase of its
national reconstruction.

