The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I would like once again to congratulate Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his excellent briefing on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic.

We welcome the holding of the eleventh meeting of
the Astana process on the settlement ofthe Syrian crisis,
which took place on 28 and 29 November in Astana. My
country welcomes the joint statement issued at the end
of that meeting, which stressed the need

"to intensify consultations at all levels to help
the Syrian people to return to a normal life and
preserve the territorial integrity of Syria".

The declaration further reaffirmed,

"the commitment to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as respect for the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations".

I also call on all parties to the conflict to implement
the agreement providing for a demilitarized zone in
Idlib governorate, which was signed 17 September in
Sochi under the auspices of the Russian Federation
and Turkey.

Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress
made within the framework of the pilot project prepared
by the working group established by the Astana process
and the United Nations, which aims at investigating the
fate of missing persons and releasing those detained.
That progress, which included the exchange of
prisoners between the Syrian Government and armed
groups in the northern part of Syria on 24 November,
constitutes a decisive step towards building confidence
among the parties to the conflict. The principles of
justice and accountability should also be applied by all
parties to the conflict as a necessary step in the search
for achieving peaceful coexistence among all Syrian
people of all creeds and communities.

My delegation is concerned about the announcement
by the Turkish President on 12 December ofthe launching
ofa new offensive in Syria against the Kurdish People's
Protection Units, which Ankara considers a separatist
terrorist organization. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on
the Turkish authorities to prioritize negotiations so as
to avoid a new outbreak of violence that would lead
to massive displacement of people and exacerbate the
already alarming humanitarian situation. Furthermore,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), my country
calls on the Syrian parties to create the conditions
necessary to enable refugees and displaced persons
to return voluntarily and in dignity and safety to
their home areas and to enable conflict-affected areas
to recover.

Cote d'Ivoire endorses the appeal made in Istanbul
on 27 and 28 October during the quadrilateral summit
for the effective establishment of a constitutional
committee and for drafting a new constitution by late
2018. In that regard, cote d'Ivoire welcomes the most
recent Geneva meeting on the implementation on an
inclusive and credible constitutional committee. Such
a constitutional committee will enable relaunching the
political process, which is at a deadlock, and will pave
the way for the holding of free and impartial elections
under United Nations supervision.

As Mr. De Mistura is about to leave his post, C6te
d'Ivoire expresses its deep gratitude to him for his
unfailing commitment to bringing about peace in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Cote d'Ivoire would like to take
this opportunity to pay heart-felt tribute to him for his
tireless efforts during the mission that the Secretary-
General conferred upon him. My country recognizes his
excellent work over the past four years, his dedication
and self-sacrifice in significantly contributing to the
restoration of peace and lasting stability in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Furthermore, C6te d'Ivoire urges all
stakeholders to support Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new
Special Envoy, in successfully carrying out his mandate.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for a
political resolution to the conflict in Syria and urges the
Syrian parties to resume negotiations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
