Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me to begin
by welcoming the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals - Judges Agius, Joensen and Meron,
respectively - as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow. We commend their important work and their
continued efforts to ensure accountability, and we
thank them for today's briefings and comprehensive
reports.

Croatia pays tribute to Judge Theodor Meron,
former President of the ICTY, under whose Vigorous
and diligent guidance the Tribunal achieved further
important progress in the proper interpretation and
application of international humanitarian law. During
his presidency, the Tribunal significantly contributed
to ending impunity for horrendous crimes committed
on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We also use
this opportunity to welcome Judge Carmel Agius and
wish him every success in carrying out his new duties
as President of the ICTY.

As the ICTR completes its work at the end of this
month, we recognize its achievements and invaluable
contribution to international criminal justice. Together
with the ICTY, it has embodied the pivotal quest to fight
impunity and has paved the way for the International
Criminal Court, which Croatia strongly supports. We
commend the fact that the Residual Mechanism is
increasingly assuming responsibility for all aspects of
the work of the two Tribunals, and we commend the
ongoing progress in that regard. Croatia believes that
it is important that both Tribunals and the Mechanism
receive all the necessary support to complete their
mandates. We reaffirm our unwavering support for
their work.

Many words have been said on the matter in the
Council Chamber. When it comes to the ICTY, some
things have not changed in the past six months. We
are still waiting for the verdicts in certain pivotal
cases involving the masterminds of some of the most
horrendous crimes. The slow pace of the proceedings
remains a serious problem. More than two decades
after the establishment of the Tribunal, thousands of
victims and their loved ones are still waiting for justice
to be served.

Croatia reiterates the importance of completing the
remaining ICTY trials in the Seselj, Hadiic', Mladic'
and Karadeic' cases. In that regard, we note with great
concern the continued suspension of proceedings in
the Goran Hadzie case. While commending the efforts
of the Office of the Prosecutor for the continuation of
the trial, we encourage the Tribunal once again to take
all the necessary steps to ensure that this significant
trial recommences forthwith. As in the case of HadZie's
mentor in crime, Slobodan Milosevic, painfully
reminds us,justice delayed is indeedjustice denied. His
death thwarted his deserved conviction.

In a completely different case, but in the same
context ofprolonged proceedings, let me add that Croatia
hopes that the fact that there is a new presiding judge
in the case Prlic' et al. will not affect the length of the
proceedings or the procedural results achieved. This is
the most voluminous appellate case in the history of the
Tribunal. Nevertheless, it would have been reasonable
to expect the final decision by the end of 2016, but it
seems that it will not arrive before November 2017. We
call on the Tribunal to find the ways not to prolong this
extremely complex case, keeping in mind the Tribunal's
targeted completion strategy.

We must again draw the Security Council's
attention to the Seselj case and the toxic impact of
the temporary release of the accused. The fact that
this indicted war criminal is still allowed to continue
with his cynical rampage and mockery of victims,
with occasional live appearances on Serbian television
reality shows, his victims rightly regard as a slap in
the face of international criminal justice and humanity
itself. In a further abomination ofjustice relating to this
particular case, three persons charged with contempt
of Court for having threatened, intimidated, offered
bribes to or otherwise interfered with witnesses have
not yet been arrested and surrendered to the Tribunal.
We took careful note of the ICTY written assessment
that this represents Serbia's serious failure to honour its
international obligations. We therefore call upon Serbia
to comply with the Tribunal's requests without delay
and recall that full cooperation with the ICTY remains
an essential condition for the candidate country in its
accession process to the European Union, as a tool for
ensuring not only continued cooperation with the ICTY,
but also for the transformation of domestic institutions
and State-building in general, including the reform of
the judiciary and consolidation of the rule of law.

The important work of the ICTY in bringing justice
to thousands of victims is not yet completed. That is
why justice must be served without any unnecessary
postponement while ensuring full State cooperation. I
will say once again what we have stated in the Security
Council on many occasions: protracted proceedings may
lead to the weakening of public trust in international
justice and its appropriate administration. We must
constantly remain mindful of that fact.
Council members may rest assured that Croatia
will continue to render its full support and assistance
to the Tribunal and its efforts to complete its work. The
lessons learned and knowledge gained from the work
of both the ICTY and the ICTR in the fight against
impunity forms an essential part of their legacy and
must not be forgotten. We are hopeful that a smooth
and efficient transition process for both branches of the
Mechanism shall ensure the protection and effective
continuation of the work of the Tribunals.

