Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone): Permit me, on behalf of
the Government of Sierra Leone, to thank members of the
Security Council, both past and present, and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations for the assistance and
support they have been giving to the democratically elected
Government of Sierra Leone, headed by President Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah.

Let me also thank the Governments of the United
Kingdom, the United States of America, Canada, China, the
Netherlands, the Republic of Guinea, Ghana, Mali, the
Federal Republic of Nigeria, other member countries of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
and others for the support they have been giving to my
country.

I must acknowledge the special role that the
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria has played
and continues to play in peacekeeping and in the
maintenance of international peace and security, not only in
our subregion but in Africa at large. The relative peace
prevailing in Liberia today would not have been possible
but for the intervention of the Government of Nigeria
through the regional peacekeeping force known as the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

When the coup took place in Sierra Leone on 25 May
1997, the Government of Nigeria, through ECOMOG,
quickly intervened at the request of President Kabbah for
assistance to bring an explosive situation under control.
Apart from the human losses suffered in Sierra Leone, the
Government of Nigeria has been spending over $1 million
a day since 1997 on ECOMOG for the sole purpose of
bringing peace to my country. This is a colossal amount. I
believe that the valuable role played by the Government of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria in peacekeeping in Sierra
Leone and in the subregion in general should be reinforced
with added financial and logistical support from the
international community.

It is no news to members of this Council that the
prevailing rebel war has not only destroyed the socio-
economic infrastructure of my country but has resulted in
a huge loss of human life and property. The country has
been brought to a virtual standstill. In the process, a lot of
pressure has been put on the Government to have a
dialogue with the rebels. I want to put the record straight
here today. Since the assumption of power in 1996 after
a democratic election, the Government of President
Kabbah has always been serious about bringing peace to
the country. Through his efforts, the peace accord was
signed between the Government and the rebels in Abidjan
in November 1996. The accord reached in Conakry
between the ECOWAS Committee of Five and the rebels
in 1998 was supported by the President, even though most
of his advisers did not agree with some aspects of the
accord.

Most recently, after the rebel's invasion of the
capital on 6 January 1999, he had a meeting with the
leader of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), Foday
Sankoh, the main purpose of which was to arrive at a
ceasefire leading eventually to a resumption of talks.
Foday Sankoh was permitted to travel to Conakry so that
he could talk to his commanders. On reaching Conakry,
he reneged on the agreement and refused to sign any
ceasefire until he was released from prison. Again, in an
address to the nation on 28 February 1999, President
Kabbah agreed to permit Foday Sankoh to meet with his
colleagues so that they could articulate their position as to
how to move the peace process forward. The Government
has now suggested two possible venues for that meeting:
Togo or Mali. The Government cannot therefore be
accused of failing to make enough serious efforts to hold
a dialogue with the rebels.

On Wednesday this week, in Accra, President
Kabbah told journalists that he would be willing to
exercise his power of clemency to release Foday Sankoh
after his appeal has been settled by the courts, in order to
advance the peace process in Sierra Leone. He said, "If
I have to use my clemency to release Foday Sankoh in
order to bring lasting peace to my country, I will do that."

There are two forces in play today in the political
arena of Sierra Leone: the supporters of democracy,
namely, the people of Sierra Leone, who in 1996 elected
a Government of their choice and are now refusing to be
disenfranchised; and the anti-democratic forces, namely,
the rebels and their collaborators, internal and external,
who want to assume power by illegitimate means. The
rebels feel that by killing and amputating the limbs of
innocent civilians the people will succumb to their
devilish wishes. But the people have continued to resist.

 

Even though they have destroyed and killed, the rebels have
not achieved their objectives. There is no doubt that the
international community will continue to support the people
of Sierra Leone.

My Government believes that without good
governance there will be no meaningful development.

As further evidence of the insincerity of the rebels in
advancing the peace process, the RUF Commander, Sam
Bockarie, yesterday told the Associated Press that he will
ignore the call of the RUF leader, Foday Sankoh, for a
ceasefire. Instead, he has threatened to launch an all-out
offensive against Government forces. He said, "We are
ready to fight".

We think pressure should now be put on the rebels to
be serious about talking peace. Although they are saying
they want peace, they continue to kill and maim innocent
civilians, and they continue to burn villages and all the
cities of the country.

