Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first congratulate
France for once again raising this important issue
within the framework of an open debate of the Security
Council on the Middle East.

We also wish to align ourselves with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and that to be made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. We also
thank Mr. Miroslav J enca, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Indonesia is pleased to welcome the landmark
agreement reached last week by the leaders of Hamas
and Fatah. We believe that a united Palestine will
further strengthen their struggle to achieve a peaceful
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through
a two-State solution. As a consistent advocate of the
Palestinian cause, Indonesia has always urged unity
among all Palestinians in order to enable them to
confront their common issues together. The agreement
is an essential step towards the full reunification of
the West Bank and Gaza, and keeps alive prospects
for the peaceful emergence of a Palestinian State. We
appreciate Egypt's role in that regard. The agreement
is of tremendous interest in Indonesia, where it
was warmly welcomed by all our people. Indonesia
commends the leadership of the Palestinian people and
celebrates Palestinian unity.

Indonesia once again reiterates its call upon
members of the international community to fulfil
their obligation to push for peace in the Middle East
by playing their due parts, just as the Palestinian
leadership did last week by coming together. That
call is of particular importance in the context of the
Security Council, in view of fulfilling its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

It has always been of grave concern to Indonesia
that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has needlessly
gone on for too long in the history of humankind, with
unhappy implications for generations of children who
have found it difficult to lead normal lives. We reiterate
that the time has come to end that conflict, while
recalling the pivotal adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
of December 2016, and once again calling for its full
implementation. In the resolution's wisdom of casting
its vision upon the road to peace, the Council rejected
Israel's establishment of settlements in Palestinian
territory occupied since 1967, while categorically
condemning them as illegal and a flagrant violation of
international law. Settlements continue to be a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

We therefore express our dismay that, as of this
open debate, States Members of the United Nations have
not received a substantive report from the Secretary-
General, as stipulated by the resolution, detailing its
implementation. In effect, three of those quarterly
reports have yet to be forwarded.

My delegation recalls that, merely months
following the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Government of Israel announced the construction of the
first new settlement in the West Bank in two decades.
That policy derailed the authority of the Council, in
particular with regard to the substance of resolution
2334 (2016). A failure by the United Nations to take
measures in its implementation and to report diligently
when expected at the due time can only serve to yield
to Israel misplaced confidence in the error of its ways
and encourage it to continue to undermine the just and
lasting solution envisaged in the two-State solution.
On Yemen, Indonesia sees no other way to arrive at
a solution to the conflict except through a Yemeni-led
negotiation process, in which all the parties involved
participate in an inclusive, peaceful and democratic
manner. There is no military solution to the conflict.
The lack of concrete results in the peace process
continues to create suffering for Yemeni civilians,
causing great damage every day to the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is aggravated by famine and
the outbreak of cholera. Indonesia emphatically urges
the parties to return to the negotiating table in good
faith so as to ensure a peaceful settlement.

On Syria, Indonesia underscores that the Astana
process and other regional initiatives launched in
the recent months to end local hostilities have led to
a considerable reduction in the level of fighting in
the country, through the implementation of various
de-escalation zones. We underline the need to preserve
the unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. What is further needed is reconstruction and
rehabilitation, as well as to ensure the safety and well-
being of civilians in Syria. Indonesia highly appreciates
the activities of the humanitarian personnel of the
United Nations stationed in Syria, namely, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
World Health Organization, as well as of the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent.

I would like to once again emphasize that Indonesia
will never waver from its commitment to supporting the
Palestinian struggle for independence as a true partner
in the efforts to find a peaceful solution to sustaining
peace in the Middle East. Nevertheless, I would like
to end by posing a question to the Chamber, namely,
How many more open debates do we need to have on
the issue of Palestine before there is progress on the
ground? Life is at stake.

