Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Director
Rajasingham for their briefings. My delegation also
wishes to congratulate Ms. Khawla Matar on her

appointment as the Deputy Special Envoy for Syria. We
wish her every success in carrying out her mandate.

Indonesia is pleased to hear the continuing
discussions and engagement between Special Envoy
Pedersen and the relevant parties to the conflict. As
stated last month by Ambassador Pedersen in this
Chamber (see S/PV.8475), building confidence and
trust with the parties is indeed key. My delegation
therefore fully supports the Special Envoy's approach
in developing a sustained dialogue. For Indonesia, it is
a sine qua non for any future progress.

As the conflict enters its ninth year, it is more
crucial than ever to move the political process forward,
pursuant to the Geneva communique (S/2013/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). Indonesia believes
that a negotiated political solution is the only way to
achieve lasting peace in Syria. The absence ofa political
solution will continue to deteriorate the humanitarian
situation in Syria. My delegation wishes to share three
pertinent points: the need to respect Syria's sovereignty,
the need for strong political commitment and the
urgency of addressing the humanitarian situation in
Al-Hol camp, Rukban and Idlib.

First, Indonesia urges the international community
to fully respect and reaffirm its commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. That is a basic foundation that is needed to be
able to effectively assist the Syrian people. That is also a
necessity, not an option. Moreover, a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process is not merely a slogan, it is a
process that would lead to a lasting political settlement
of the crisis. We are fully aware of the complexity
of the crisis, and ignoring the principled elements of
sovereignty and territorial integrity will complicate the
situation. In that context, let me reiterate Indonesia's
strong rejection of the recognition of Golan Heights as
part of Israel by the United States, as elaborated by our
Vice-Minister at yesterday's meeting (see S/PV.8489).

Secondly, a strong political commitment is greatly
needed by all parties to work together and gradually
begin the political process. Indonesia is of the view that
the establishment of a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee is an important phase of
the process, but my delegation also believes that a
measured and careful process is necessary to lay a firm
groundwork. We support the Special Envoy's work in
facilitating the finalization of the rules of procedure
and the composition of the committee. Again, that is
not an easy task, but it is doable.

Thirdly, Indonesia is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Syria and stresses the urgent
need to promptly address and alleviate the suffering of
millions ofpeople in need. More than 70,000 displaced
people reside in Al-Hol camp, of whom 90 per cent are
women and children. The majority of the people suffer
from malnutrition, with no adequate medical assistance.
In the four months since December 2018, there have
been approximately 60,000 arrivals in Al-Hol, and the
camp has exceeded its capacity. We hope to see the
establishment of 4,000 additional shelters and other
responses related to food security, water and sanitation,
as well as health services.

On Rukban, we are encouraged by the second
humanitarian assistance convoy delivered in February
and look forward to the next delivery to thousands of
refugees in Rukban. With regard to potential Rukban
evacuees, and based on the results of the survey of
intentions, Indonesia wishes to underline that it is
important to accommodate a safe and voluntary return
for refugees and displaced persons. All parties should
work together in rebuilding Syria through a steady
reconstruction process. Indonesia would also like
to emphasize the need to maintain and respect the
ceasefire agreement in Idlib in order to prevent another
humanitarian tragedy. My delegation takes note of the
pledges made during the third Brussels Conference
on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region
and underlines the importance of ensuring the proper
distribution of the funding to those in need.

In conclusion, Indonesia shares the Secretary-
General's view, expressed in his statement of 15 March,
that it is indeed a moral obligation for the international
community to support Syrians in uniting around a
vision for their future. It is also the Council's obligation
to support all Syrians in deciding their own future - a
future that is stable and peaceful.

