Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Yamamoto,
for his candid briefing, and we welcome the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report (S/2017/508).
We also welcome the Secretary-General's visit to
Afghanistan, which demonstrated his solidarity with
the Afghan people.

Despite decades of effort by national and
international actors to stabilize the security situation
in Afghanistan, the situation today remains volatile
and has deteriorated further since we last met (see S/PV.7896). The ongoing violence takes a heavy toll on
the civilian population. Each attack on a mosque, each
bazaar, home, hospital or school targeted, each life lost,
undermines the ability of the Afghan people to plan
their lives and futures with hope or certainty.

Let me reiterate Sweden's condemnation of the
recent terrorist attacks in Kabul and extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families of those affected.
We call for an end to this senseless violence and for
those responsible to be held to account.

We encourage the Afghan Government to take
the necessary steps to defuse the tensions following
the attacks. As we heard today from the Special
Representative, unity is of the utmost importance if the
people ofAfghanistan are to tackle the many challenges
ahead. Internal differences must be put aside in order to
make progress with the reform agenda and to bring an
end to the conflict.

As the Secretary-General says in his report,
"[p]eace must be attained through negotiations and not
on the battlefield" (S/2017/508, para. 58). With that in
mind, we commend the Afghan Government on the first
meeting of the Kabul process for peace and security
cooperation. We look forward to the next meeting
under the process and to cooperating closely with the
Afghan authorities to ensure women's participation. A
peace process without women is not a peace process.
Sweden remains fully committed to supporting an
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process. We
also echo the calls of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the need to restart the dialogue
with the Taliban towards a lasting political settlement.

All ofus, but particularly the countries ofthe region,
have an interest in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
In turn, sustained and constructive engagement by the
region will be essential to make that a reality. Regional
tensions continue to undermine Afghanistan's long-

term stability and economic growth. We call on all
parties to act constructively and responsibly and work
together towards sustainable peace. Enhanced dialogue
between Afghanistan and Pakistan is an important part
of this complex puzzle.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) continues to play a critical role in supporting
the Government and the people of Afghanistan as they
work towards building a democratic, prosperous and
peaceful society. However, significant challenges to
that goal remain. Against that background, an efficient,
effective and appropriately configured United Nations
presence in Afghanistan - in Kabul, as well as in the
provinces - continues to be vital to support efforts
to achieve lasting peace. We welcome the ongoing
strategic review and await the final report. Looking
forward, Sweden sees the following priorities for
United Nations support to Afghanistan.

First, there is a need for a comprehensive approach
that includes development, human rights, the rule of
law and humanitarian assistance. Providing appropriate
support will require a coherent and well-coordinated
United Nations.

Secondly, it is important to continue UNAMA's
field presence at current levels, so as to safeguard
crucial contacts between international and local
actors, build local capacities, as well as facilitate
humanitarian access.

Thirdly, there is a need for a stronger political
mandate for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, including on regional issues related to peace
efforts, and with sufficient resources to implement this
political mandate.

Fourthly, we see the need for improved donor
coordination, with a continued sharp focus on
development, humanitarian and human rights issues.

Fifthly, women's participation and integration into
the political, economic and social life of Afghanistan
must be at the core of UNAMA's activities.

Finally, children continue to suffer disproportionately
from the violence in Afghanistan. We welcome an
enhanced focus on children and armed conflict. Words
must now be translated into action with respect to this
agenda. In addition, ensuring respect for humanitarian
principles, human rights and international humanitarian
law should always be an integral part of United
Nations missions.

Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes patience, courage and determination from
all the parties involved. We must now ensure that the
gains made in Afghanistan are not lost. Renewed efforts
from Afghan leaders and the international community
are needed to move the country down the path to peace.
Sweden has provided assistance to Afghanistan for
more than three decades, and we are committed to
stand with the Afghans for the long term.

