Dr. Satcher: Let me thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to be here today and to address it. I have
heard that I might well be the first Surgeon-General ever
to address the Security Council, and that, for me,
represents a tremendous opportunity and challenge. Over
50 years ago Surgeon-General Leonard Scheele, speaking
to the first meeting of the World Health Organization,
said, that the world cannot exist half healthy and half
sick. So we are challenged today by that commitment
expressed on behalf of the United States by a Surgeon-
General.

As the Security Council has heard, AIDS has had
and is having a devastating impact on sub-Saharan Africa
and on many other areas of the world. But I think that it

 

is also important to point out that, as we have heard, we are
not without hope. When we look at what partnerships and
global strategies have already achieved, we have to have
hope. Together, we have eradicated smallpox, the last case
occurring in the late 19705. We are very close to
eradicating polio from the world. In this respect, I must
point to the dynamic leadership of Rotary International and
of the business community, which is going to be so
important to our efforts in this context, working in
partnership in areas such as Uganda. Certainly, when I was
Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
we learned much about what can be accomplished through
comprehensive programmes of counselling, education and
testing.

We appreciate the opportunity we have had to work
with our colleagues. Working with our colleagues in
Thailand, we learned about what can be accomplished in
the military, where AIDS was a major problem, and as a
result of working together, we have seen a dramatic
decline. So we have learned a lot of lessons by working in
partnerships throughout the world, and we hope to continue
those kinds of partnerships.

We have also learned much from our experience in the
United States. As the Council has heard and knows, we
have made significant progress in the United States. But, in
the words of Robert Frost, we still have promises to keep
and miles to go before we sleep.
We have learned that it is possible to decrease the
onset of HIV, which has gone from a high of 150,000 cases
a year in the late 1980s to 40,000 cases a year today. We
have also invested in science, as a result of which we have
developed treatments, including the highly active anti-
retroviral therapies that are making a difference and have
reduced mortality from AIDS by 60 per cent compared to
1995. However, we know that this is not the answer to this
epidemic in our country or anywhere else in the world. So
our commitment today is to work in global partnership -
not just providing the funds that have been committed by
the Vice-President and Ambassador Holbrooke - in
combating this epidemic throughout the world.

We are committed to a balanced approach to this
epidemic. We believe that it is important to invest heavily
in prevention, including surveillance, so that we can
monitor this epidemic throughout the world, including in
sub-Saharan Africa. We believe that it is important to invest
in treatment. I believe that treatment is in and of itself
preventive when applied correctly. For example, working
together in Tanzania, we learned that the aggressive
treatment of sexually transmitted diseases significantly
reduced the spread of HIV/AIDS. So we have learned the
importance of comprehensive treatment, and we have
learned the importance of treating opportunistic infections
in people infected with AIDS. But we have also learned
that we must continue to work together to provide
treatment to all people who are infected with this virus,
a commitment that was made by the Vice-President this
morning.

We are also committed to continuing to invest in
research, especially in research to develop a vaccine. We
believe that prevention is the most important investment
that we can make in dealing with this epidemic. We are
very pleased to be able to work with our partners
throughout the world - in Thailand, Uganda, the United
States and other places - in the development of a
vaccine. In fact that is now in phase III trials in parts of
the world. We are committed to continuing that research
and that investment.

Our Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna
Shalala, has said that our ethics must be as sophisticated
as our science. In response to comments that we have
heard today, I want to say that together we must make
that commitment as we work in prevention, treatment and
research and in dealing with orphans throughout the
world, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Our ethics must
be as sophisticated as our science, and we must hold each
other to that commitment.

The interrelationships among health and social,
economic and political stability and well-being, and their
impact on peace and security, is a point that has been
well made in this meeting of the Security Council. We
hope that as we work with the Council throughout the
world we can keep this in mind.

In closing, let me say that our partnerships must be
interdisciplinary. Our experience with business and labour
response to AIDS in the United States has been really
critical - I have mentioned the eradication of polio and
Rotary International. We have also benefited from the
faith community. We have benefited from other non-
governmental organizations and from the military and the
role of the military. The Security Council will soon hear
from the Secretary of Labor of the United States, as we
attempt to gather with our partners throughout the world
to make a commitment in the area of labour in dealing
with the AIDS epidemic, as we have tried to do in our
country.

 

In closing, let me say again how very pleased I am
that the Security Council has raised the issue of AIDS in
Africa to this level and presented to all of us the challenge
of keeping before us the relationships between health and
security. We look forward to working with the Security
Council in the days, months and years ahead to conquer
this global pandemic.

