Mr. Salam (Lebanon): 1 would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban for his important introductory
remarks, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme, Mr. Steiner, for his
stimulating briefing. I also wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate in the Security
Council on the impact of climate change in the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.

At the outset, allow me to stress, along with my
partners in the Arab Group, the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 and China, that we
consider, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 63/281, that in the United Nations system
the responsibility for sustainable development issues,
including climate change, is conferred upon the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council and that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the key instrument
for addressing climate change.

Yet, focusing our discussion today on the
potential security implications of climate change will
not constitute an encroachment by the Security Council
on the functions and powers of other United Nations
organs, for the same General Assembly resolution,
63/281, also

"Invites the relevant organs of the United
Nations, as appropriate and within their
respective mandates, to intensify their efforts in
considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications".

In this same vein, in addition to increasing awareness
about the potential security impact of climate change,
our debate today should be viewed as an expression of
complementarity in the work of the different organs of
the United Nations.

There is broad agreement within the scientific
community that our planet has been warming, due
largely to human activities at least since the eighteenth
century, and that the rate of warming in the last century
was historically high. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change confirmed in 2007 the historic
magnitude of these changes and warned of their
potential impacts on the future of the Earth and its
inhabitants.

As to the relationship between climate change
and conflict, including armed conflict, the 2009 report
of the Secretary-General (A/64/350) identified climate
change as a threat multiplier exacerbating threats
caused by persistent poverty and weak institutions for
resource management and conflict resolution.
Emerging threats related to climate change include sea-
level rise, which could result in the loss of entire

countries such as the small island States; accelerated
desertification and erosion of agricultural land, which
could lead to food insecurity, increased poverty and
reverse development; migratory and displacement
flows, which could become a source of social and
political tensions in the neighbouring areas; and water
scarcity, which could exacerbate competition over
natural resources.

No region on the surface of the globe is immune.
But it is important to underline that the impact of
climate change will be greater where factors of
fragility already exist. This is the case of the least
developed countries.

The global nature of climate change requires the
cooperation of all countries, in accordance with their
common but differentiated responsibilities and their
respective capabilities. It is also important to keep in
mind that the international community cannot win the
battle against the detrimental consequences of climate
change without putting into action all the relevant
instruments in its possession.

In this context, United Nations organs should,
within their respective mandates, mobilize all their
resources in the fields of mitigation, adaptation,
finance, technology development and transfer, and
capacity-building in order to address and reduce the
negative effects of global warming. Here, the Security
Council should, inter alia, play a critical role of
conflict prevention in addressing, as early as possible,
the potential security implications of climate change.

