Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak here today.

We are here to discuss a tragedy: the downing of a
commercial airliner and the death of298 innocentpeople.
Men, women and a staggering number of children lost
their lives on their way to their holiday destinations,
homes, loved ones or international obligations such as
the important HIV/AIDS conference in Australia. Since
Thursday, I have been thinking how horrible must have
been the final moments of their lives, when they knew
the plane was going down. Did they lock hands with
their loved ones, did they hold their children close to
their hearts, did they look each other in the eyes, one
final time, in a wordless goodbye? We will never know.

The demise of almost 200 of my compatriots has
left a hole in the heart of the Dutch nation, and it has
caused grief, anger and despair - grief at the loss of
loved ones, anger at the outrage of the downing of a
civilian airplane, and despair after witnessing the
excruciatingly slow process of securing the crash site
and recovering the remains of the victims.

It is fitting that the Council should take a position
on this matter, and I welcome the adoption of today's
resolution 2166 (2014), which was submitted by
Australia and which the Netherlands co-sponsored. I
thank the countries that expressed support for it, and
I particularly want to thank Julie Bishop personally.
Julie, we are in this together.

For the Netherlands, one priority clearly stands
out above all others: bring the victims' remains home.
It is a matter of human decency that remains should
be treated with respect and that recovering victims'
remains should be done without any delay.

In the last couple of days, we have received very
disturbing reports of bodies being moved about and
looted for their possessions. Just for one minute - and
here I address you not as representatives of your countries
but as husbands and wives, fathers and mothers -just
imagine that you first get the news that your husband
was killed, and then within two or three days you see
images of some thug removing the wedding band from
his hand. Just imagine that this could be your spouse.
To my dying day I will not be able to understand how it
could have taken so much time for the rescue workers
to be allowed to do their difficult jobs and how human
remains could have been used in a political game. If
someone here around the table talks about a political
game, this is a political game that has been played with
human remains, and it is despicable. I hope that the
world will not have to witness this again any time in
future.

Images of children's toys being tossed around,
luggage being opened and passports - including
children's passports - being shown on television are
turning the grief and mourning of a whole nation into
anger. We demand unimpeded access to the terrain.
We demand respectful treatment of the crash site. We
demand dignity for the victims and the multitudes who
mourn their loss.

I call on the international community, on the
Security Council, on anyone with influence on the
situation on the ground: allow us to bring the victims'
remains home to their loved ones without any further
delay. They deserve to be home.

As we are currently taking the lead in the forensic
examination of the human remains, I pledge that the
Netherlands will do its utmost to make sure that all
remains will be identified and returned home, wherever
that home may be. We will work intensively with all
countries and international organizations involved to
make this happen as soon as possible.

I also welcome the setting up of a proper
investigation into the cause of the tragedy of MH-l7,
as envisaged in today's resolution. The Netherlands
has agreed to assume a leading role in such an
investigation, in close cooperation with the relevant
countries, the United Nations and the International
Civil Aviation Organization. I am fully aware of the
great responsibility we now take upon ourselves, and
I give my personal commitment that we will discharge
this responsibility to the best of our abilities.

As far as the safety and security of the site and the
international investigators is concerned, I underline the
responsibility that the Security Council took upon itself
with today's resolution to take additional measures if
circumstances so require.
Once the investigation ascertains who was
responsible for the downing of Flight MH-17,
accountability and justice must be pursued and
delivered. We owe it to the victims; we owe it to justice;
we owe it to humanity. Please, provide full cooperation
so that justice can be served. We will not rest until all
facts are known and justice has been served.

