Mr. Tarragfi (Brazil): I am indeed very pleased
to see you today, Ambassador Kumalo, at the end of a
productive presidency of the Security Council in this
month of April.

We are also thankful to Ms. Hannelore Hoppe of
the Office of Disarmament Affairs for her presentation
of the Secretary-General's report.

The ready availability and the misuse of small
arms and light weapons pose a great threat to the
security of States. Such weapons exacerbate conflicts,
fuel international terrorism, undermine peacebuilding
efforts and contribute to immense suffering. The issue
of small arms and light weapons, whether in the
context of disarmament, national security or public
security or from a humanitarian perspective, must
therefore be discussed in all relevant and appropriate
forums. The solution to this problem requires the
commitment of all States and the assistance of civil
society, as well as the necessary inputs of international,
regional and subregional entities.

The international community has been working in
unison in order to establish effective mechanisms to
deal with the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons. In this context, attention should continue to
be devoted to the process of monitoring the
implementation of the measures contained in the
Programme of Action of the 2001 Conference.

Our collective experience in implementing the
Programme of Action has clearly revealed some of its
shortcomings. The ambitious goals of the Programme
are still far from being accomplished. They continue to
require reinforced commitment and political will from
Governments and civil societies. That is particularly
important in the light of the upcoming Biennial
Meeting to consider the implementation of the
Programme of Action. In this respect, we think that
many areas have yet to be adequately addressed.

The current report of the Secretary-General
brings to light some areas where progress, we believe,
can be made. In particular, we welcome the
recommendation to develop an international framework
for authentication, reconciliation and standardization of
end-user certificates. That would be an important step
towards improving export and import controls.
Enacting, enforcing and strengthening transfers
controls is a shared responsibility of all States and an
essential measure to prevent the diversion of small
arms and light weapons to the illicit market. We firmly
believe deliberations on this issue must lead to an
international instrument that effectively disciplines the
legal trade in conventional arms without interfering
with the right of States to manufacture, import, export,
transfer and retain such weapons.

The report of the Secretary-General also makes
some interesting points that should be highlighted. It
notes that the issue of ammunition is not adequately
addressed by the Programme of Action or by the
international marking and tracing instrument, but it
does form a key component of the small arms issue.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
assessment that the non-legally binding status of the
Programme of Action may imply lower prioritization
than is needed. We think that this is also the case with
the marking and tracing instrument.

On the issue of the destruction of surplus
ammunition and stockpile management, Brazil is aware
of the security and safety problems that may arise from
inadequate procedures, especially in post-conflict
situations. However, the determination of what
constitutes surplus quantities is the purview of the
competent national authorities, subject to the
respective national constitutional and legal systems, as
provided for in the Programme of Action.

There is a growing awareness in Brazil regarding
the importance of controlling firearms in all aspects,
given the impact on public security. In 2004, in
collaboration with State governments and organized
civil society, the Federal Government launched a major
nationwide disarmament campaign aimed at promoting
a culture of peace, raising public awareness on the
dangers inherent in the possession of weapons and
stimulating their voluntary disposal.

Between July 2004 and October 2005, 464,000
guns were collected by the campaign, which has also
been considered instrumental in reducing killings.
Before the campaign, homicide rates were constantly
increasing in Brazil. This trend was reversed in 2004,
with a reduction of 12 per cent in that ominous rate
from 2003 to 2006. In View of this positive result, the
Brazilian Government has recently relaunched the
campaign.

At the subregional and regional levels, there have
also been important developments. Along with the
reinforcement of internal legislative measures, Brazil is
progressively strengthening cooperation with its
MERCOSUR partners to curb the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

The implementation and further development of
the Programme of Action will enhance the importance
of multilateral cooperation in addressing global
challenges in this field through globally coordinated
responses. Despite national efforts, there are still
loopholes that allow the diversion of small arms and
light weapons to the illegal market. We think much
more remains to be done. For that reason Brazil will
continue to work with determination towards achieving
the goal of eliminating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons.

