Mr. Bull (Liberia): Mr. President, I congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. Your vast experience
and diplomatic skills assure us that the Council's
deliberations will proceed smoothly and successfully. I
also wish to commend Ambassador Li Zhaoxing of the
People's Republic of China for the able manner in which
he conducted the work of the Council during March.

My delegation expresses its profound gratitude to the
Secretary-General for the interest which he continues to
manifest in the Liberian conflict. We remain hopeful that

 
the noble objective of finding a peaceful resolution of the
conflict will soon be realized. The Secretary-General's
reports of 24 February 1995 (S/l995/158) and
10 April 1995 (S/1995/279) accurately assess the prevailing
situation in Liberia and do offer alternative courses of
action that should assist the Council in determining the
measures it should take to end the fratricidal conflict in my
country.

Since the eruption of the civil war more than five
years ago, it has been our solemn duty to represent, before
this body, the sentiments, hopes and aspirations of our
compatriots. On those occasions, we sought to convey their
anguish, frustration and outrage at the losses of innocent
lives, which now exceed 300,000, and at the fact that over
a million of our citizens have been forced to flee to
neighbouring countries as refugees.

During this period of national distress, the Liberian
people have appealed for and received assistance from the
international community, for which we are indeed most
grateful. In this regard, they have been and continue to be
appreciative of the peace-keeping initiative of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on the one
hand and the humanitarian relief assistance of the United
Nations and governmental and non-governmental
organizations on the other. Moreover, the United Nations
has lent its moral authority to several peace initiatives
undertaken by ECOWAS, thus giving concrete meaning to
Chapter VIII of the Charter, which encourages cooperation
with regional bodies in the pacific settlement of disputes.

The efforts of the United Nations and ECOWAS are
underpinned by the fact that a large majority of Liberians
have made known their preference for democratic
institutions and the rule of law, in opposition to the
coercive use of military force to achieve political power.
Sadly, this legitimate aspiration has been lost on the
factions in Liberia, which seem bent on acquiring power by
force of arms. To date, they have reneged on every
agreement signed, and have instead continued to subject the
people of Liberia to acts of terrorism and violence.

This sad state of affairs is a major impediment to the
demobilization and disarmament of combatants. We are
now left with the question of what is responsible for the
impasse, and what kind of pressure can be brought to bear
that will induce the factions to forgo their intransigent and
belligerent stance and seek political accommodation. Time
and again, concessions were made taking into consideration
the specific concerns of particular factions. Unfortunately,

 

this approach has served only to embolden them to make
new demands.

In this connection, it is clear that, until all forms of
support to these factions are curtailed, they will not
honour the agreements to which they are signatories. We
therefore welcome and support the proposed ECOWAS
summit - which will, inter alia, address this issue -
and we are certainly most grateful to the Security Council
for the resolution, which contains elements that will help
to ensure that the arms embargo is respected.

It is the prevailing view that the forthcoming summit
of ECOWAS will offer the last, best hope for the
Liberian parties to reach political accommodation and
fully implement the terms of the previous agreements,
including a cease-fire and installation of the Council of
State. Furthermore, if the parties fail to avail themselves
of this opportunity, the goodwill and support of the
international community will be eroded.

While we Liberians realize that this Organization,
indeed Member States, cannot continue to utilize scarce
resources to assist parties which are unwilling to resolve
their differences peacefully, it should be borne in mind
that the majority of Liberians desire to live in peace: it is
the armed factions which continue to hold the people
hostage. In such a case, should a defenceless people be
abandoned because of the unscrupulous acts of a few? We
strongly believe that, in this post-cold-war era, the
Organization has a moral obligation, and should consider
bold and imaginative measures to address these and other
relevant problems resulting from internal conflicts in
Member States.

We the Liberian people have suffered long enough
and yearn for normal life in our country. As before, we
can only appeal to the international community not to
leave us before a resolution of the conflict. The United
Nations has shown much courage and persistence in other
conflicts, and we wish it do so and believe that it can
exert a similar effort in Liberia.

