Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Thank you
very much, Madame President, for convening this
debate on the situation in Timor-Leste. I would like to
start by welcoming His Excellency Prime Minister Kay
Rala Xanana Gusmao and thanking him for his very
comprehensive statement. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her comprehensive
briefing, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/32).

We are encouraged by Prime Minister Xanana
Gusmao's statement that the overall situation in Timor-
Leste remains calm and stable and the country is well
on its way to long-term peace, stability and
development. We would like to record our appreciation
for all the political parties for their continued and
active engagement in the democratic processes. In
order to confront the various challenges that Timor-
Leste faces, it is crucial for all the political parties,
including the Government and the Frente
Revolucionaria do Timor-Leste Independente
opposition to fully cooperate with each other. This is
essential for cementing the foundations of nation-
building as well as for socio-economic development in
the country.

We are happy to note that the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL) will very soon assume primary
policing responsibilities for the entire country. More
importantly, the PNTL has demonstrated its ability to
incrementally assume policing responsibilities from the
United Nations police without any major difficulty.
This is essential for sustained peace and stability and
for a successful transition.

It is incumbent on the international community
and the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) to ensure that they remain steadfast in
their commitment towards supporting training and
capacity-building for the PNTL. We strongly support
the efforts of UNMIT to ensure that its police
component has the skill sets to support the PNTL in
capacity-building as well with their efforts at
institutional development. Moving ahead, it is critical
that there be a clear delineation of authority and
respective fields for the military and police, so that
they can effectively discharge their responsibilities
under the civilian Government.

The presidential and parliamentary elections
scheduled in the first half of 2012 will be major
milestones in the consolidation of the democratic
transition in Timor-Leste. Also, the elections will be a
litmus test of the PNTL readiness for the transition,
which is scheduled to take place by the end of 2012.
The United Nations must provide technical and
logistical support for the smooth conduct of these
elections in accordance with the priorities of the
Government.

Towards consolidating the progress made so far,
it is important that the international community
continue to extend assistance and support to the
Government's strategy for accelerating the
infrastructure development and reconstruction of the
country. We have noted with satisfaction that economic
growth continues to remain robust, and the 2011 State
budget has been quadrupled from that of the 2006
budget.

India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute to that
country's development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence, and where we see
complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of Timor-
Leste, including through assistance for the purchase of
equipment and materials related to socio-economic
development and in the human resources development
sector.

As UNMIT moves into a critical transition phase
prior to its departure and the Government assumes full
responsibility for various processes, the United Nations
system and agencies present in the field must work in a
coherent manner towards addressing the long-term
needs of the country in accordance with the priorities
set by the Government.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General for the extension of the UNMIT mandate for a
further period of 12 months, with the same
composition and current authorized level of personnel
while continuing with the gradual decrease of police
personnel.

The progress made so far gives us hope and
confidence that we are moving towards making
UNMIT a real success story. We appreciate the efforts
by UNMIT, the international community and the
bilateral partners in this regard.

Last but not least, I would like to express my
delegation's sincere appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haq and her
team for their dedication and hard work in supporting
the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

