Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate. I would also like to
congratulate you, Sir, and Indonesia for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
Lieutenant General Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and
Mr. Bjorn Holmberg for their insightful briefings.

We take this opportunity to pay tribute to all those
who have fallen serving under the United Nations flag,
including the 30 Blue Helmets who have lost their lives
in 2019.

The recent attacks against Blue Helmets
demonstrate the continued need to ensure that our
troops have the proper training, equipment and logistical
support necessary to implement mission mandates and
guarantee their safety and security. Those are also
commitments that we adhered to in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and in the action plan based on the Santos
Cruz report.

Guaranteeing the effectiveness of our peacekeeping
endeavours requires a comprehensive and integrated
approach that comprises politicalwill, financial support,
realistic mandates, adequate equipment, cooperation
from regional actors, peacebuilding activities and, of
course, tailored training.
When it comes to training, it is essential to
strengthen existing mechanisms to assess the concrete
needs of each mission, so that training efforts can
factor in the specific challenges found on the ground.
We are glad to see that the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System is becoming an important tool to
address missions' capacity gaps.

Brazil recognizes the current efforts by the
Secretariat to develop and review its field manuals. We
have been an active supporter of that process, including
by hosting and sending representatives to workshops.
In line with the shared commitments and United
Nations environmental policy on field missions, Brazil
has also shared with the Secretariat its guidelines for
environmental practices in missions under the aegis of
international organizations.

In some instances, in-mission training will also
be necessary to maintain the skills of troops and adapt
them to changing circumstances. Over the years,
Brazil has deployed mobile training teams to several
countries in Africa and Latin America. Most recently,
during the Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March,
Brazil was glad to pledge to deploy a team of experts
in jungle operations to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Brazil has shared its experience of more
than 70 years of participation in United Nations
peacekeeping with other troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries, including through
the partnerships of the Brazilian Peace Operations
Joint Training Centre. We have hosted different
courses in close cooperation with the United Nations.
Brazil will host the United Nations Buddy First Aid
Train-the-Trainer course in 2019 and the Senior
Mission Leaders Course in 2020. Brazil has also
provided training to African military contingents on
the management of engineering projects.

Brazil is fully committed to the women and peace
and security agenda, including by offering specific
training on this issue for both uniformed and civilian
peacekeepers. Recently, a Brazilian officer, Captain
Marcia Braga, was awarded the honour of Military
Gender Advocate of 2018 by the United Nations, in
recognition of her work as an adviser in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. She is an
outstanding example of the positive impact that women
can have in peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
The training that we offer must, above all, ensure
that peacekeeping operations have a transformative
impact on the ground. General Elias Martins Filho gave
a sound example of how a quick-impact project was
used to mitigate rising tension in a local community
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our own
experience in Haiti demonstrates that quick-impact
projects, programmatic activities and peacebuilding
activities can garner local support for the military and
police components of peacekeeping missions. United
Nations peacekeepers should receive adequate training
to play the role of early peacebuilders.

Improving peacekeeping operations requires a
collective effort. The Council can count on Brazil's full
commitment to attain that objective.

