Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset, I would like to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Council for
this month. Your neighbouring and friendly State has
helped to maintain and strengthen international peace
and security, especially in our mother continent, Africa,
and in my country, the Sudan, which has strong and
eternal ties to yours.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Mikhail
Margelov, Special Representative of the President of
the Russian Federation on the Sudan. I also welcome
the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Le Roy, and thank him for the
objective briefing with which he opened today's
meeting, held to discuss the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/352) on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

Today's discussion of the report coincides with an
important step forward in a relevant area - the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, embodied in the decision of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration pertaining to the Abyei issue. The
two partners' strong commitment to implementing the
decision is itself an affirmation of the Sudanese
people's ability to overcome differences and internal
disagreements both on their own and with the help of
the international community, and it affirms and
strengthens the Sudan's determination to choose unity.

It also further promotes the possibility of
achieving a speedy and permanent peace in Darfur,
owing in part to much-appreciated ongoing
international and regional efforts such as those exerted
by sisterly Qatar, and arising from a unified national
position aimed at strengthening the initiative of the
people of the Sudan. Regional sponsorship has also
been forthcoming through the Arab-African initiative
and the sincere and unified endeavour to support the
Sudanese people's efforts on the part of sisterly Libya
and Egypt. All of this has been accomplished under the
direct coordination and supervision of the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Bassole, whose mission we support and
whose success we are completely committed to.

As we have previously affirmed in this Council,
the Government of the Sudan stands by its commitment
to achieving comprehensive peace in Darfur as soon as
possible through an objective and goal-oriented
dialogue. We expect the Security Council to continue
to offer the necessary moral and political support for
the national, regional and international efforts under
way by sending strong, encouraging and supportive
messages to those at the negotiation table in order to
confirm its objective support for the option of a
political settlement. The Council should also send a
firm message to those boycotting the negotiations to
the effect that the peace train will not wait for them,
that the Council will not tolerate a military solution as
a way to fulfil their goals and demands, and that a
boycott is not an option.

However, the Security Council continues to throw
its full weight behind peacekeeping rather than
peacemaking, as if peace were supposed to emerge
from a vacuum. National and regional efforts have
been dedicated to creating this peace, and what we
need now is the Council's support for the political
process. It is important to note that a permanent
member of this very Council, which I need not mention
by name, continues to offer safe haven in its capital to
one rebel leader who has continually and repeatedly
challenged the international will and the peace option
by boycotting the political process and endorsing an
exclusively military solution.

We appreciate the genuine and sincere efforts of
UNAMID, deployed under the leadership of Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy and Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support Susana Malcorra. We also
appreciate the African Union endorsement in all its
logistic and technical aspects the Tripartite Mechanism
established by the Council. The latest developments
surrounding the Mechanism discussed most recently at
the sixth meeting of the Tripartite Committee held on
12 July in Khartoum. At that meeting, as at the five
previous meetings, the complete commitment and
cooperation of the Sudanese Government in facilitating
the deployment of UNAMID were reaffirmed. The
sixth meeting of the Tripartite Committee further
confirmed that the overarching goal of the Mechanism
is to deploy 92 per cent of the mission's troops and
forces by December 2009, and highlighted the
seriousness, cooperation and ambition that characterize
the Committee's meetings.

As we informed the Council only a few days ago,
the last meeting of the Mechanism addressed many
important issues that have been discussed in today's

meeting - and some that were not, such as aerial
operations, including the provision of a landing base
for tactical helicopters - such as mechanisms for

expediting deployment procedures and operations,
including the issuing of visas.

We must recall that the Sudan is a developing
country. We expect the Council to see the situation in
its entirety, rather than merely focusing on a dozen or
so persons who experienced delays in receiving visas,
as if that were the result of a Sudanese policy of non-
cooperation or to delay entry, which is completely
untrue. We have pledged to facilitate the deployment of
personnel. We stand by that pledge and reaffirm it
today. We will do our best to ensure that the mission
deploys as required as soon as possible.

The meeting also discussed the facilitation of
mechanisms and procedures pertaining to local
procurement for the mission and customs clearance, as
has been mentioned at today's meeting. I simply wish
to cite examples that reveal the full picture. We hope
that the Council will first support the Tripartite
Mechanism by welcoming its achievements to date in
terms of the deployment of the Hybrid Operation.

In the context of serious cooperation with regard
to the deployment of the Operation, we would also like
to refer to the manner in which the humanitarian aspect
has been addressed. We would remind the Council that,
in recent briefings on the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs has stated that the implementation of the
humanitarian protocol with the United Nations is
proceeding smoothly. He has also said that the adoption
of a fast-track approach has contributed greatly to
speeding up access to those in need of humanitarian
assistance, especially after the Government of the Sudan
extended the protocol in November to facilitate the
operations of humanitarian agencies and organizations.
In addition, as the Council is aware, a high-level
ministerial committee is in place to focus solely on
facilitating access for humanitarian operations.

With regard to the references in the report to
challenges to humanitarian efforts, such as attacks on
convoys, the Security Council is fully aware that some
armed groups in Darfur have begun to target
humanitarian convoys solely to steal and loot goods. I
would also mention the various clashes between armed
groups and between cattle herders, farmers and
nomads. All of that indicates that the causes of the
conflict in Darfur are all rooted in the scarcity of water.
That of course has an impact on the security situation
and, in turn, on the lifelines of humanitarian aid. In that
regard, we emphasize the important role being played
by police units. Sudanese police forces, working in
close cooperation with the Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
continue to work in many places to establish safe
corridors and guarantee the security of humanitarian
convoys.

As usual, some speakers have referred to the
so-called aspect of accountability. With regard to the
so-called issue of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), the Government of the Sudan, which as the
Council knows is not a party to the ICC, has a well-
known position that does not need reiterating here. It is
final and non-reversible. Major regional organizations
have taken a stand on this issue - including, as I have
mentioned, the African Union, which is both a strategic
and a basic partner for the United Nations in Darfur,
the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the League of Arab States, the
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, and
regional organizations comprising two thirds of the
Members of this Organization. All of them have issued
numerous decisions and expressed positions that have
convincingly reaffirmed that this heinous legal
decision is merely political posturing that has nothing
to do with bringing justice to Darfur or establishing
peace there. It is a decision that targets the Sudan's
unity and integrity as an independent State.

There is no need to reaffirm again today that the
Sudanese Government has its own national judicial
system capable of achieving justice and accountability.
We hope that we do not have to continue to repeat that
at the Council. We have fully welcomed and always
cooperated with the African Union's Panel of the Wise,
led by former South African President Mbeki. All we
ask of the Council is that it work to overcome all
hurdles to the political process in order to enable it to
take its course. A political settlement is the primary
solution to this issue.

With regard to Chad and the situation on the
border, the Security Council has received several
letters from the Government of the Sudan. In those
letters, we have regularly informed the Council of an
ongoing series of hostile acts, cross-border attacks and
violations. On 16 July, those acts culminated in Chad's
carrying out air raids inside Sudanese territory. We
reported that action to the Council last week. I would
like to reaffirm to the Council that the Government of
the Sudan has had enough and is running out of
patience. We are doing our best to continue to act
rationally and to exercise self-restraint in the face of
the transgressions of our neighbour Chad. However,
patience has its limits. The Sudanese Government
would also like to reaffirm that it will continue to
assert its full, indivisible and legitimate right to deal
with those acts of aggression and violations and to
respond to them in a way that ensures that they will not
be repeated and that preserves the security and safety
of the citizens of the Sudan.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the complete
commitment of the Sudanese Government to unlimited
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union in the deployment of the Hybrid Operation and
in establishing lasting peace in Darfur as soon as
possible. As we have always affirmed to the Council,
achieving a lasting and comprehensive political
settlement of the conflict in Darfur is of the utmost
priority for the Government of the Sudan.

Darfur is a historic part of the Sudan. The people
of Darfur are dear to the hearts of the Sudanese people;
indeed, they are part of the Sudanese people.
Therefore, we care deeply about their safety and
security and about ensuring that they have access to
assistance and can return to their villages and homes in
order to resume their ordinary lives.

We renew our appeal to the Security Council to
throw its full weight behind the political process and to
support this operation and this process in every
possible way in order to achieve a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Darfur conflict. Thus, we can
close this chapter of Sudanese history forever.

