Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by expressing the United States'
deepest condolences to the victims and the families of
those killed in the heinous terrorist attack at Istanbul's
international airport yesterday. We remain steadfast in
our support for Turkey and all of our friends and allies
as we continue to confront the scourge and threat of
terrorism. The United States welcomes the Security
Council's unanimous vote today to extend the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for an additional year.
This decision comes at a critical time in Mali's history
and for the future of United Nations peacekeeping.

Over the past year alone in Mali, 27 MINUSMA
peacekeepers have been killed. Over the past year
alone, 112 have been wounded. Ten ofthose attacks used
improvised explosive devices that targeted MINUSMA
convoys. United Nations peacekeepers are increasingly
being called upon to fulfil complex mandates in
dangerous environments that include asymmetric
threats. This requires more prompt, effective and
agile responses by the United Nations system and
Member States deploying or providing capabilities
to successfully operate in such environments. It also
requires clarity from the Security Council.

In light of the volatile security situation,
particularly in central and northern Mali, the Security
Council's decision to reinforce the mission's vital
protection of civilians and stabilization mandate should
help to rationalize the mission's posture with the
prevailing security environment. The Security Council
is also requesting that the Secretary-General enhance
MINUSMA cooperation with regional security
initiatives, such as the Sahel Group of Five, so that the
Mission has greater awareness of the broader regional
security dynamics in which it operates.

The Security Council took an important step today
by reconciling the current MINUSMA mandate with its
security environment and by calling on the Secretary-
General and Member States to urgently give MINUSMA
the capabilities it needs to enable the Mission's more
mobile, proactive and robust posture in pursuit of its
mandate. The resolution emphasizes that MINUSMA
must anticipate, deter and counter threats, including
asymmetric threats, to protect civilians and United
Nations personnel. This means that MINUSMA must
take robust and active steps, including direct operations
if necessary, against serious and credible threats.

When MINUSMA is attacked or threatened as it
carries out its mandate, MINUSMA is expected to act,
and we are expected to ensure that MINUSMA has the
ability to do so effectively. This is not ambiguous, as
some have suggested; it is rational, and it is necessary
when a mission is deployed in this kind of environment.
It is a critical step forward for this peacekeeping
mission.

Today, the Security Council also affirmed
that the gradual restoration and extension of State
authority across Mali - and particularly the reformed
and reconstituted Malian defence and security
forces - would contribute to the stability that all
Malians seek. This would also help to deter the
terrorist threat, which continues to claim the lives of
Malian security forces and those supporting the Malian
people, namely, the French forces and MINUSMA
peacekeepers, to achieve the peace they have so long
desired. We certainly pay tribute to their sacrifices in
Mali.

The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
was signed over a year ago, and yet today it remains
largely unimplemented. Failure to move forward and to
take the political risks necessary for the greater good of
Mali's enduring peace creates openings for spoilers and
for terrorists. While the United States is encouraged
by the recent agreement among the signatories on the
interim authorities, as well as by President Keita's
decision to appoint a high-level representative on
implementation, we continue to urge - as resolution
2295 (2016) rightly underscores - that all the
signatories immediately implement the broad range
of institutional, security, development and defence
provisions ofthe agreement. Too much time has passed,
patience is wearing thin, political will is dissipating
and implementation is urgently necessary.

