Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, I would like to sincerely thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's important debate and
to congratulate you on your country's presidency of the
Security Council this month. It gives me great honour
to deliver the following statement on behalf of the Arab
Group, except for Iraq, followed by a statement in my
national capacity.

The Arab Group decided to participate in this
important debate because the issues deliberated today
strongly concern the Arab region. We wanted to ensure
that our positions on those issues, which threaten
security and stability in the region, are heard. Today
our region suffers from serious challenges posed
by several existing crises and conflicts, the spread
of extremism and terrorism and interference in the
internal affairs of Arab States. The current situation,
which has transformed the Arab region into an arena
for regional and international clashes, religious and
sectarian conflicts and a safe haven for terrorist groups,
cannot continue. All those issues led Arab leaders to
hold an emergency meeting in Mecca at the end of May.

The declaration of the thirtieth annual Arab Summit,
which was held in Tunisia on 31 March, underscored
the Arab efforts to addressing the region's security,
economic and development issues in our mutual pursuit
of protecting our communities and shared interests. In
that context, allow me to underscore five measures that
Arab leaders determined must be implemented in order
to achieve regional security and stability.

First, they called for stepping up efforts to end all
forms of tension and conflict. We will continue our
mutual efforts in accordance with a unified vision to
strengthen Arab solidarity in securing security and
stability for Arab countries and peoples, as well as
improving their capacity to address political, security,
economic and cultural challenges. That requires taking
the lead in accelerating efforts aimed at reaching
comprehensive political settlements forthe current crisis.
In that regard, we stress that establishing security,
peace and stability in the Middle East region depends
essentially on achieving a just and comprehensive
settlement to the Palestinian question and the entire
Arab-Israeli conflict. That requires Israel's withdrawal
from all the territories it has occupied on June 1967.
It also requires the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the 4 June 1967 borders, as well as putting
an end to all forms of religious extremism exercised
by Israel, the occupying Power, in the holy sites of
Al-Quds, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and stopping
its attempts to alter the existing historical and legal
status, which would increase tension in the region.

In that connection, the Arab Group affirms that
the Palestinian question remains central to collective
Arab action. The Arab Group is determined to continue
efforts to relaunch serious and effective negotiations
within a specific timeline, so as to address final-status
issues, including Palestinian refugees, in accordance
with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

The Arab Group will also continue to work on
ending the crises and challenges facing Libya, Syria,
Yemen, the Sudan and Somalia, as well as supporting
reconstruction efforts in Iraq. In that context, we stress
the importance of compliance with international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as they are fundamental
to achieving peace in the region.

In that context, the Arab Group stresses the
importance of upholding international resolutions
relating to the occupied Syrian Golan. The Group
rejects any action aimed at changing the legal and
demographic status of the Golan.

Secondly, Arab leaders called for protecting the
region from foreign interference and ensuring that
all States in the region respect the principles of good
neighbourliness and refrain from the use or threat of
force and from violating the sovereignty of States.

The Arab Group reaffirms its rejection and
condemnation of targeting cities and territories of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles. We
also stress that the cooperation between Arab States
and the Islamic Republic of Iran must be based on the
principles of good neighbourliness, non-interference
in the internal affairs of States and the non-use or
threat to use force under international law, as well as
refraining from any practices or actions that undermine
confidence-building and threaten regional security
and stability.

The Arab Group therefore condemns the Iranian
Government's policy and ongoing interference in
Arab affairs, which is fuelling religious and sectarian
conflicts. In that regard, I would like to stress the need
for Iran to refrain from supporting the groups that
fuel such conflicts, especially in Arab Gulf States.
We demand that Iran stop supporting and financing
militias and armed parties in Arab States, particularly
with regard to its interference in Yemen. We also
demand that Iran stop supporting the anti-Government
militias in Yemen and supplying them with weapons,

and refrain from turning Yemen into a platform for
launching missiles against Yemen's neighbouring
States or threatening maritime navigation in the Bab
Al-Mandab Strait and the Red Sea. Those acts have had
a negative impact on the security and stability of Yemen
and of the region as a whole. They are also considered a
clear violation of resolution 2216 (2015).

Thirdly, Arab leaders have stressed strengthening
security coordination among Arab States and
intensifying international efforts aimed at combating
all forms of extremism and terrorism, including the
eradication of their sources of financing. The Arab
Group will continue to promote the values of tolerance,
moderation and human rights and will counter all forms
of sectarianism, exclusion and marginalization, which
are exploited by terrorist groups and their supporters
to disseminate their ideologies. Furthermore, we renew
our support for the promotion of interfaith dialogue as
a critical factor for spreading the values of tolerance,
human solidarity and the acceptance of the other.

Fourthly, Arab leaders have highlighted the
importance of taking concrete measures to implement
international resolutions relating to the establishment
of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. We also support the major conference
that the United Nations will hold on that issue, the first
session of which will be held in November and chaired
by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. We urge all the
parties concerned to participate in the conference in
good faith so as to establish a stable security system
that achieves the collective security of the States of the
region, without discrimination.

Fifthly, Arab leaders have signalled the need to
focus on achieving inclusive development to improve
the situation of the region through intensified
collective efforts aimed at enhancing and stimulating
economic cooperation and by investing in the natural,
financial and human resources of Arab countries. We
also reaffirm the need to intensify efforts aimed at
increasing the volume of trade exchange and launching
investment projects, which could contribute to forming
an Arab economic bloc.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Arab Group, we
stress that the League of Arab States, as an incubator
of joint Arab action, is best positioned to contribute
to achieving the desired settlement and reconciliation
for the crisis in the region. We therefore call on the
Security Council and on the Organization as a whole
to strengthen their consultations and meetings with
the Arab Group, especially when discussing Arab
issues, in order to reach the appropriate solutions and
settlements for the region's crises and conflicts. The
Group expresses its deep appreciation for the diligent
efforts made by the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy to resolve these crises and promote stability in
the region.

Allow me now to speak in my national capacity to
mention some points that require a response in order to
clarify the facts pertaining to them, as we believe that it
is important to do so in order to achieve the objectives
of this meeting.

We regret what we heard today, with regard to
claims and allegations against my country, on the
developments that took place in Aden. We categorically
reject those claims in their entirety. It is worth noting
that, in an official statement, my country has expressed
its deep concern about the armed clashes in Aden
between the legitimate Yemeni Government and the
Southern Transitional Council. My country has called
for calm and non-escalation and for safeguarding the
safety and security of Yemeni citizens. That is the same
position we adopted as a main partner in the coalition
led by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Moreover, the United Arab Emirates, as a partner
in the coalition, will make every effort to de-escalate
matters in southern Yemen. My country was part of the
joint team, in cooperation with the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, that sought to safeguard the national institutions
in Aden when the Southern Transitional Council was
formed. The team sought to coordinate and achieve
calm among the various parties. That is the expected
role from States that place the safety and security of the
region as their primary objective.

We flatly reject the allegations that were made
today. We would like to remind the Council that the
United Arab Emirates, based on an official request from
the legitimate Government of Yemen and as a member
of the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen, led
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, has taken decisive
measures against Houthi hostilities and in support of
the legitimate Government. The United Arab Emirates
has made great sacrifices in that regard, which serves to
refute all the claims that, regretfully, were voiced today
in the context of disagreement and division that the
United Arab Emirates does not consider itself party to.

We must not forget the important role that my
country has played in the liberation of Aden and most of
the territories that were occupied following the Houthi
coup d'etat. The United Arab Emirates has thereby
prevented terrorist groups from taking advantage of
the security vacuum during these critical and difficult
stages. My country has managed to play a great role
in rebuilding liberated areas, thereby compensating, in
many instances, for the weak performance, management
and governance that the Government has suffered from,
as attested by observers.

My country has also offered generous financial
and technical support and has managed to neutralize
the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.
We have also supported efforts made by the coalition to
protect the freedom of navigation in the Bab Al-Mandab
Strait and the Red Sea. We did all that despite the fact
that the legitimate Government in Yemen was unable
to manage its own affairs and to perform properly, as
well as despite the atmosphere of rampant political and
regional internal division that the Government was
unable to resolve through constructive dialogue and
reaching out to all Yemeni stakeholders.

We would like to reiterate our call to all the parties
involved to conduct a responsible and serious dialogue
in order to resolve all internal differences and to work on
preserving unity at this decisive stage, so as to maintain
security and stability. All those attending the meeting
today agree with that approach towards achieving peace
and security in Yemen and the region. We therefore do
not think it is appropriate for the Yemeni Government
to lay blame for its political and administrative failures
on the United Arab Emirates, as that is based on the
concept that offence is the best defence, which was
exemplified in its negative statement today.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates would like
once again to urge all the parties to focus on the joint
objectives in Yemen, as well as and to underscore our
support for the efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen.

