Mr. Petritsch (spoke in French): This is the fifth
time that I have had the honour of addressing the
Security Council. Given the tragic events that took
place 10 days ago in New York; Washington, DC; and
Pennsylvania, one might wonder if perhaps there are
not more important questions to be discussed than the
implementation of the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. Many have stated,
however, that last week's terrorist attacks prove the
truth of the idea of an inevitable clash of civilizations.
Indeed, many had put forward the same argument
during the horrible war that ravaged Bosnia and
Herzegovina until about six years ago.

(spoke in English)

I firmly believe that the raison d'etre of this
world body - the United Nations - is to work
actively against this flawed concept, and I
wholeheartedly agree with the Secretary-General's
assertion in today's New York Times that the United
Nations is uniquely positioned to advance this effort.
Having served now for two years as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, I am
deeply convinced that the Dayton peace process
demonstrates that the comprehensive engagement of
the international community to heal the wounds of
conflict in the Balkans is, in fact, working. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still a country with a very delicate
religious, cultural and social fabric. However, its post-
war society is about to pull together the strength
needed for this State to survive.

In this context, I believe it should be noted that
the work which the international community is carrying
out in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to strengthen
State institutions and establish the rule of law, which
was so obviously absent during and immediately after
the war, is also contributing to the overall fight against
global terrorism.

Since I last reported to the Security Council on 22
March, there has been considerable progress in this
work, which is predicated on empowering the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and bringing the country
ever closer to the European mainstream.

At this juncture, let me recapitulate some of the
more security-related aspects of our mandate to
strengthen the State institutions. In January 2000, l
imposed the State Border Service law, establishing an
institution which effectively addresses the wartime
legacy of fragmented, porous and unprotected borders,
patrolled by local police forces which were often
complicit in cross-border crime. Since then, the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) has taken on responsibility for setting up,
training and monitoring the State Border Service. The
Service currently covers 75 per cent of the border of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Full deployment is scheduled
for the end of September 2002, pending budget
allocations.

In the absence of secure State identity documents,
my Office - the Office of the High Representative -
initiated two years ago, in conjunction with the
domestic authorities, the so-called common identity
protection system, or Citizens Identity Protection
System (CIPS), a package of legal and administrative
steps which, among other things, will significantly
improve Bosnia and Herzegovina's border regime.
Under CIPS, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have its first
integrated civil registry. Bosnian authorities can then
compare the current passport database with the civil
registry of valid Bosnian residents and isolate
suspicious cases. This represents a tool that will allow
Bosnian authorities to address concerns about their
ability to deal with the phenomenon of cross-border
crime. CIPS will also create a State-level network
operations centre containing a blacklist of
internationally wanted persons, as compiled by
Interpol.

CIPS will deliver a range of additional benefits to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will introduce a secure
identity card which meets International Civil Aviation
Organization standards for use as an international
travel document. Most importantly, the information
technology supporting the CIPS project will increase
the confidence of immigration authorities that Bosnian
identity documents are well-managed and secure. We
hope that this will be a first step towards easing visa
restrictions for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
travelling abroad.

As early as February, my Office had proposed to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives
that the mandate of the Naturalization Commission,
which reviews cases of wartime naturalization, be
extended so as to address any irregularities in
citizenship granted to foreigners during the war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I reiterated this request to
Prime Minister Zlatko Lagumdzija this week when I
discussed with him the urgent need for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to establish an anti-terrorism task force in
his country.

Prime Minister Lagumdzija is the leader of the
Alliance for Change, a coalition of non-nationalist
parties that formed Governments at the State and
Federation level at the beginning of this year. The
Alliance groups together political parties that have
significant ideological differences. However, it is held
together by a common determination to replace the
failed nationalist agenda with a raft of policies aimed at
creating a modern European State.

The new, non-nationalist authorities have asserted
themselves, and they demand greater respect and a
partnership with the international community.
Partnership is a necessary and welcome first step
towards ownership. Indeed, I am encouraged to see that
the Government is embracing the ownership concept I
articulated when I arrived in Bosnia and Herzegovina
two years ago.

I responded to this new mood when I proposed
the establishment of what we call a consultative
partnership forum. In this forum I have already started
to discuss and resolve urgent issues with the Council of
Ministers, reflecting the principle of ownership. The
partnership forum is not aimed at replacing existing
mechanisms of Government. It will facilitate
interaction between the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on the one hand, and the international
community, on the other.

I am now preparing for the inaugural meeting of a
civic forum, which will extend informal consultations
to intellectuals, business people, media personalities
and religious and community leaders. The object of this
is to promote active citizenship. Through the civic
forum I intend to give the country's recovering civil
society a more active role in the public policy
discourse.

I have already spoken about the ruling coalition's
determination to join the European structures. Allow
me to draw the Council's attention to the passage of an
election law by the State Parliament on 23 August.
This legislation had been stalled for years because of
chronic parliamentary obstructionism. I had
consistently argued in the past that Bosnia and
Herzegovina should pass this most basic of laws
necessary for a democratic State, prior to being
allowed to join the Council of Europe. Over the
summer, a majority of deputies decided to support the
law on the grounds that, whatever its limitations, it
provides the necessary mechanism for holding free and
fair elections. Their decision represents what I may
describe as principled pragmatism, and it points
towards a promising legislative future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

While saluting this pragmatism on the part of
Bosnia and Herzegovina politicians in securing passage
of the election law, I would also like to commend the
efforts of the Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which played a crucial role in piloting
this legislation onto the statute book. As a
consequence, I believe that Bosnia's application for
membership in the Council of Europe should now be
favourably and rapidly considered.
Let me turn to another burning issue - the state
of the economy. Part of the changing circumstances in
Bosnia and Herzegovina involves the evolution of a
double transition. In addition to the shift from war to
peace, Bosnia and Herzegovina is engaged in a
transition from a communist command-driven economy
to a free market; and, indeed, in many cases, the two
are intimately interconnected. For example, the old
payment bureaux, which we successfully abolished at
the beginning of the year, were remnants of the
command economy that stifled enterprise and were also
being used to finance the nationalist parties that were
dominant during the war. Now, a modern commercial
banking system is swiftly taking root in the country.

However, in the last six months, overall economic
progress has, unfortunately, been patchy.

August should have seen the selection of a
telecommunications company to take up the third
mobile phone licence for Bosnia and Herzegovina, a
crucial step forward in a strategic economic sector. The
Communications Regulatory Agency, established by
my decision of March 2001, had organized a tender
that required the successful bidder to invest up to $200
million in a new, State-wide mobile phone network.
The tender had to be abandoned when two of the four
foreign companies that had submitted bids pulled out in
the final stages, citing uncertainty over the Council of
Ministers' attitude towards incoming investors.

The failure of the GSM. tender was of course a
self-inflicted wound. What Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs is the total, immediate and professional
commitment of its leaders to long-term economic
reform, not short-term political calculation. My Office
will seek to encourage that commitment.

There is a danger that unless the pace of reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina rapidly increases, it will be
left behind and will remain the weak link in the
regional chain. Bosnia and Herzegovina's overall
economic growth, projected to be around 5 per cent
this year, continues to disappoint. According to the
World Bank, it would take another six to eight years of
annual growth of 6 per cent for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to achieve a level of credit worthiness that
would be sufficient to finance future development. On
the positive side, it has become increasingly apparent
that the Alliance parties are beginning to realize that
any further delay in instituting real economic reform is
not an option. Citizens are impatient, and will not
allow their representatives to drag their feet prior to the
elections to be held late next year.
The Federation recorded solid growth in the first
half of 2001, whereas the economy of the Republika
Srpska actually contracted in the same period.
However, the fact that growth of any sort has been
achieved this year, in the face of declining donor aid
and a weak growth of the global economy, may be
viewed as a promising indication that the economy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is beginning to function under
its own steam, albeit at a minimal level.

The post-war recovery of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has depended from the very beginning on
the return of refugees and displaced persons to their
homes. According to Human Rights Watch, a
breakthrough in the return process was achieved last
year, and this positive trend was maintained during the
first half of 2001. In the first six months of 2001, there
were more than 35,000 so-called minority returns, an
85 per cent increase over the same period last year.
These figures point to an unstoppable momentum. I
View this as a result of activities undertaken by the
Reconstruction and Return Task Force (RRTF). The
RRTF is the umbrella group of agencies that includes
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the Stabilization Force
(SFOR), the European Commission, the World Bank,
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and the OSCE. The Task Force operates
under the auspices of the Office of the High
Representative, making common and productive use of
information, facilities and personnel.

The process of return depends on economic and
social sustainability * the reopening of shops,
factories, schools and so on. As communities recover
they become better able to absorb larger numbers of
returnees. By applying consistent and focused pressure
on recalcitrant authorities, the RRTF has been
remarkably successful in boosting the number of
people who have been able to go home. Let me take
this opportunity to underline that the presence of SFOR
on the ground remains a precondition for those efforts
to be brought to a successful end.

Work has also continued apace to create a
political environment that is conducive to return. By
the end of July, both entities' Constitutional
Commissions, established by me in January to
implement last year's Constitutional Court ruling on
the constituency of peoples, had adopted provisional
reports on draft amendments to their respective entity
Constitutions. These amendments will ensure that no
citizen living in either entity will experience inequality
because of ethnicity or religion. This autumn will
likely see an animated debate over the adoption of
these amendments by the respective entity Parliaments.

The work of the Constitutional Commissions also
demonstrates how the Dayton process can be adapted
to meet changing needs. If one day the representatives
of the peoples and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
decide that they want to amend the core annex of the
Peace Agreement, the Constitution, they can do so.

As the country's constitutional settlement is
modified through consensus and as politicians turn
their attention to pressing issues of economic reform, I
have acted decisively to quell any recurrence of
separatism.

On 6 April, I placed the Hercegovacka Bank, the
biggest bank in Herzegovina and the second biggest in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, under provisional
administration after I had been presented with clear
indications that the bank was being used to finance
illicitly a variety of nationalist projects, including the
attempt to launch the so-called Croat self-rule,
specifically condemned by the Security Council in its
statement of 22 March 2001. The extremely violent
reaction by a well-organized mob to the establishment
of the provisional administration indicates that we went
for the right target.

The bank's provisional administrator has spent
the summer examining the books and retrieving
thousands and thousands of documents which the
former management sought unsuccessfully to erase
from computer files. She will shortly report her
findings.

In March, as a corollary of the self-rule project,
thousands of Croat soldiers deserted from the
Federation army. By mid-June a majority had re-
enlisted. The hard-line Croat politicians, who had
exhorted troops to leave the barracks with the promise
that their salaries would continue to be paid and even
enhanced, were unable to deliver on this promise. With
their failure, one of the most serious challenges to the
Dayton peace process was overcome.

While standing firm against regressive
nationalism, my office has made consistent and
increasingly successful efforts to reach out to moderate
Croat leaders and to respond to the legitimate concerns
of the Croat constituent people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In May, Serb extremists and local thugs attacked
local and international participants at the ground-
breaking ceremonies for the reconstruction of historic
mosques in Trebinje and in Banja Luka, which had
been demolished under the wartime regime of the
Republika Srpska. One of the participants at the Banja
Luka ceremony subsequently died of his injuries. The
Republika Srpska authorities conspicuously failed to
maintain public security during these well-orchestrated
outbreaks of nationalist violence.

After consultations with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, I asked Republika Srpska authorities to
dismiss immediately several high-ranking police
officials who had failed in their professional
obligations. I also summoned the Republika Srpska
leadership - the President, Vice-President, Prime
Minister and relevant ministers - to Sarajevo, where I
made it clear to them that if they did not make
arrangements for the ceremony to proceed, with
complete security and appropriate dignity, and if
significant changes were not made in the Republika
Srpska's social and political structures, there would be
serious consequences for the future of the entity. I laid
out the steps that must be taken in order to change this
regressive mindset, unfortunately prevalent in the
Republika Srpska, and the steps that must be taken to
find and punish the culprits in the violence of May and
to ensure that such violence is never repeated.

In addressing the violence surrounding the
mosque ceremonies and the flawed political
environment which produced it, I received the
forthright support of UNMIBH. The Mission has also
been at the forefront of efforts by the international
community to ensure that those responsible for the
violence of May are identified and prosecuted. Finally,
on 18 June, the cornerstone was laid at the Banja Luka
mosque site, with the President and Prime Minister of
the Republika Srpska in attendance.

On 11 July, a ceremony to mark the sixth
anniversary of the massacre at Srebrenica was held
without incident. Security was provided by SFOR in
cooperation with local police from the Republika
Srpska and the International Police Task Force (IPTF).

Meanwhile, I am able to report two promising
developments regarding the stance the Republika
Srpska is taking on military issues. At the end of July, I
communicated to the Republika Srpska and Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities that the defence
annex to the Special Parallel Relations Agreement that
they had just signed had no legal effect, as they had
failed to consult my Office, as required by this very
agreement. Delegations from the Republika Srpska, the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and my Office met last
month and agreed on the way forward to the conclusion
of a future defence annex.

In July, the Bosnia and Herzegovina presidency
formally applied for the membership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the Partnership for Peace programme
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
This will require a joint military structure that closely
coordinates the operations of Federation and Republika
Srpska armed forces. This in turn represents a viable
long-term military strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is particularly encouraging that the
initiative for this has come from the tripartite
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Next week the Republika Srpska National
Assembly will decide whether or not to adopt
legislation formalizing and facilitating the cooperation
of the Republika Srpska with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Regardless
of the outcome, the Republika Srpska has a standing
obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal, an obligation
that it has failed to honour so far. Passage of the bill,
though technically unnecessary, would represent an
important acknowledgement on the part of the
authorities of the Republika Srpska of the fact that their
entity cannot continue as the only holdout in the region
against the process of international justice. It is high
time the remaining fugitives from justice, beginning
with Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, were
apprehended and transferred to The Hague. Inasmuch
as these and other indictees have been able to find
refuge inside and outside Bosnia and Herzegovina,
routinely travelling to and from neighbouring
countries, I am seeking to promote a regional response
to the apprehension of these fugitives.

One bright spot in regional cooperation has been
the succession agreement signed in Vienna on 29 June
by the five former Yugoslav republics. Under my
separate mandate for this succession issue, I oversaw
and mediated the negotiations and acted as a witness to
the signature of the agreement. With this treaty, the
first agreement since the end of the old Yugoslavia to
be concluded among all five States, the protracted legal
dismantling of the old Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is brought to a close. It allows the
successor States to gain access to their agreed portion
of the former Yugoslavia's assets, an important
boost - approximately $125 million in the case of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - to their respective State
finances. I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, who graciously accepted my
proposal of being the depository of this agreement.
Improving State and entity finances,
professionalizing the civil service, promoting the work
of independent regulatory agencies, and establishing a
modern legal framework: all of this will endow Bosnia
and Herzegovina with institutions that can maintain
stability and, in due course, take the country into
Europe. In the last six months, important progress has
been made in developing and strengthening strategic
institutions.

The Independent Judicial Commission, which I
established last December, replacing the United
Nations-led Judicial System Assessment Programme,
has the task of strengthening the independent judiciary
of the country. It aims to reform the appointment
process for judges and other court personnel. It is
reviewing the qualifications and conduct of all judges
and prosecutors, and it is introducing initiatives
designed to improve the training offered to personnel
throughout the judicial system over the next 18 months.

Work is also under way to overhaul the civil
service, freeing bureaucracy from political influence
and raising its standards. We are pushing for the swift
adoption of a civil service law prepared by my Office
that will professionalize the state civil service, making
merit the main criterion for appointment and
promotion.

In the spring of this year, I was asked by the
Foreign Ministers of the Contact Group, as well as by
the Foreign Ministers of the European Union, to
oversee the streamlining of civil international peace
implementation structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with a view to improving efficiency and coordination.
This is especially important in light of our desire to
foster local ownership.

The present level of international commitment
cannot be sustained. Donor fatigue has already led to a
strategic reduction in actual and projected aid. Equally
important: as long as the international community
determines politics in Bosnia and Herzegovina to such
a large degree, it will inhibit the mature growth of
domestic institutions. We thus need to develop, in
coordination with the entire international community
and in consultation with the local Government, a plan
that will set the stage for the final phase of peace
implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me
emphasize the need to focus on the end state, rather
than merely on an end date. However, it is imperative
that we set benchmarks and develop action plans for
our core activities to improve focus and cooperation.

Since my last report to the Security Council, my
Office has carried out a comprehensive overview of the
international community's activities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative
has sought and received proposals from other
international agencies. The United Nations mandate
given to me, the High Representative, under resolution
1256 (1999) obligates me to take an inclusive approach
to our streamlining efforts. At the meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
last week, I invited representatives from UNMIBH,
UNHCR, the United Nations Development Programme,
OSCE and SFOR to present their views. In its
communique, the Steering Board has tasked my Office
with identifying core requirements and functions for
the international community, reviewing tasks, mandates
and field presence, and presenting options for a follow-
up police monitoring mission. This plan of action will
be presented for consideration by the Steering Board at
its December 2001 meeting.

Let me state in this context that I appreciate and
welcome the presence of Jacques Paul Klein, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, at this
very important meeting.

In concluding, I would like to stress the vision
that the international community must adhere to in its
efforts. Our task is not to work on a mere exit strategy;
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs an entry strategy into
European structures. Membership in the Council of
Europe is a first step. The European Union has further
defined the path with its Stabilisation and Association
Agreements.

In my address to the Council, I have gone into
some detail in order to demonstrate the at times
complex and technical nature of our engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, I believe that these
are indispensable elements of our mission to help build
a viable and truly multi-ethnic State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that can take its rightful place in the
European family of States.

