Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their briefings. Let me also thank all those United Nations colleagues who are working very hard to get the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) stood up and to deal with the ongoing issues there. Despite competing priorities and, indeed, the complications and death toll from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we have continued to see the civilian-led Government of the Sudan take forward the implementation of the key transitional benchmarks, as set out in their Constitutional Document. In particular, we welcome the recent progress made on legal reforms that strengthen human rights across the Sudan, as well as the appointment of civilian governors. On the latter, we welcome very much the inclusion of a number of women in those appointments. So that is all very positive. But the Sudan still faces a multitude of challenges. In the last year alone, the people of the Sudan have had to contend with unprecedented flooding, desert locusts and the first polio outbreak in more than a decade. Inflation exceeds 160 per cent, and humanitarian need, unfortunately, is increasing. COVID-19 has only exacerbated those challenges. It is clear that the Sudanese people cannot face those challenges alone, and it would be unreasonable for any of us to believe that. The international community must step up. The United Kingdom is playing its part. We have contributed more than $100 million towards the Family Support Programme, which will help mitigate the negative impact of some of the necessary economic reforms being pursued by the Government of the Sudan. And in 2020, the United Kingdom is donating an additional $76 million of humanitarian aid to United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations to meet the most urgent needs of those affected by food insecurity, conflict and economic crisis in the Sudan. But we must do more. Echoing the Secretary- General, I ask Member States to consider not whether we can afford to support the Sudan, but whether we can afford not to. Once established, UNITAMS will be at the core of international support, working to ensure that it is coordinated and effective. We urge the United Nations to work with the Government of the Sudan to facilitate the swift deployment of the Mission and, crucially, to ensure that UNITAMS has adequate resources and geographical presence to enable it to respond to the needs on the ground and to fulfil its mandate. We need to see the rapid appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We have waited for too long, and that delay is undermining the ability of the United Nations to support the people of the Sudan. Turning to the peace process, I want very much to commend the efforts and achievements of the Government of the Sudan, under the leadership of Prime Minister Hamdok, and a number of armed movements to take forward negotiations despite the challenges of COVID-19. I want particularly to welcome the initialling of a peace agreement on 31 August by the Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front. It is a very welcome step towards a comprehensive peace deal for the Sudan, and it is an opportunity that we urge all parties to take advantage of through the swift and full implementation of the agreement. We also reiterate our call on all of those who remain outside the peace process to engage constructively, immediately and without preconditions and to conclude swiftly negotiations on a comprehensive peace agreement.Although we have seen progress towards efforts to secure peace, the security situation in Darfur remains concerning. The recent increase in intercommunal violence and civilian displacement and the ongoing conflict in Jebel Marra demonstrates the complexity of the drivers and root causes of conflict, which will need to be comprehensively resolved if we are to see a stable and secure Darfur. I want to commend the work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) during these unprecedented times, not only in its assistance of the national response to COVID-19 in Darfur, but also in its work with the Government of the Sudan to support and bolster the protection of civilians. In that regard, I want to welcome the Government of the Sudan's national protection-of-civilians strategy, which demonstrates its firm commitment to fulfilling its responsibility to protect. However, it will take time to build the required capacity. In doing so, we urge the Government of the Sudan to build on its cooperation with UNAMID to ensure that protection needs continue to be met.
