Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I join other members, Sir, in expressing
satisfaction at the manner in which you have been
presiding over the Security Council at today's meeting.
We wish also to thank you and the entire delegation of
Slovenia for taking the initiative to convene this important
meeting.

I also join in welcoming the members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who have come
today to address the members of the Security Council.

The international community's most important task
in Bosnia remains that of ensuring that the peace process
is irreversible and lasting, and strengthening the multi-
ethnic nature of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
building the foundations of democracy and respecting the
rights of all the peoples of that country.

It is important that all three members of the
Presidency today reaffirmed their determination together
to bring about the consistent implementation of the Peace
Agreement and not to permit any arbitrary changes to the
Dayton text or any unjustifiable outside pressure in its
implementation.

The Bosnians themselves bear the chief
responsibility for pursuing the peace process and for
 

normalizing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
international community is helping them to the extent that
it can, and it will continue to do so; but it cannot build a
stable and prosperous Bosnia for the Bosnians. That is the
ultimate goal of the Peace Agreement, and it requires
lasting reconciliation and solidarity on the part of all the
Bosnian parties. A most important factor for success is the
smooth and effective functioning of the common State
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The leadership of
the entities and their representatives in pan-Bosnian
institutions must finally overcome their political, national
and ethnic disagreements and get down to constructive
work in compliance with the Peace Agreement and other
international agreements on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the positive changes in this regard, including the
effective joint work of the Presidency in the context of the
Standing Committee for Military Matters.

To be sure, a number of difficulties remain, first and
foremost with respect to ensuring the proper measure of
cooperation by both entities, not only in common State
institutions but also in relations with the leading
international structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
entire United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Such cooperation, along with the independent cooperation
of the Bosnian parties towards progress in the Dayton-Paris
process, would be timely, as important issues remain to be
resolved. These include the organization of a Bosnian
police force, the establishment of a democratic court
system, the campaign against corruption, the establishment
of a unified border service, the adoption of an election law,
and the return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
along with other issues.

We are pleased that these issues were among the
subjects of the Declaration that the members of the
Presidency adopted yesterday in New York, a document
which we shall study carefully. We trust that the obligations
it sets out will be met in a consistent manner. We also note
that the Declaration affirms the commitment of the
members of the Presidency to the task of ensuring military
cooperation between the entities, and in particular to the
establishment of a joint unit for participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. But, as we understand it,
this still does not address the fact that there are three de
facto independent armies in Bosnia, which is clearly not a
normal situation and which does not help in the trend
towards integration and towards strengthening a unified
Bosnian State. We call for action on the development of
a unified military doctrine for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are concerned about the continued negative
impact on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
final arbitration award on Brcko. It is important that that
decision be implemented in a way that will stabilize the
situation to the greatest possible extent and that will be in
accordance with the Peace Agreement - in other words,
through identifying solutions acceptable to all parties.

I had intended to end my statement here, but I
cannot fail to convey my gratitude to Ambassador
Holbrooke, who is no longer in the Chamber, for his
words of welcome upon my return from a trip to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and in particular to
Kosovo. Bearing in mind what has been said here today
about the relationship between the issues being addressed
respectively in Bosnia and in Kosovo, let me respond to
Ambassador Holbrooke's query by saying briefly that my
principal personal conclusions on Kosovo are not very
encouraging. The safety and security of the population
seem to be increasingly under threat; indeed, the number
of incidents has increased, which cannot be accounted for
solely by the activities of criminal elements. More and
more often, we see that the majority of such incidents
reflect an organized policy aimed at expelling non-
Albanians from Kosovo: all non-Albanians, not only
Kosovars. This is undermining resolution 1244 (1999).

In my personal view, which was only strengthened
by my trip to Kosovo, KFOR and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) are
unable to eliminate provocations and activities intended to
undermine resolution 1244 (1999), or to guarantee the
proper level of safety and security for all. I do not mean
to say that they are not doing good work or that they are
not trying hard enough; I merely note that at present the
result is a lack of - indeed a deterioration in - proper
safety and security, even though some very important
measures are being taken through KFOR and UNMIK.

Uncontrolled activities continue by what are called
elements of the former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA),
who are in fact under the control of no one. Heavy
artillery fire on villages continues, along with the burning
of churches and other acts intended to humiliate and
intimidate. It is interesting to note that a KLA flag
appeared in the building that houses the headquarters of
the Kosovo Protection Corps. General Klaus Reinhardt
ordered that the flag be removed and replaced with a
United Nations flag. This was done. But by the evening

 

of that day, the United Nations flag had disappeared, and
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) flag had reappeared.
Therefore, I am convinced that, as in Bosnia,
representatives and leaders of the international presence
must use all of their authorized powers so as not to allow
for such developments, which are already a threat to the
authority of all of the powerful international structures now
being erected in Kosovo.

Of course, I cannot agree with attempts to link
decisions relating to Kosovo or Bosnia with any questions
that have nothing to do with the issues under discussion, as
this might be interpreted as interference in the internal
affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

I will be prepared to give members of the Security
Council my impressions in greater detail, with specific
facts, at the meeting devoted to problems of Kosovo. For
the moment I wished simply to respond to Ambassador
Holbrooke's request for me to share my impressions.

