Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting
on the Syrian Arab Republic and the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014) on humanitarian assistance.
We extend our greetings to Ms. Valerie Amos of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. Antonio Guterres, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Ertharin Cousin,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme;
and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and thank
them for their briefings.

In addressing the tragic humanitarian situation
in Syria, we cannot fail to refer to the causes that
unleashed the armed conflict and its devastating
effects on the country, especially on civilian victims
of terrorist violence. In contravention of international
law, the agents of foreign Powers have provided
backing and financing to armed groups and terrorists
to violently overthrow the legitimate Government
of Syria, in disregard for that country's right of
self-determination. Such illegal actions have also
endangered the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of Syria. The existence and
strengthening of terrorist groups is not just a problem
in Syria. The proliferating actions of such groups affect
neighbouring countries and threaten to extend their
presence and control over other territories.

Venezuela rejects war, the violation of human
rights and atrocities arising from religious, political
and ethnic intolerance. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates that the only way to end the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a political,
negotiated and inclusive solution to the armed conflict.
In that regard, we firmly support the diplomatic efforts
undertaken by Moscow, leading to a second round of
negotiations among the parties to the Syrian conflict.

We also support all the efforts and initiatives of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to achieve a ceasefire, albeit
a partial one, in order to open the way to talks among
the parties and to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. An immediate ceasefire would make it possible
to address the humanitarian crisis and allow a pause for
peace and for the political effort. We urge all countries
and parties involved in the conflict to support the
diplomatic efforts and initiatives for dialogue. This
effort should include all Syrian parties, especially the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad. We affirm
our commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The fourteenth report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian issue in Syria (S/2015/264) offers a
critical overview of the situation. There is probably
no way to describe the suffering of the Syrian people.
What is happening in that sister nation is without
doubt a tragedy. It is a people martyred by the horrors
of war. Our country condemns the massive violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law there. We reject the sectarian violence
and the cruelty perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians in their campaign of terror and their crimes in
the territories they occupy. The brutal practice of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) ofbeheading
those they consider to be enemies of their creed is an
example of this.

Given the challenges resulting from this protracted
conflict, we value the work of humanitarian agencies
and rescue and medical workers, and we reject their
falling victim to violence. They cannot be military
targets. We encourage the international community to
promote all efforts in order to stop attacks on medical
staff. We also value and acknowledge the work and
efforts of neighbouring countries to host Syrian
refugees. We urge the international community to
support those efforts. We are very concerned by the
report's information concerning the recruitment of
children by terrorist groups, particularly ISIS, which
has opened a school for the so-called Cubs of the
Caliphate to indoctrinate and train children and young
people to join the war effort.

As indicated in the report, the number of civilians
under siege is truly alarming. Some 440,000 people are
in this situation, which is unacceptable. In addition, the
refugees remaining in the Yarmouk Camp are currently
suffering the effects of the strategic alliance between
the Al-Nusra Front, ISIS and associated groups, which
are working together under the umbrella of the so-
called non-State armed groups.

The weak implementation of the measures adopted
to control the presence of international terrorists in the
Middle East, especially in Syria, is clearly reflected
in the most recent report (S/2014/815, annex) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004), as
forwarded by Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.
The report indicates that more than 25,000 foreign
combatants from more than 100 countries have crossed
the border from neighbouring countries. The report
also indicates the lack of commitment on the part of
those countries that have become bridges for terrorism
to stop the flow of extremist militants. As a result, it
has now become necessary to prevent and combat the
presence of foreign terrorists in order to prevent Syria
and other countries in the Middle East and beyond the
region from falling victim to the terrorists' criminal
acts, which are based on ethnic and religious hatred.

We would like to express our gratitude for the data
in the report that refers to the bombing carried out by
the anti-ISIS coalition in Syria. Unfortunately, that
information has not been reflected in previous reports.
However, it strikingly calls attention to the fact that
the central command responsible for such attacks has
been calling into question the credibility of the public
sources that have been denying the existence of civilian
casualties in those bombings. That is an issue that
must be clarified, since those public sources have been
the principal sources for the reports prepared by the
Secretary-General.

We also assert that the humanitarian crisis in Syria

must not be used to promote political agendas in third
countries. The situation in Syria is a tragedy, and it
should be understood as such by the various actors who
inflame and sustain the conflict. The main factor that
has escalated and deepened the war derives from the
fact that terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida, ISIS, the
Al-Nusra Front and their associates, have taken over
the military and political leadership in the conflict
with the help and logistical assistance received from
foreigners, despite the fact that many wish to overlook
that fact. We once more ask: How much must the Syrian
people suffer? How many men, young men, women and
children must lose their lives? How many more must be
martyred by terrorism, until those who influence the
conflicting parties understand the urgency of working
decisively towards a political solution to the tragedy, a
solution that must include all parties?

In conclusion, the United Nations and the Security
Council have a moral obligation to work impartially
and decisively to seek a political solution to put an end
to the war. Otherwise, history will blame us for what is
happening to the Syrian people today.

