Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to hold this open meeting of the Security
Council to discuss Ethiopia and Eritrea. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report of 9
August 2000, and to offer my thanks to Mr. Bernard
Miyet for his introductory remarks concerning the
report.

Mali welcomes the signing by Ethiopia and
Eritrea on 18 June 2000 of the Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities. Mali supports the continuation of
negotiations on outstanding issues under the auspices
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as well as
the efforts made by the United States and the European
Union to find a comprehensive and lasting solution to
the conflict.

As the basis of a negotiated solution acceptable to
both parties, the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
is today a consensual and comprehensive instrument
that opens the door to lasting political settlement of the
conflict.

My delegation follows with great interest the
ongoing negotiations to resolve outstanding issues, and
we call upon the two parties to achieve quickly an
agreement leading to the restoration of peace. In this
regard, we welcome the decision taken by the heads of
State or Government of the OAU to ask President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika to continue his efforts.

The report before us today gives a good overview
of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE). My delegation welcomes the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report, as well as the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1312 (2000), of 31 July 2000. We hope very
soon to see the deployment of military observers and
other authorized civilian support staff. That
deployment will of course take place during the various
phases of the operation. We welcome the mandate and
concept of operations of UNMEE's various
components, as well as the proposed mechanism of
cooperation with the OAU described in the report of
the Secretary-General.

My delegation is very concerned about the tragic
humanitarian situation in Ethiopia and Eritrea. In this
respect, we call upon the international community to
respond positively to the humanitarian appeal so that
the refugees can return before the rainy season begins.
We also invite the two parties to cooperate fully so that
the temporary security zone can be clearly delimited to
make possible the beginning of mine clearance.

Finally, we call upon all parties to cooperate with
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity and to continue indirect negotiations in order to
achieve a comprehensive and lasting solution to the
conflict.

