Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to express our appreciation to our French colleagues
for their very effective work in the month of February.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) during the past
90 days. We appreciate the work he has done since
assuming the chairmanship of the Committee. China
notes that the 1737 Committee has done very effective
work in that period, for which we are grateful.

The Council has adopted several resolutions on
the Iranian nuclear issue since 2006, including
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
Those resolutions reflect the common concerns of the
international community in connection with the Iranian
nuclear issue. They were adopted in the interest of
maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime, strengthening the authority and role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and
promoting diplomatic efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of the Iranian nuclear issue. Every State has
an obligation to implement those resolutions
comprehensively and faithfully.

China has always supported the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime. We favour addressing
the Iranian nuclear issue through the dual-track
strategy. We attach great importance to and have
strictly observed our obligations under the relevant
resolutions. At the same time, however, we believe that
sanctions are not an end in themselves and can in no
way provide a fundamental solution to this issue.
Diplomatic negotiations and a peaceful settlement of
the issue therefore remain the best option.

Although the relaunching of negotiations
currently faces some difficulties, the window for
contact and dialogue is not closed. In that regard, it is
worth noting that all the parties concerned have
indicated that the draft IAEA agreement on supplying
nuclear fuel for the Tehran research reactor continues
to be valid. This illustrates that diplomatic efforts by
the international community have not been exhausted
and that there is still room for further diplomatic
efforts.

China has taken note of the latest report of IAEA
Director General Amano. We support the IAEA's
continued constructive role in finding an appropriate
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We also hope that
Iran will further strengthen its cooperation with the
IAEA and clarify and properly resolve relevant
8

questions at an early date so as to remove the
international community's doubts about its nuclear
programme.

We believe that the key to easing the current
tense situation surrounding this issue remains finding
an acceptable solution to the problem of supplying
nuclear fuel for the Tehran research reactor and the
resumption of negotiations between the permanent five
members of the Security Council plus Germany with
Iran as soon as possible. We hope that the relevant
parties will arrive at early consensus with regard to the
IAEA draft agreement for the supply of nuclear fuel for
the Tehran research reactor. We also hope that the
parties concerned will take the broader and more long-
term situation into consideration in order to strengthen
diplomatic efforts, including adopting more flexible
and pragmatic policies with a view to making progress
in the dialogue and negotiations.

China will continue to participate actively in the
work of the 1737 Committee and support and
coordinate with the relevant efforts of the Chairman to
allow the Committee to play a constructive role in duly
resolving the Iranian nuclear issue.

