Mr. Nambiar (India): Mr. President, we are
grateful to you for convening this meeting at short
notice following the sharp deterioration of the situation
in the Middle East.

The attack launched by Israel late Monday night
in the Gaza Strip has resulted in the loss of a large
number of precious human lives and injury to
hundreds. Most of the dead and injured were helpless
and unarmed Palestinian civilians, including women
and children.

In his statement of 22 July, the Secretary-General
pointed out that

"Israel has the legal and moral
responsibility to take all measures to avoid the
loss of innocent life; it clearly failed to do so in
using a missile against an apartment building."

Even while we have noted the statement by Israel
that this was a mistake, we cannot but strongly deplore
this act of unwarranted violence and indiscriminate
killings at a time when serious efforts are afoot to
broker de-escalating actions between the concerned
parties. We have in the past deplored the acts of
violence perpetrated against Israeli civilians. In the
present instance, we join other Member countries in
calling upon Israel to conduct itself in a manner that is
fully consistent with international humanitarian law.

It has been almost two years since the
commencement of the current spiral of aggravated
action and reaction in the conflict between Israel and
Palestinians. Countless lives have been lost and many
others broken by the loss of livelihood or of loved
ones. All efforts to find a solution have been frustrated
for one reason or another. We join our friends from the
Arab Group in requesting the Security Council to call
for necessary measures to bring an end to the current
tragic situation. In the meantime, we are also faced
with what Secretary-General Kofi Annan has referred
to as a "threat of economic collapse and social
destitution" looming over the occupied territories.

India believes it is time for the international
community to act proactively to reduce the suffering
and deprivation faced by the Palestinians. In this
context, we support the Secretary-General's call for the
parties to fully respect their international obligations as
well as to facilitate the work of the United Nations and
of other agencies.

It would seem from actions such as the Monday
night attack that we are moving away from the vision
of Israel and Palestine living peacefully as two States,
side by side within secure and recognized boundaries.
But such a slide back must not be allowed to happen.
We reiterate our call for an immediate end to violence
and the resumption of dialogue leading to a negotiated
and permanent settlement of this question based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and as envisaged in resolution 1397 (2002). My
Government attaches great importance to the ongoing
efforts of the "quartet" and to the initiative of Saudi
Arabia endorsed by the Arab League Summit at Beirut,
aimed at achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

