Allow me to begin by acknowledging and welcoming the ongoing work of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations Kosovo team. I would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing. We would also like to acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Da€ic, as well as that of Ms. Haradinaj-Stublla. South Africa wishes to reiterate that the presence of the United Nations in Kosovo and its constructive engagement with all stakeholders to create an environment conducive to compromise, reconciliation, unity and stability remains critical. We welcome and continue to support UNMIK's facilitation role in building trust among communities and in capacity-building, as well as its advocacy of the role of women and youth in building peace. In this regard, we support UNMIK's continued cooperation with UN-Women and the empowerment of women and youth in peacebuilding and training. In line with South Africa's consistent position on the need for dialogue to resolve long-standing disagreements, we support efforts to continue engagement between authorities in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as the role of civil society and bilateral and multilateral partners in building peace and intercommunity trust in Kosovo. We are pleased with and commend the ongoing work towards establishing the Kosovo truth and reconciliation commission. Our own Truth and Reconciliation Commission was an integral part of the process that paved the way for our democratic transition, which was achieved through constructive engagement and difficult compromise. Our Truth and Reconciliation Commission experience confirmed that facing the past was crucial for realizing national unity, as hearing the different views and versions of events of all communities can contribute to reconciliation and ultimately a peaceful, inclusive political process and solution. A lasting, comprehensive peace can be achieved only with the involvement of all stakeholders. It is only through dialogue that existing disagreements can be resolved and the foundations laid for an inclusive and fair political settlement acceptable to both sides. We believe that through confidence- and trust-building measures a sustained dialogue between the sides will prevail. We commend the important mediation role that the United Nations has continued to play in the normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We also commend the role that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has played as well as all efforts made by the European Union Special Representative, Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, and the United States Government, to bring the sides closer together. We urge the parties to continue to take these opportunities for engagement to build confidence and strengthen relations between the sides. The normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina is key to regional stability. In the context of women and peace and security, UNMIK and UN-Women continue to do valuable work with regard to the creation of safe spaces for Kosovar women who have fallen victim to gender-based violence and domestic violence, particularly during the coronavirus disease pandemic. We also commend the role played by UNMIK and all other United Nations agencies to contain the spread of the disease. Let me conclude by calling on the sides to refrain from any actions that could undermine constructive engagement between them. In this regard, we are hopeful that a spirit of compromise will be the basis for negotiations towards an inclusive and fair political settlement that is acceptable to both sides.
