Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I am speaking here today
not only as the Permanent Representative of Hungary,
but also as the mother of a young man. I truly believe
that we should teach our children the concept and
understanding of diversity. We should teach them
to celebrate diversity. Rather than see it as a burden,
they should see it as a source of inspiration. If we are
successful in that pursuit, our children will feel safer in
their own bodies.

Instead of that, what is happening today? Let me
start with the pressing issue of losing or not finding
one's identity and looking for one, and then I shall
continue with the basic human aspiration of belonging
to some place and to someone, as well as the need for
recognition and the wish to be talked about, without
regard to good or bad motivations. All of this is taking
place in a time of uncertainty in both a chaotic world
and a chaotic order.

Culture is the foundation on which peoples'
identities grow and mature. It is my deeply held
belief that many of today's problems are rooted in
a crisis of identity, which has today become a global
issue. The increasing mobility of young people and
ideas across international borders, the information
and communication revolutions, and economic
globalization have made identities broader, delocalized
and multilayered. Under the rapid transformation of
cultural and social structures, the fear of the unknown
and the lack of understanding of differing Views often
provide fertile ground for racism, xenophobia and
intolerance, human rights Violations and, of course,
outright conflict. Fully appreciating one's own cultural
background is possible only after understanding and
respecting the diversity of other cultures and celebrating
the richness of our common cultural heritage. In other
words, we need to learn from and about each other.

Accordingly, I would like to address this very
issue of the power of learning. Such ideals and values
as compassion, hospitality, fraternity and solidarity
are, to a large extent, learned through education and
life experience. Peaceful transformation begins within
one's selfand involves learning about the selfand others.
Transformations start from and within an individual.
An avalanche of incredible force accumulates from the
movements of particular snowflakes on a mountain
top. Powerful ideas are generated in the minds of
individuals and spread with the lightning speed of
modern information technologies to transform societies
in most fundamental ways.

I wish to thank Jordan and Crown Prince A1 Hussein
bin Abdullah II for initiating today's open debate on the
role of youth in countering Violent extremism. Hungary,
of course, fully aligns itself with the statement made by
observer of the European Union.

We fully agree that, in order to effectively counter
the threat of radicalization, we must tackle the
socioeconomic root causes that often leave young people
marginalized and susceptible to violent extremists.
High levels of youth unemployment, illiteracy and weak
family bonds all contribute to creating a fertile ground
for radicalization. We also believe that education should
be accessible to every child and be directed towards the
development of respect for the child's parents and his
or her own cultural identity, language and values, and
prepare the child for a responsible life in a free society.

It is my belief that strong and harmonious families
contribute to the development of strong identities and
cultural values that will make children and young
people more resilient in the face of extremism. In the
same vein, promoting sports, art and cultural activities
for youth is also important for developing culturally
sensitive and responsible young adults. We believe that
Governments should also facilitate the participation
of young people in public life and public discourse.
I cannot express strongly enough the responsibility
and role of the media in creating dreams and setting
examples - negative or positive. Young people are not
only the targets of violent extremist groups; they may
also have a role to play in using the media, for instance
by engaging in journalism, to counter such ideologies
and promote tolerance, diversity and respect towards
each other.

Let me conclude my statement by underlining the
importance of criminal accountability in ensuring
justice for the victims and 4 in the long term - in
healing the wounds of traumatized societies.

In recent months we have heard a lot about the
barbaric crimes committed by terrorist organizations.
Although today we are discussing the important role
of youth in countering Violent extremism, we must not
forget about the young victims, who deserve justice.
Hungary is of the View that there can be no peace and
reconciliation without accountability. Therefore, we
must redouble our efforts to find a solution that would
also honour the victims.

