The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Rwanda.

First of all, I would like to thank Australia for
introducing resolution 2166 (2014), on the shooting
down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I would
also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the
presence among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Australia, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
European Affairs of Luxembourg and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands. There is no doubt
that this incident has shocked the world and taxed us
all, in particular the families and nations grieving
their loved ones. I take this opportunity to once again
offer the deepest sympathies and condolences of the
President and the people of Rwanda to the families and
to the Governments and compatriots of the 298 victims.

Rwanda co-sponsored and voted in favour of
resolution 2166 (2014) primarily because, as a matter
of principle, the deceased and their families must be
accorded the utmost respect and the dignity that they
deserve. We believe also that it is important that
the facts surrounding the downing of this plane be
established and that the perpetrators of this heinous
crime be identified and brought to justice.

We were extremely troubled at the fact that separatist
groups in eastern Ukraine have been obstructing
and denying access to the crash site, not to mention
removing bodies and the material elements necessary
for the investigation. We condemn this behaviour in the
strongest terms.

Let me recall that resolution 2166 (2014), which
we just adopted, supports efforts to establish a full,
thorough and independent international investigation
into the incident, in accordance with international civil
aviation guidelines. The resolution further demands
that the armed groups in control of the crash site and
the surrounding area refrain from any actions that may
compromise the integrity of the site. In that regard, we
urge the separatists to fully implement, without excuses
or preconditions, their commitment made on 17 July in
a videoconference with the Trilateral Contact Group.

Finally, Rwanda reiterates its call on the separatist
groups in eastern Ukraine to respect the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, to
adhere to a sustainable ceasefire, as requested by the
2 July joint declaration by the Foreign Ministers of
Ukraine, the Russian Federation, France and Germany,
and to engage in a political dialogue with the Ukrainian
Government based on President Poroshenko's peace
plan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Minister
Franciscus Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

