Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. The Committee also extends
its congratulations to all new members of the Council.

As we meet for the first quarterly open debate
of the year to consider the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, we urge the
Security Council to make 2019 a year of action and
progress on the road to achieving just and lasting peace
and the full exercise of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. We must collectively redress the
historic injustice subjected upon an entire people under
occupation, without independence and deprived of their
basic dignity and rights, first and foremost the right to
self-determination.
As further proof ofthe State of Palestine's existence
as a full member ofthe community ofnations, the largest
group of States Members of the United Nations elected
it to the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China,
which represents 80 per cent of the world community,
to lead us in all our collective negotiations in 2019. That
important event must be given due consideration.

Allow me to recall some events that marked the
past year and that should serve as a reminder of the
task ahead. The political paralysis and stalemate in the
peace process continued; the lack of a political horizon
remained a source of frustration for both Palestinians
and Israelis and the region continued to be threatened
by the constant risk of increased destabilization.
Protests by Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip have
been taking place since March 2018 and indiscriminate
violence by the Israeli occupying forces has resulted
in a large number of casualties, including the death of
several children.

The Committee has repeatedly called on Israel, the
occupying Power, to lift the illegal blockade of Gaza,
which has lasted for 12 years. Military escalation and a
catastrophic conflict must be avoided at all costs and an
immediate response is needed to the grave humanitarian
crisis, in particular through increased support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and other United
Nations organizations that provide vital assistance.

Regrettably, despite the ongoing efforts of Egypt
and other actors, Palestinian reconciliation has not
progressed. The Committee believes that Palestinian
unity remains the best guarantee of a politically
stable and economically viable future for the
Palestinian people.

As we have just heard, the construction and
planning of Israeli settlements and the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian property, including in
East Jerusalem, continue unabated, as do incidents of
settler-related violence in violation of resolution 2334
(2016), among others. The recent announcement of
plans for new settlements deeper in the West Bank, near
Ramallah and Bethlehem, and for a new five-kilometre
road divided lengthwise by a concrete wall to separate
Israeli and Palestinian traffic and connect settlements
on the outskirts of Jerusalem, constitute new serious
violations of international law. Even the Israeli press
has spoken of "apartheid on the road" in reference to
the new route.

The illegal activities of the occupying Power, in
particular the planned demolition of entire Bedouin
villages, such as Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu and
the relocation of its population, have only fleetingly
captured the attention of the Council. The international
community ignores not only the obligations of the
occupying Power that are being violated, but also its
own obligations as a third party under international law.

Resolution 2334 (2016) provides a checklist and
a path towards a just and lasting settlement between
two States living side by side in security, within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the capital
of a sovereign and independent Palestinian State. The
Committee welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and looks forward to future reports in the same
format. We also welcome the initial steps taken by
some Parliaments to ensure national implementation of
paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) and to encourage
others to do the same.

Lastly, the Committee calls on all Member States to
refrain from taking unilateral action on any final status
issue in contravention of international law and United
Nations resolutions. Such measures, if implemented,
would only further jeopardize the two-State solution
and the prospects for lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.

On a positive note, I note that many Member States
have increased their financial support to UNRWA
to ensure the continuation of its vital operations
following its unprecedented financial crisis in 2018.
The Committee calls on all Member States to continue
to fund UNRWA in a reliable and predictable manner
until the refugee issue is resolved fairly and definitively
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions.

The Committee firmly believes that, although
unilateral initiatives to overcome the current impasse
could be useful, the Security Council has a clear
responsibility in that regard and is the key to resolving
the conflict.

In conclusion, the Committee calls on all Member
States that have not yet done so, in particular the
members of the European Union, to join the majority
of the States of the international community - 139 so
far - and recognize the State of Palestine, supporting
its efforts to become a full State Member of the United
Nations and take its rightful place in the community
of nations. That step would help make 2019 the year in
which peace between Israelis and Palestinians becomes
a reality and allow us to finally reach the goal we
collectively set 71 years ago.
