The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, document
8/2001/1079.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2001/1110, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. If I hear no objection, I shall now put the
draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, France, Ireland,
Jamaica, Mali, Mauritius, Norway, Russian
Federation, Singapore, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1381 (2001).

In connection with the resolution just adopted on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, I have been authorized
to make the following statement on behalf of the
Security Council.

"As is known, the report of the Secretary-

General on the United Nations Disengagement

Observer Force (8/2001/1079) states in paragraph
12:

"the situation in the Middle East continues
to be potentially dangerous and is likely to
remain so, unless and until a comprehensive
settlement covering all aspects of the
Middle East problem can be reached'.

"That statement of the Secretary-General
reflects the View of the Security Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2001/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at10.15 am.

