Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): C6te
d'Ivoire welcomes the convening of this briefing on the
latest developments in the humanitarian situation in
Syria, at the request of Belgium, Kuwait and Germany,
whom I thank.

I commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on their briefings, which orient
the Security Council on the magnitude of the current
humanitarian challenges and the need to act for a
peaceful resolution to the Syrian conflict.

My delegation is deeply concerned by the
resumption of fighting in the governorate of Idlib
since 29 April, which has further eroded an already
crumbling humanitarian situation. That new military
escalation reveals the unwillingness of the parties to
the conflict to silence their guns in order to resolutely
engage in a political process to end the crisis.

My delegation notes with regret the continuing
fighting, as well as the resulting loss of life and
the thousands of internally displaced persons.
Approximately 300,000 people have been forced to
seek refuge outside Idlib governorate, causing a surge
in humanitarian needs in the region. Similarly, the
destruction of hospital and school infrastructure once
again constitutes an urgent need for action to improve
the protection of civilians. My country would like to
remind the defence and security forces and armed
groups that they have the primary responsibility of
refraining from all forms of violence against civilians.
The current state of fighting cannot exempt them from
their obligations under international law, human rights
law and international humanitarian law.

In that regard, the parties to the conflict must be
fully aware of their responsibility before the competent
international courts for violations of conventions and
treaties relating to the protection of civilians and
international humanitarian law, if they are found guilty.
Moreover, my delegation believes that, in addition to
the protection of civilians, the actors in the Syrian
conflict have an obligation to create the conditions for
the safe and unhindered access to deliver humanitarian
assistance to the affected populations.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that, despite the exacerbation of the conflict and the
gravity of the humanitarian crisis it has caused, peace
is possible in Syria through an inclusive and credible
political process aimed at ending the crisis, which would
allow all parties to engage in fruitful compromises. In
that regard, we reaffirm our full support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
and encourage his efforts towards reaching a political
solution to the Syrian crisis.

My country urges the Syrian parties to prioritize
dialogue and comply with the provisions of the Russian-
Turkish agreement on the demilitarized zone for a
lasting ceasefire, with a view to giving the political
process a chance to succeed. Cote d'Ivoire also calls
on all stakeholders to work towards the establishment
of the constitutional committee, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

