Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/579), as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their briefings. We welcome their
ongoing commitment to protecting civilians and the
tireless efforts of their teams alongside the victims of
armed conflict on the ground. France supports the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union.

Recent months have brought important
developments on two points: peacekeeping operations
and the fight against impunity. First, with regard to
peacekeeping operations, since the adoption of
resolution 1894 (2009) a year ago, the Security Council,
the Secretariat and all actors concerned have mobilized
to improve the process of defining, following up and
monitoring the implementation of mandates involving
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.
All the recent mandates of the Security Council contain
a protection of civilians segment, which is a priority in
all cases. The protection of civilians justifies measures
that are adapted to the situation on the ground when
necessary. We continue to develop this approach. The
updated aide-memoire we adopted this morning (see S/PRST/2010/25) is a valuable instrument in that
regard, and we thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for its update.

The challenges we face remain numerous. There
have been serious breaches, notably in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this summer, when massive
sexual violence was perpetrated while our forces were
present in the zone. But the Council and the
Organization assumed responsibility for the failure and
immediately took measures to strengthen its early
warning and prevention capacities. One of the main
perpetrators was arrested by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with the help of the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo.

Situations also persist where the forces mandated
by the Council do not have the cooperation they need
from local authorities, which undermines their action.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), whose freedom of movement is
too often hindered in Darfur, still does not have
sufficient access to the population. It often arrives too
late, when it does arrive, at the scenes of the crime,
such as J ebel Marra.

I draw three lessons from these difficulties. First,
the Secretariat must develop a strategic framework for
every peacekeeping operation on the protection of
civilians, as well as specific training modules, and
identify the resources and capacities necessary to each.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations must develop
closer communication with the local population in
order to strengthen their ability to prevent and respond
to threats posed by armed groups, which involves a
linguistic component, as well as adequate logistics and
communications.

Thirdly, the Council must receive regular reports
on the protection of civilians and be informed as soon
as possible of situations where there are human rights
violations against civilians. Such reports will require
the establishment of a systematic monitoring
mechanism to follow progress or gaps in the protection
of civilians on the ground, provide detailed information
on incidents and make it possible to identify those who
violate international humanitarian law and human
rights, assess the effectiveness of measures taken to
protect civilians, and evaluate threats. In that regard,
UNAMID has set up a data collection system on sexual
violence, and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan produces thorough reports on these
matters.

We must have access to such information in all of
our areas of action. We welcome the intention of the
Secretary-General to set up monitoring indicators to
follow up the protection of civilians in countries at risk.

We have to continue developing synergies
between peacekeeping operations, the teams of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
humanitarian community. Parties to conflict must
guarantee access and full, unhindered security for the
humanitarian personnel of international organizations
and non-governmental organizations and for their
provisions and equipment. Obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance are serious violations. Groups
of experts on the protection of civilians must be
regularly updated in that regard.

As for the fight against impunity, France
welcomes the publication of the mapping report of the
Secretary-General on crimes committed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1993 to 2003.
We commend the resolve of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prosecute the
perpetrators of the abuses committed at that time and
of those committed today.

France welcomes the content of our presidential
statement, which indicates the progress made by
international justice and application of the Rome
Statute, as confirmed at the Kampala Conference.

We welcome the intervention of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in Guinea, where it is
contributing to efforts to prevent crime at this historic
time for Guineans. The judicial activity of the Court
against those who recruit child soldiers, those
responsible for sexual violence and genocide
campaigns could contribute decisively to protecting
civilians if we are all committed to respecting the
decisions of the judges in all circumstances. No one
has any interest in encouraging impunity.

The Court also has a role to play in preventing
attacks against peacekeeping personnel. 1 note in that
respect the upcoming opening in The Hague of a
procedure against those responsible for the deadly
attack against African Union soldiers in Haskanita in
2007 as they were assuming their mandate to protect
the population.

In supporting the Rome Statute of the ICC, in
cooperating with Court, in carrying out its arrest
warrants and in respecting its independence, we are
protecting civilians today and tomorrow.

