Mr. Wittig (Germany): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today's meeting. Germany is
also very grateful for the clear and informed remarks of
the Secretary-General. I am particularly gratified by
the presence of Prime Minister Abdullahi Mohamed
and the Special Representative for Somalia of the
African Union Commission, Ambassador Diarra, as
well as, via videolink, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, our friend Augustine Mahiga, from
Mogadishu. I would like to extend a very warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bellingham, Minister
for Africa of the United Kingdom.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the delegation of the European Union
later on.

The Security Council has a unique responsibility
in addressing the momentous challenges in Somalia.
Germany strongly advocates for continued and focused
work by the Council on Somalia, in close cooperation
with regional actors and especially our partners in the
African Union.

The conflict in Somalia has lasted far too long. It
has attracted international terrorist activities and
provided the breeding ground for piracy. It threatens
international peace and security. But above all, its
human cost is unacceptable. This human cost reminds
us of our humanitarian responsibilities, especially with
respect to vulnerable groups such as refugees, women
and children. They continue to bear the brunt of the
violence. We are concerned by the severely limited
humanitarian space. We call upon all parties in the
country to ensure unhindered access of humanitarian
aid as well as the safety of all humanitarian staff. We
also call for the immediate implementation of all the
conclusions of the Security Council's Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict in Somalia.

Five months before the end of the transitional
period, it is urgent to promote a clear political strategy
for mastering the remaining transitional tasks. All of
us- the Security Council, the actors in Somalia,
neighbouring countries and all other stakeholders -
must continue to join efforts to achieve tangible
progress.

Germany reiterates her full support to the
Djibouti process. The Somali Government now needs
to focus on the completion of the constitution-making
process, outreach to armed opposition groups through
dialogue wherever possible and sensible, and the
provision of security and basic services to the Somali
people. The Transitional Federal Institutions must stop
their political infighting. They are responsible to their
people. They must refrain from unilateral actions, such
as the recent extension of its term by the Transitional
Federal Parliament.

The international community has to pursue its
support to the Somali people and Somali institutions, in
particular the security institutions, in order to work
towards the stabilization of Somalia. Wherever
possible, we should explore ways to extend our support
to those regions of Somalia enjoying relative stability
and security, including Somaliland and Puntland. We
should also urge better cooperation between such
regions and the Transitional Federal Government in
Mogadishu. We also see the need to engage with local
administrations, communities and civil society as a
whole. We feel that their traditions and experiences can
add significantly to the political process on the ground.
In the longer perspective, extended cooperation
between all actors could enhance opportunities for
economic and social development beyond those regions,
for the betterment of all Somalia.

Piracy originating from Somalia needs to be
tackled in a comprehensive way. The United Nations
and all other international actors have to pursue their
common efforts in this regard. Germany will continue
to actively take part in this endeavour.

Let me turn to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We reiterate our full support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia and its troop
contributors, and are looking forward to its full
deployment in the near future, in accordance with
resolution 1964 (2010). Germany and the European
Union are extensively assisting AMISOM. and troop-
contributing countries. Germany recently delivered
substantial equipment aid to Burundian AMISOM
contingents worth well over $5 million. We invite other
donors to join our common effort and support
AMISOM.

Germany is impressed by the professional and
successful work carried out by AMISOM. and its troop
contributors in fulfilling its daunting task. We thank
them for their dedication and are encouraged by the
recent progress made on the ground, in Mogadishu and
beyond. We are very saddened by the recent casualties
among AMISOM. soldiers.
My last point concerns the future of a United
Nations presence in Somalia. Germany encourages the
United Nations to strive to strengthen its presence in
Somalia and especially in Mogadishu, as outlined by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report. We
welcome the recent efforts of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and the United Nations
country team in this respect. An enhanced United
Nations presence on the ground can contribute to a
more direct engagement with the various communities
and thus to a political solution in Somalia.

