Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): It is always
gratifying for me to return to New York and to meet
again with all my friends around this table. I wish also
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
with the members of the Security Council. We are very
pleased to be able to have this exchange of views under
your presidency. We acknowledge and fully appreciate
your personal commitment to the development of an
effective partnership between the Security Council and
regional organizations.

Your delegation, on 11 April last, convened an
open meeting of the Security Council on that issue, and
we welcome that. That meeting was an opportunity to
stress the complementary nature of the Security
Council's actions with those of regional organizations
and the need to enhance their capacity for intervention.

This afternoon's meeting is therefore taking place
in the framework of the active partnership that was set
up between the Security Council and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) some
time ago. The mission of ECOWAS, our subregional
organization, is to create conditions of peace and
stability in West Africa in order to facilitate the
integration of our States.

We were very encouraged by the adoption by the
Security Council on 4 February last of resolution 1464
(2003) and especially by its full support for
ECOWAS's efforts to promote peace and security in
Cote d'Ivoire. I need hardly stress the consequences of
the Ivorian crisis for the whole of our subregion, and
especially the need to give ECOWAS the means it
requires in order that we may continue our determined
efforts to restore peace in Cote d'Ivoire.

Indeed, we already have some experience in
restoring peace in West Africa. This was made clear in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, and now we
are in Cote d'Ivoire. It would be presumptuous of us to
tell the members of the Security Council that
peacekeeping or peace-building operations require
significant logistical and financial resources, which
are, unfortunately, not always within reach of our
countries. That is why we are looking to the members
of the Council today to work with us in our initiative,
which is fully in accord with the Council's mandate.
We have no doubts about the concern of the members
of the Council as to the Ivorian crisis, and we count on
their support for the efforts of ECOWAS for the benefit
of peace and stability, a goal that is so important to the
Security Council.

That is the fundamental reason for our presence
here today. We are convinced that with the Council's
continued support for our organization - if it indeed
does continue - and with assistance from our bilateral
and multilateral partners, the action that we have
undertaken in Cote d'Ivoire will be successful and
accord fully with the efforts of the Security Council to
restore peace in Cote d'Ivoire and stabilize West
Africa.

