Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
History, and in particular Africa's history, has
accustomed us to situations in which a small spark has
led to a great conflagration. History also teaches us
that the most absurd and atrocious of wars are often
born of events that we thought were easy to control.
Let us therefore not deceive ourselves. We must
consider the situation in Zimbabwe as a serious one.
Whatever one may say, the worsening of the political
and security situation in the country continues to be a
potential danger and threat to peace in southern Africa.

The second round of presidential elections that
took place on 27 June 2008 was marked by acts of
intimidation and violence, thereby compromising the
honesty of the balloting and the standing of democracy
in both Zimbabwe and Africa. According to the 29 June
2008 statements by the Observer Missions of the
Southern Africa Development Community, the Pan-
African Parliament and the African Union, that
election was not fair, free or credible and thus did not
reflect the will of the Zimbabwean people.

The African Union, in keeping with its
Constitutive Act, on 1 July 2008 expressed its concern
about the loss of human lives and the ongoing violence
in Zimbabwe. In order to prevent the conflict from
spreading to the whole of the subregion and to foster a
climate favourable to democracy, the African Union
encouraged the Zimbabwean leaders to engage in
dialogue so as to promote peace, stability, democracy
and national reconciliation. As a member of the great
African family, and faithful to its commitment to
peace, Burkina Faso of course endorses that initiative.

However, Burkina Faso is also a member of the
Security Council, and in that capacity it must shoulder
its responsibilities regarding any situation that it
regards as posing a threat to international peace and
security. That is why, keeping in mind that the
provisions of the draft resolution providing for an
embargo on arms imports are designed to prevent a
large-scale military conflict, Burkina Faso has decided
to lend its support to the draft resolution. I would state
clearly, that it is that provision of the draft resolution in
particular that essentially explains our position.

We are also convinced that the adoption of the
draft resolution would neither compromise nor
undermine any moves under way at this stage to bring
about a fair settlement to the crisis. On the contrary, we
believe that, as a means of exerting pressure, it could
help to encourage the Zimbabwean parties to agree as
quickly as possible on a consensus political settlement.

