Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We were unable to support resolution 2441
(2018), drafted by the United Kingdom. No account was
taken of our principled and duly justified comments.
The authors incorporated into the resolution a provision
specifying sexual and gender-based violence as a
separate criterion for sanctions, although such actions
are fully covered in the existing listing criteria. The
existence of precedents in the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) and recently
extended pursuant to resolution 2399 (2018) concerning
the Central African Republic, as well as in the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, does not mean that
the practice should automatically apply to all country
situations, each of which is unique. Any unjustified
appearance of a gender component in the work of the
Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya will distract
the experts from their main tasks.

The resolution is adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, based on which the
Security Council identifies the presence of threats to
international peace and security and adopts decisions
on measures to be taken. That is the Council's core
prerogative. The issue of sexual and gender-based
violence is considered by specialized bodies, such as
the Human Rights Council and the Commission on the
Status of Women. The appropriate division of labour
must be adhered to. If not, the Security Council will
find itself chasing after violators and trying to reason
with domestic tyrants rather than resolving conflicts.

Sexual and gender-based violence is part of the
general level of criminality in any country. For example,
open-source data shows that there has been a steady rise
in instances of sexual violence in Sweden, while in the
Netherlands the indicator for violence against women is
among the highest in the European Union. Combating
this kind of crime falls first and foremost within the

remit of national Governments. Measures taken by the
international community must be auxiliary in nature.

We get the impression that the countries that are
pushing this issue on the Council's agenda are trying
to make domestic political capital out of the imposition
of sanctions regimes on other States. It has occurred to
no one to consider whether Security Council sanctions
on specific individuals for sexual violence in Libya will
actually help prevent such crimes there. That approach
is populism reduced to its essence. The facts of these
kinds of crimes committed against migrants in Libya
only confirm our view that the most effective way to
combat them is to eradicate the criminal networks
involved. Everything, including the information from
the Panel of Experts, indicates that the tracks lead to
the migrants' countries of destination and Europe
most of all. Yet we have seen no desire on the part of
the European countries to impose Security Council
sanctions on their own criminal authorities.

Very recently, when the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
was being extended (see S/PV.8387), we spoke about the
abuse of their powers by some penholders for particular
issues on the Security Council's agenda. Today's case
also attests to the resolution's authors' unconstructive
methods, in which no effort is made to adopt documents
by consensus. The penholdership mechanism needs
major change.

