Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegation of Chile
for taking the initiative to organize this debate on
the maintenance of international peace and security,
focusing on inclusive development. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and this morning's
briefers: the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota of Brazil,
and Ms. Leymah Gbowee, Nobel Peace Laureate and
President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa.

We also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3 earlier today.

The Government of Somalia is keen to learn and
to develop all strategies that will foster inclusive
development in Somalia. Our country has entered a
new era of pursuing peace, stability and prosperity
for all Somalis. The Somali Government has built a
foundation and laid down the necessary groundwork,
not only for stabilizing the nation but also for ensuring
reform. The New Deal Compact for Somalia has been a
significant force for change.

The Somali Government's approach to support
inclusive politics encompasses three strategic
areas - State-building, constitution-making and
preparing the nation for elections - while taking into
consideration and encouraging the involvement of
all groups, especially women, youth and minorities.
The Compact goals have guided the Somali Federal
Government, civil society and the international
community in laying the necessary State-building
blocks and developing a legal framework and
governance structures. The Somali Government is
restoring the provision of health-care services in areas
liberated from extremist groups. The Government has
also kick-started education campaigns to open schools
to reduce the level of illiteracy, thereby enrolling an
additional 78,000 children.

As discourse on peacebuilding in Africa continues,
it is important for policymakers to consider the plight
of women on the continent, where they are a poorly
represented majority that tends to suffer greatly in
times of war. With an understanding of the devastating
impact of Africa's endemic conflicts on women, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000).
Through this resolution, the Security Council, for the
first time in history, acknowledged the plight of women
living in African war zones, as well as the manner in
which most peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
had excluded them. Another solution that the United
Nations has implemented regarding the exclusion of
women is the commissioning of a study that will look
into the implementation of additional resolutions on
women and security, including resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2122 (2013). With this
study, the United Nations will understand how well
the resolutions are aiding women in conflict zones and
the additional ways in which it can involve them in
peacebuilding.

The African Development Bank has commissioned
a report - put together by a high-level panel chaired
by President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf - entitled Ending
Conflict and Building Peace in Africa: A Call to Action.
Youth unemployment and urbanization are reported as
two of the main challenges that Africa will face and
that will need to be addressed. Special focus should be
placed on empowering women in peacebuilding and
State-building processes at all levels.

We strongly welcome the efforts by African leaders
and scholars to try to find solutions to Africa's chronic
problems. There are certain issues that need to be
considered. First, the rapid change that the continent
is currently experiencing places Africa in a precarious
position. Whereas population growth and economic
progress are positive factors, they can increase the
fragility of the continent if policymakers do not handle
them properly. Managing the change that the continent
is undergoing is the key to ensuring that Africa does
not become fragile and that it continues to grow.

Youth employment ensures that the millions of
young people on the continent contribute to their
nation's growth and do not become disenfranchised. In
that way, a potential problem becomes an advantage.
This is especially the case for countries with ongoing
conflicts, such as Somalia, Nigeria and Libya.

In conclusion, over the past decade the Security
Council has been of great assistance in Somalia's
steady progress towards peace, something that the
Somali people deeply appreciate. In return, the country
is working hard to become a strong member of the
international community so that it may contribute
positively to global development. As the country moves
forward, it still faces numerous challenges, some of
which can be solved through inclusive development.
Indeed, the Federal Government of Somalia recognizes
the need for inclusive politics, justice and economic
progress if the country is to move forward. Inclusive
development for a country such as Somalia will involve
the implementation of projects on a grass-roots level
so that they can involve average Somali people. In
particular, special focus should be placed on empowering
women in peacebuilding and State-building processes
at all levels. The success of this new strategy would
allow Somalia to emerge from the 24-year civil war
a stronger nation than it had been before the conflict
started.

