Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
for his briefing.

The conflicts in some parts of Syria have intensified
lately, and the situation in Aleppo has escalated, causing
extensive civilian casualties, which have summoned
the attention of the international community. China
is gravely concerned about the civilian casualties
and the humanitarian crisis in Syria. We welcome
Russia's support for the United Nations proposal for
a weekly 48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo. We
commend the efforts of the International Syria Support
Group co-chairs - the United States and the Russian
Federation. We hope that the parties concerned will
urge the Government and the opposition in Syria to
implement the cessation of hostilities agreement in
good faith and facilitate the efforts of United Nations
aid agencies to ease the humanitarian situation in
Aleppo without delay.

China has been actively supporting the mitigation
of the humanitarian situation in Syria and has
provided, through multiple channels, several tranches
of humanitarian aid, including food and supplies, for
Syria and other countries in the region.

A political settlement to the Syrian situation is
the ultimate way out for resolving the set of issues
related to Syria, including the humanitarian problem.
The international community should stay the course
in the general direction of moving towards a political
settlement, with an intensified effort to move the
political settlement forward. Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura is actively pushing for a new round of Geneva
peace talks as soon as possible. All parties in Syria
should put Syria's national interests and the interests
of its people first and attend the Geneva peace talks
to find a solution acceptable to all parties based on a
step-wise approach. The international community,
including other countries in the region, should support
the leading role of the United Nations in the area of
good offices and support the Special Envoy in his work,
so as to sustain the momentum for a political settlement
and ensure that the process can come to fruition.

Counter-terrorism is a challenge that must be
confronted in the course of addressing the Syria issue.
Terrorism in the region at large and in the Syrian
territory in particular causes civilian casualties and
hampers international relief efforts. The international
community should strengthen coordination, uphold
uniform standards and join forces to combat all the
terrorist organizations in Syria that have been so
designated by the Security Council in order to create
enabling conditions for the achievement of a political
solution.

