Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Mr. Shearer for his briefing. I also thank
President Mogae for his briefing and his tireless efforts
to bring peace to South Sudan.

The people of South Sudan are suffering and
the promise of their hard-fought independence is
slipping away. In fact, we are so concerned about the
deteriorating situation in South Sudan and elsewhere in
Central and East Africa that President Trump has asked
me to go to Africa in October. While there, I will go to
Juba as a representative of my Government, but also as
a representative of the Security Council.

Six months have passed since the Security Council
demanded that the warring parties in South Sudan
cease fighting and return to the negotiation table. In
each month since then, we have gathered here to lament
the terrible situation in South Sudan. Each month, we
have urged the parties to stop fighting. We have called
on them to stop obstructing the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). We have watched in dismay
as hundreds of people have been forced to flee their
homes every day and as hunger has set in.

Each month, we have watched the situation in
South Sudan become worse, not better, and we issue
still more calls to action. We are disappointed that
the Council refuses to stem the flow of arms to South
Sudan or punish those who victimize their own people.
Still, we know that the real responsibility and power for
change lies with South Sudan's leaders, but so far, the
Government of South Sudan has not responded to the
pleas of the Council to create an inclusive Government
and put an end to the fighting. There is a great deal of
work left to do.

The violence and destruction have left 2 million
South Sudanese displaced, 2 million refugees, 6 million
facing near-famine conditions and countless dead.
The impact on children has been especially severe.
Seventeen thousand children have been abducted or
recruited into armed groups. More than 15,000 children
have been pulled apart from their families and other
loved ones. More than 1.1 million children face acute
malnutrition and barely half of school-age children
are in the classrooms. Those are sobering statistics
with dire implications for the safety, well-being and
future of an entire generation. The United Nations
Mission is in South Sudan to respond to the crisis, help
protect civilians and ease their suffering. UNMISS
shelters more than 200,000 civilians at sites across the
country. It tries to reach more, but its operations are
continually frustrated.

We call on the Government of South Sudan to
welcome the assistance of the Mission and cooperate
with it fulfilling its mandate for the South Sudanese
people. The United States is not waiting to act. Earlier
in September, we imposed economic and financial
sanctions against individuals who have obstructed the
peace process, denied access to humanitarian assistance
and interfered with the peacekeeping mission. The
United States will do what it can to reduce the suffering
in South Sudan and the Security Council and regional
actors must do more, but our ultimate message to the
South Sudanese leaders will be that they must seize the
opportunity to take the initiative. They have a way to
stop the violence.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
has presented them with a way to quickly resuscitate
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, but time is running out. It
is the last chance at salvaging the peace agreement in
South Sudan. The different parties to the conflict must
use the next several weeks to commit themselves to the
process and conclude it. Our hope is that South Sudan's
leaders will seize the opportunity. If they do not, we
must resolve now, both individually and collectively, to
do more to end the conflict.

As for the people of South Sudan, we look forward
to delivering the message in person very soon that we
have not forgotten or given up on them. The people of
South Sudan have a friend and advocate in the United
States of America.

