Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin previous speakers
in welcoming the timely adoption of resolution 2268
(2016). Its unanimous adoption is a testament to the
resolve of the Security Council in seeking an end to the
bloody conflict in Syria. We also thank Special Envoy
De Mistura for his briefing, which provided us with
insight into a very crucial week for Syria, one which,
hopefully, will begin to define a better future for the
men, women and children of Syria.

Malaysia welcomes the announcement of the
cessation of hostilities by the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG), which is scheduled to begin
right now. We also welcome the agreement by the
Government of Syria and the opposition groups in
that regard. With the agreement of all parties to the
cessation of hostilities, including allied forces, we now
have a real opportunity to reduce violence and end the
senseless brutality that the conflict has inflicted upon
the Syrian people. The glimmer of hope presented to
the Syrian people after much work by the Council, the
ISSG and Special Envoy De Mistura over the past few
weeks must be made a reality. It cannot be allowed to
fail, because military escalation and the continuation of
conflict can only serve to inflict more damage on both
sides and to prolong the dire humanitarian crisis.

Malaysia was encouraged by the first round of
peace talks held by Special Envoy De Mistura late last
month. Unfortunately, the peace talks were suspended
due to the continued aerial bombardment and the
hindering of deliveries of humanitarian aid to people in
need. The cessation of hostilities and the breakthrough
in humanitarian operations last week give us fresh hope
that the peace talks can be resumed. We take note of
the planned resumption of talks on 7 March and call
upon all the relevant parties to participate in the United
Nations-facilitated talks next week. However, we would
caution against moving the goalposts too often. We
hope that the peace talks scheduled for next Monday
will proceed. The peace talks are extremely crucial,
and the only solution to the Syrian conflict is through a
political settlement. The sooner the relevant key actors
accept that, the sooner greater effort could be invested
to find a breakthrough to end the conflict and to work
for peace. We must therefore now shift our focus to
the political route and work towards implementing the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

We are heartened by the breakthrough made by the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners in securing
safe passage for humanitarian relief missions to the five
besieged towns in Syria. We have also seen the United
Nations carry out its first airdrop of humanitarian aid to
more than 200,000 people in Deyr ez-Zour. Given that
breakthrough, my delegation would reiterate that the
success in delivering humanitarian relief via airdrops
to the besieged areas must be replicated; it should not
be a one-off event. In addition, there are other besieged
areas inaccessible by humanitarian partners, and access
must be granted to those places. We again call upon
States with influence on the parties to the conflict to
do their utmost to ensure that the sieges end and that
humanitarian aid is accessible to all.

We are hopeful that the cessation of hostilities
among the relevant parties to the conflict will lead us
to the desperately sought-after political solution. It is
incumbent upon the Council to stand united in making
that happen.

