Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Reske-Nielsen for his presentation
and to welcome the presence and the statement of
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

My country aligns itself with the statement that
will be made by the observer of the European Union.

At the outset, I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of South Africa for having
led the Security Council's mini-mission to Timor-Leste,
for his report (see S/PV.6858) and, more generally, for
his work in the Security Council on this matter. My
country would also like to thank the United Nations
staff members who have worked in the Mission in
Timor-Leste since its deployment, the successive
Special Representatives and those nations that have
participated in stabilizing the country, in particular,
Portugal, Australia and New Zealand.

We would like to congratulate the authorities
of Timor-Leste for organizing free and democratic
legislative and presidential elections, which were
held in a peaceful climate with a high turnout. The
transfer of power was peaceful, which gives shape to
the entrenchment of democracy and the solidity of the
country's institutions. The transfer of responsibility for
security to the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL)
took place in good conditions and without an increase
in crime. The certification of the full reconstitution
of the PNTL paves the way for a cut in staff levels of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and an end to the Mission on 31 December
2012, as stipulated in resolution 2037 (2012). The
country's diplomacy is displaying great dynamism, as
demonstrated by its role in the Group of Seven Plus
coalition of fragile States and its growing interaction
with regional organizations in the area, an aim that we
too are pursuing for our territories in the Pacific. The
security situation has been stable for some years now,
and everything points to it remaining so.

The challenges that the Timorese must tackle today
include combating poverty, economic development,
discrimination against women, the scourge of
corruption and bolstering justice and accountability for
serious crimes committed in the past. The challenges
should be met with the assistance of the international
community, and no longer with the support of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation.

The effective departure of UNMIT is approaching
and taking final shape. The preparations for UNMIT's
withdrawal and the Joint Transition Plan are, in our
eyes, a model to be followed in other theatres. We
have taken due note of the wishes expressed by Prime
Minister Gusmao on the nature of the relation between
his country and the United Nations after the withdrawal.
It is clear that the type of presence that the United
Nations will maintain on the ground should be defined
in concert with the local authorities and with their full
agreement. We should also bear in mind its budgetary
implications. We are also ready, as requested by the
Timorese authorities, to see the agenda of the Security
Council evolve in order to reflect the new situation in
Timor-Leste. We nonetheless are prepared to join all
the parties concerned in considering the outlines of
a future relationship between the United Nations and
Timor-Leste.

