Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I would like to start by
expressing the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Sir, and the Security Council for convening this public
meeting on the briefings by the Chairmen of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the three
Committee Chairmen, as well as the Committee
members and all the experts involved, for their
dedication and hard work in pursuing their mandates.

Allow me also to reiterate my Government's
strong commitment to combating terrorism. We
ourselves have been the unfortunate victims of acts of
terrorism, but even before those tragic events,
Indonesia had decided to put into effect various
measures to combat that scourge nationally, bilaterally,
regionally and internationally. The recent visit to
Indonesia by the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and his
subsequent meetings with high-ranking officials in
Jakarta underline the commitment of the Indonesian
Government to that endeavour. The visit by the
Chairman was fruitful not only in enhancing
collaboration and further strengthening international
efforts to combat terrorism, but also in sharing the
experiences and in understanding the challenges being
faced by Indonesia in implementing the sanctions.

In that regard, Indonesia wishes to welcome and
support the determination of the Chairman of the 1267
Committee to continuously improve the quality of the
consolidated list. In our view, adding the missing
identifier for many of the individual names would
greatly assist countries in their efforts to apprehend
such individuals. We believe that problems arising
from the incompleteness of background information on
individuals can be resolved through adding more
information to the list. In that case, countries that have
submitted particular names to the list should be able to
give more information or share such information with
other countries so that they can all focus their efforts
on pursuing all the persons listed.

Permit me now to turn to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee work programme for the eighteenth 90-day
period, which covers the period from January to March
2006. Indonesia welcomes and supports the work
programme. In our View, it will enhance the
effectiveness of existing counter-terrorism measures.
Let me add, in that connection, that Indonesia supports
all measures intended to enhance the counter-terrorism
capabilities of States requesting aid. We hope that such
aid will be made readily available.

On the particular issue of State visits, while
Indonesia recognizes its importance in monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as well as in
identifying areas needing technical assistance, we are
of the View that the planning of such visits should be
coordinated with the 1267 Committee and the
monitoring team for reasons of efficiency and
effectiveness and so as to avoid the possibility of
creating "visit fatigue" in particular countries.

With regard to paragraph 4 of resolution 1540
(2004), Indonesia submitted its report in October 2004.
In addition, we submitted further information in
November 2005 in compliance with the request of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the hard work of the 1540 Committee.
We look forward to the fullest possible cooperation
with it and to receiving assistance in implementing
resolution 1540.

In that connection, we would like to note that the
mandate of the 1540 Committee will be completed this
April. We have no difficulties with an extension to the
mandate so long as the scope and modalities are clearly
defined and do not go beyond the provisions of
resolution 1540. Along with that, however, we think
that we should try to explore the possibility of
formulating a comprehensive and multilaterally-
negotiated legal instrument to address, in all their
aspects and on a permanent basis, the specific
questions related to preventing the acquisition of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.

Allow me to provide an update on Indonesia's
continuing efforts to combat international terrorism. On
9 November 2005, in the effort to apprehend Dr. Azhari
and Noordin M. Top - the prime suspects of many
terrorist bombings in Indonesia - our counter-
terrorism police, following information it had received,
tracked Dr. Azhari to Malang in East Java.
Unfortunately, he was killed. It is our hope that the
elimination of Dr. Azhari as one of the masterminds of
the terrorist bombings in Indonesia will weaken the
capacity of his group to launch further attacks in the
country.

In addition, I am happy to inform the Council
that, since its establishment in July 2004, the Jakarta
Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation has held
various training courses to enhance the capacity of law
enforcement officers in the Asia-Pacific region to cope
with transnational crime, including terrorism. In 2006,
the Centre will hold more training courses, including a
coastal patrol seminar to be sponsored by Italy; a
critical incident management event to be sponsored by
France; a major investigations management workshop;
as well as an event on Islamic law and politics in Asia.
Finally, I would like to stress Indonesia's
conviction that terrorism is a problem affecting all
nations and that we can best fight and vanquish that
menace through a multidimensional and multilateral
approach, based on international law and respect for
human rights and characterized by international
cooperation, collaboration and a spirit of dialogue
among all States, civilizations and religions. Indonesia
is one such party, and, as we have said in the past, we
stand ready to take every measure necessary and to
work with other States and organizations to ensure that
terrorists can find no place to hide and that terrorism is
defeated.

