Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): My delegation
welcomes the holding oftoday's meeting to discuss the
annual report of the Security Council, which will be
submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with
Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations. We are grateful to Ambassador Mahbubani,
the Permanent Representative of Singapore, and to his
deputy, Ms. Christine Lee, for their relentless drive in
making this year's report the way it is. Ambassador
Mahbubani's unyielding determination and his
innovative approach based on modern business
practices, which some of us might have found a little
overbearing, have today lead to a report which the
entire membership of the United Nations would be
proud of.

The informal working group of the Security
Council concerning the Council's documentation and
other procedural questions has done excellent work,
and we would like to thank the Secretariat and its team
for their very good work in the preparation of the
report, as well as their invaluable support to the
Council.

We also wish to express our warm gratitude to the
five elected members who left the Council in
December 2001 and who contributed enormously to the
Council's work. We wish that they could have been
invited to give their views on the report at this meeting
today, since they were also involved in the first six
months of our reporting period.

Compared to last year's report, the report we have
before us today represents a major improvement. It is
shorter, reader-friendly, more focussed and more
organized. More importantly, it has resulted in
substantial savings in publication costs, compared with
previous reports.

As for the report itself, let me divide my
observations into two parts; first, procedural matters
with regard to the works of the Security Council, and
secondly, substantive issues with which the Council
has been involved in the year covered by the report.

During the period from July 2001 through June
2002, there was a marked improvement in the working
methods ofthis Council. I will cite a few.

First, there here has been a greater number of
public meetings with greater participation of non-
Council members, and this has created more openness
and transparency in the work of the Council. Secondly,
the Council has held a large number of open briefings
followed by informal consultations, thus giving non-
members the opportunity to be apprised of the latest
developments of topics under discussion. Thirdly, there
have been several wrap-up sessions, giving members as
well as non-members of the Council the opportunity to
express their views on topics of interest in a more
candid, frank and open manner.

Fourthly, greater interaction has resulted through
interventions in Council debates when speakers
alternated between members and non-members. Fifthly,
the Council has begun a new practice of drawing lots
for the speakers list, and this has helped make a fairer
and more transparent system for the list.

Sixthly, there has been a series of brainstorming
sessions both inside and outside the Security Council.
This has helped in preparing comprehensive
approaches to many complex and difficult issues. We
think that the Council, through very busy with an
agenda that is more or less routine, should find more
time for informal, candid, free and frank exchanges so
it can prepare strategic approaches to various issues
confronting us.

The outcome of these procedural innovations has
been very positive. We have seen a more Vibrant
Council with a free flow of ideas and a more
interactive and animated exchange of views on many
issues. Some cases worth citing are the discussions on
Africa held under the presidency of the Minster for
Foreign Affairs of Mauritius in January 2002;
discussions on the Mano River Union under the
presidency of Baroness Amos; discussions on the
Democratic Republic of Congo under the presidency of
Ambassador Negroponte; and discussions on Angola,
Afghanistan, East Timor and many others.

On the substantive issues, the report clearly
shows how busy Council was during the period
covered. It not only reacted to threats to international
and regional peace and security, but was also proactive
in dealing with many problems affecting peace and
security at both regional and international levels.

The Council energetically reacted to the 11
September attacks and the immediate threats of terror
and attacks by adopting resolutions 1363 (2001), 1368
(2001) and 1373 (2001). Likewise, the Council has
been fully involved in addressing problems in
Afghanistan, Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Eritrea,
Somalia, Angola and Burundi.

In some cases, however, the Council has not been
able to deal with certain problems in the same
successful manner. On the Middle East, for example,
while the Council made a tremendous leap by deciding
in January 2002 to have regular monthly briefings,
unfortunately it has not been able to make real progress
in helping with the peace process.

On the other hand, the implied condoning by the
Security Council of non-compliance with its
resolutions by some Members prevented the Council
from attaining the desired result. Likewise, the Council
has not yet been able to reach agreement on the issue
of sanctions.
We have witnessed the proactive role of the
Council in dealing with African issues. The creation of
the ad hoc Working Group on Africa, to which many of
our colleagues have referred, and the productive use of
retreats have immensely helped in enhancing the role
of the Council. I agree with Ambassador Corr that ad
hoc working groups on other complex issues can be
useful and can contribute to the work ofthe Council.

Security Council missions to various troubled
areas have also been extremely helpful in addressing
the core of the problems and in instilling necessary
confidence in the work of the Council. We believe that
field visits are essential in helping members understand
and assess the real situation on the ground. We
therefore encourage such visits, which have also had
very positive impacts on the local actors involved in
conflict situations.

While we acknowledge the efforts of the Council
toward achieving the objectives of the United Nations
Charter, as well as the strong commitment of the
members to its principles, we believe collective interest
should not be sacrificed on the altar of national
interest. Preserving unity in the Council should be the
guiding mantra, which every Council member must
strive to achieve. Without such unity it would be
difficult to project a credible and undivided image,
which may give a wrong signal to parties concerned.

In most cases the Council has lived up to its
standard and has been instrumental in dealing with
those problems. This has contributed to the credibility
of the Council by making the body more transparent,
answerable and accountable.

We hope that this report will be the object of
serious discussion and analysis by the wider
membership of the United Nations, because we believe
that through such discussion we will be able to
strengthen the relationship and the confidence between
the General Assembly and the Security Council,
enhance the credibility of the Council and above all
preserve the centrality of the Council.

