Mr. Serry: Since the Council met on 11 May,
international diplomatic efforts to reinvigorate the
search for peace in the Middle East have continued.

The Quartet principals will meet on 26 June in
Trieste, where the Quartet will also meet with members
of the Arab League follow-up committee. In advance of
the Quartet, Arab foreign ministers will meet in Cairo
and Prime Minister Netanyahu will meet United States
envoy Mitchell in Paris. These meetings are part of a
concerted push to secure the required commitments and
actions from the parties to create conditions for
relaunching efforts for a two-State solution.

United States President Obama's 4 June speech in
Cairo reiterated his commitment to the creation of a
Palestinian State and the resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. On 14 June 2009, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu stated that the Israeli Government would
accept a Palestinian State, but under stringent conditions
related to territory, security, refugees, Jerusalem and the
character of the State of Israel. The speech represented a
step forward given the previous positions of the current
Government. I reiterate what the Secretary-General told
the Council last month:

"Action on the ground, together with a genuine
readiness to negotiate on all core issues, including
Jerusalem, borders and refugees, based on Israel's
existing commitments, will be the true tests of
Israel's commitment to the two-State solution."
(S/PV.6123, p. 3)

In this regard, the Israeli Government failed to
commit to or announce measures to begin to implement
a freeze on all settlement activity, including natural
growth. Despite efforts to remove three minor outposts
during the reporting period, illegal settlement
construction continued across the West Bank in
contravention of the Road Map. Reports that processes
to approve new construction in settlements continue as
before are extremely concerning.

During the reporting period, settlers injured seven
Palestinians in Violent attacks, burned several fields and
uprooted hundreds of olive trees. Settlers tried to take
over seven dunums of Palestinian land in East Jerusalem,
leading to violent clashes with local Palestinian residents.
There continues to be inadequate enforcement of the rule
of law against violent settlers. However, I welcome the
decision of the Israeli Government to offer financial
compensation to 50 Palestinian plaintiffs affected by
settler violence in Hebron in November 2008.

Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem remain
closed by Israeli order and demolition orders continue
to be issued against Palestinian homeowners in East
Jerusalem and in the remainder of the West Bank, with
approximately 4,500 orders outstanding. We reiterate
our call for an end to unilateral Israeli measures in
Jerusalem and an end to house demolitions.

I welcome the concrete steps taken by the Israeli
Government to ease movement restrictions on key
access routes into the cities of Nablus, Jericho,
Qalqiliya and Ramallah. However, over 600 obstacles
remain in place, as does the stringent permit system for
Palestinian movement. The construction of the barrier
within the occupied Palestinian territory continues,
despite the Advisory Opinion of the International Court
of Justice. Fundamental alterations in Israel's policies
will be required to facilitate a transformative change in
the West Bank, which is the Israeli Government's
stated and welcome intention.

Citing security concerns, Israeli forces continued
search-and-arrest operations throughout the West Bank.
One Palestinian was killed and another 96, including
33 children, were injured. Five Israelis were injured by
Palestinians. Today, Israel released the Speaker of the
09-37692
Palestinian Legislative Council, Hamas member Aziz
Dweik, after 34 months in prison.

Turning to the Palestinian side, President Abbas
responded to the speech of Prime Minister Netanyahu
by insisting that Israel freeze settlement activity before
negotiations can resume. In a speech on 22 June,
Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad outlined the
intention, despite the continuing conditions of
occupation, to build the institutions of a Palestinian
State in two years. In this regard, I am glad to report
that the United Nations has finalized a medium-term
response plan to guide all United Nations efforts to
support a Palestinian-led process of State-building.

An immediate challenge facing the Palestinian
Authority is financial. When the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee met in Oslo on 8 June, Prime Minister
Fayyad reported that the Palestinian Authority faces a
critical budget crisis. It is essential that Member States
act swiftly to fulfil pledges and commit to additional
budget support for the Palestinian Authority. At the
same time, the only sustainable way to revive the
Palestinian economy and for the Palestinian Authority
to receive sufficient finances from tax revenues is for
Israel to ease closure measures and create an enabling
environment for economic growth.

The Palestinian Authority continues efforts to
reform its security services and criminal justice system,
with considerable international assistance. It also
continues to take action against militants in accordance
with its Road Map commitments. These efforts resulted
in violent confrontations with Hamas in the West Bank
during the reporting period, in the most intense internal
Palestinian clashes since June 2007. Four members of
the security forces were killed in gun battles with
Hamas militants in Qalqiliya on 31 May and 3 June, in
a security operation which also claimed the lives of
four members of Hamas and one civilian.

Palestinian security forces also seized arms,
explosives and funds from militant groups, and
reportedly foiled plans to attack security infrastructure
in Nablus. A Hamas-affiliated detainee died on 15 June
While in the custody of Palestinian intelligence in
Hebron, in circumstances which are disputed.

This leads me to a further challenge facing
Palestinian State-building: reuniting Gaza and the West
Bank within the framework of the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. The urgency and scale of this
challenge is clear from developments on the ground. In
09-37692

response to developments in the West Bank, Hamas
arrested dozens of Fatah members in Gaza, ransacking
homes, confiscating belongings and placing movement
restrictions on Fatah political figures. Demonstrations
and media campaigns in Gaza denounced the
Palestinian Authority security campaigns and security
coordination with Israel. The Hamas military Wing
warned of an eruption of violence in the West Bank.

Likewise, Hamas continues to assert its control
over institutions and organizations in Gaza. On
14 June, a demonstration by the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine in Gaza calling for Palestinian
unity was violently disrupted by Hamas security
forces. On 17 June, Hamas took over an independent
medical non-governmental organization, the Patient's
Friends Society, which runs a hospital and a number of
clinics in the Strip.

Building Palestinian statehood on the basis of
divided societies, separate institutions and competing
legitimacies is unsustainable. Hamas must re-evaluate
its stance towards a two-State solution and the resort to
violence against civilians, and commit to genuine
political pluralism. Fatah needs to face the challenge of
internal reform. I welcome President Abbas' extensive
personal engagement as efforts continue to finalize
arrangements for the holding of the sixth Fatah
congress. Above all, the factions need to conclude an
agreement to reunite within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority, as called for in
resolution 1860 (2009) and by the Quartet.

Fatah and Hamas delegations met in Cairo on
8 June and are scheduled to meet again on 28 June, and
efforts continue towards reaching an agreement by
7 July in Cairo. Egypt has also facilitated meetings of
reconciliation committees in both Gaza and the West
Bank in an effort to calm tensions and address issues
such as politically motivated detentions and denials of
movement. The Secretary-General strongly supports
Egypt's efforts, and it is crucial that they be supported
by the international community and by all regional
parties.

The unresolved crisis in Gaza has negative
repercussions on all efforts to advance the peace
process and wreaks unacceptable havoc on the fabric of
civilian life in Gaza. Resolution 1860 (2009) specified
the key challenges that must be met if a different and
more positive strategy on Gaza is to emerge. I believe
3
that there is now an emerging opportunity to begin
shifting the dynamics.

There has been a notable and welcome drop in
violence during the reporting period. Since 11 May,
there have been two rockets and seven mortars
launched into Israel from the Gaza Strip, resulting in
one injury. Six Palestinians were killed and 10 were
injured in clashes with the Israel Defense Forces and as
a result of Israeli air strikes. Among those killed were
four radical militants who tried to attack an Israeli post
on 8 June. There have been efforts on the part of the de
facto authorities in Gaza to enforce a cessation of
rocket fire.

Likewise, efforts continue in order to prevent the
resupply of illicit weapons to militants in Gaza,
including Egyptian efforts to close down tunnels and
confiscate explosives. I commend the serious Egyptian
efforts under way, on which I was briefed during a recent
visit to Cairo. The Israeli Mission has informed the
Secretariat of Israel's assessment that at least 330 mortars,
37 rockets, 40 anti-tank weapons, 46 anti-aircraft missiles
and 17 tons of explosives have entered the Gaza Strip
since Operation Cast Lead - information that the
Secretariat cannot independently verify.

Conditions for the civilian population remain of
grave concern. Food and medicines are entering Gaza,
and the first shipment of livestock in nine months
entered Gaza on 19 June in the form of 350 cattle. But
the overall quantity and range of goods remain grossly
insufficient to support normal economic and social
activity. About 70 trucks per day have entered Gaza in
the past month, which is 15 per cent less than the daily
average last month and compares with 392 trucks per
day in May 2007, when there was a functioning
import-export system. Right before Operation Cast
Lead, the daily average of trucks was 18. The
quantities of cooking gas and industrial fuel allowed
into Gaza met only 70 per cent and 80 per cent of the
respective monthly needs.

As the Secretary-General said on 11 May (see S/PV.6123), it is completely unacceptable that no
reconstruction materials were allowed into Gaza when
an entire civilian population was trapped in a war zone
and given the scale of damage caused by Operation
Cast Lead. The Secretary-General has presented to
Defence Minister Barak a United Nations proposal to
kick-start early recovery in Gaza by opening the
crossings for materials to complete United Nations
construction work on housing, health and educational
facilities, suspended since June 2007. The United
Nations has existing mechanisms in place to ensure the
integrity of the programming. That proposal was
developed in close consultation with the Palestinian
Authority and the Gaza business community, and Prime
Minister Fayyad confirmed his full support to the
Secretary-General today. Intensive consultations with
the Israeli Government have taken place, and we await
Israel's reaction.

The Israeli Government has appointed a new
negotiator on the question of Corporal Gilad Shalit,
whose third anniversary in captivity was yesterday and
to whom the International Committee of the Red Cross
has not been granted access. Hamas continues to state
its readiness to resume negotiations on that file in
exchange for the release of a number of the more than
11,000 prisoners held in Israeli jails. Egyptian efforts
are continuing to resolve that crucial issue.

On 1 June, I met Justice Richard Goldstone when
he arrived in Gaza, through Rafah, to conduct a first
phase of fact-finding, pursuant to the mandate given to
him by the Human Rights Council. The mission is
expected to return to the Strip at the end of this month.
Regrettably, the Government of Israel has not extended
cooperation to the mission.

We continue to believe strongly in the potential
for activating the regional tracks of the peace process
alongside a rejuvenated Palestinian track. United States
envoy Mitchell visited Lebanon and Syria on 12 and
13 June for discussions on the revitalization of regional
peace efforts. The situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan was quiet during the reporting period, although
Israeli settlement activity continues.

We continue to support the Arab Peace Initiative
as a key framework for comprehensive peace, and
welcome and encourage the active engagement of Arab
countries in the efforts under way to create the
conditions for resumed negotiations. We also continue
to support the convening of an international conference
in Moscow.

Turning now to Lebanon, and mindful that the
Secretary-General will submit his tenth report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) at the end of
this month, I should like to focus on the most salient
issues since the last briefing on 20 April (see S/PV.6107).
09-37692

The 7 June parliamentary elections were held in
an atmosphere of calm and without any major security
concerns. International observation missions assessed
that the elections were largely free and fair. The
Secretary-General congratulated the people of Lebanon
and all Lebanese parties and institutions concerned on
the peaceful conduct of the elections. According to the
official results released by the Ministry of the Interior,
candidates from the 14 March coalition won 71 out of
the 128 seats in Parliament, while candidates from the
8 March coalition won 57 seats.

Against that background, a climate of dialogue
and cooperation has prevailed in Lebanon since
election day. Prime Minister Siniora's Cabinet has been
acting in a caretaker capacity since the formal end of
the legislative period on 20 June. The election of a new
speaker of Parliament will take place on 25 June. After
that step has been completed, President Sleiman will
appoint the Prime Minister-designate, who will then
hold formal consultations on the formation of a new
Government. The Secretary-General has expressed his
hope that the process of forming a new Government
will proceed as expeditiously as possible and take
place in a calm and secure environment.

Lebanon's Ambassador to Syria arrived in
Damascus to take up his post on 20 April and his
Syrian counterpart presented his credentials to
President Sleiman on 29 May. Both countries now
operate functioning embassies in each other's capitals.

In the period since the last briefing, there have
been a large number of arrests, including of former and
current military officials, over allegations of spying for
Israel. On 16 June, a low-ranking Fatah member was
assassinated in Saida's Ain el-Hilweh Palestinian
refugee camp. The assailants remain unknown. In spite
of that attack, it must be noted that the situation inside
the refugee camps remained calm during the elections.

As concerns the reconstruction of the Nahr
el-Bared refugee camp, much work remains to be done.
Complications due to the discovery of archaeological
09-37692

artefacts at the old camp site during the removal of
rubble have recently caused new delays in the
reconstruction schedule.

On 29 April, the four generals held since 2005 in
connection with the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri were released upon the
recommendation of the pre-trial judge of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon.

The overall situation in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations
remained generally quiet over the reporting period.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces continued to
carry out intensive joint operational activities during
that period. Israeli air violations continued on an
almost daily basis during the reporting period.

Let me now conclude. As we prepare for Friday's
Quartet meeting, we will be looking for a strong
affirmation of the international framework for peace, as
embodied in the resolutions of this Council, existing
agreements and the Arab Peace Initiative. I urge
Israelis and Palestinians alike to carefully assess the
opportunity before them to serve the legitimate
interests of their peoples. Israelis have an opportunity
to achieve lasting peace and recognition within secure
and recognized borders. Palestinians have an
opportunity to see the occupation end and a Palestinian
State emerge. We need both Israeli and Palestinian
Governments clearly committed to a two-State
solution, achieved peacefully through negotiations on
all core issues; to implementing their Road Map
commitments; and to changing the dynamics in Gaza.
International determination is stronger than ever before
to ensure that commitments made are commitments
monitored and commitments kept.

