I want to thank the Dominican Republic for its leadership in calling for today's meeting. Let me also thank our three United Nations principals for their briefings, in the context of resolution 2417 (2018). It is important that we meet today to consider our role in preventing harm. That is what resolution 2417 (2018) is about, so I am very pleased to see this meeting taking place today. The prospect of famine in the twenty-first century is a human-made and preventable failure, as our briefers have set out. The link between conflict and hunger could not be clearer: armed conflict and violence are playing a central role in denying civilians their basic rights to food and to life. The United Kingdom shares the strong concerns raised on the rising risk of famine and acute food insecurity in Yemen, north-eastern Nigeria, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are just as concerned about the deteriorating food security situation in several other conflict-affected countries, including Somalia, Burkina Faso and Afghanistan. It is clear that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has further compounded by such humanitarian emergencies, increasing pre-existing vulnerabilities. Armed actors are violating the rights and safety of civilians, deploying tactics that use the suffering of civilians as a weapon of war and wilfully disregarding their obligations under international humanitarian law to protect civilians. That includes the prevention of humanitarian access to life-saving support through bureaucratic impediments, delays to aid delivery, blockades and inhibited monitoring. But, as we know from our discussions, unfortunately and tragically aid workers who try to serve populations in many different theatres face deliberate attacks. The rising risk of famine and acute food insecurity in conflict zones requires immediate action on the ground, first, by both Governments and non-State armed groups. With regard to the countries cited in today's briefing, I want to make a few brief comments. On Yemen, famine can be prevented only by urgent external financial assistance to the Central Bank of Yemen to improve the affordability of food and medicines through immediate funding for the desperately underresourced United Nations humanitarian response and urgent progress towards a nationwide ceasefire. All States Members of the United Nations, I think, have a responsibility to provide funding to the United Nations-led response, particularly those that have made commitments to do so. Of course, the Yemeni parties bear the primary responsibility to agree urgently to United Nations peace proposals. In north-eastern Nigeria, the deliberate targeting of aid workers by non- State armed groups in the north-east is an abhorrent and unacceptable violation of international humanitarian law. Close joint work between the United Nations and the Nigerian Government is essential to ensuring the full protection of civilians, as well as progress on humanitarian access. In South Sudan, we continue to see a stalling peace process and escalating violence at the subnational level. Again, it is vital that the Government of South Sudan and also any non-State groups ensure unrestricted access for humanitarian workers and reduce the risk that aid workers face there. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, an expanded security and political effort that works with regional, national and subnational authorities is needed to address the conflict drivers. But, more broadly, the international community must come together. We must coordinate and prioritize our efforts. We must break the cycle of armed conflict and humanitarian crisis. We have a collective responsibility to act fast, but we have heard today that our contributions are not keeping up with needs. Earlier this month, the United Kingdom announced a call to action to prevent famine. That included the announcement of an additional aid package worth over $150 million, which aims to alleviate extreme hunger for more than 6 million people. I say additional, as the United Kingdom is proud to be one of the main humanitarian donors not just to individual country appeals, but also to core funds, such as the Central Emergency Response Fund. I believe that in 2020, the United Kingdom has given just over $1 billion in humanitarian assistance. We have given just under $1 billion in assistance to deal with COVID-19. The United Kingdom has also announced the appointment of Nick Dyer as the United Kingdom's first Special Envoy for Famine Prevention and Humanitarian Affairs. We call on all Member States to rapidly mobilize all financial means to support swift humanitarian action before it is too late. We, the members of the Security Council, must also play our role. Not only is it incumbent upon us to step up our funding, but we can also mobilize our diplomatic efforts. We can use our influence with actors on the ground to insist on unfettered humanitarian access and ensure the protection of civilians in that regard. Having welcomed this briefing today and the white note that preceded it, I would like to set out what I hope will be a common expectation that United Nations reporting on such situations, and on others of concern, should continue. That should include updates on progress with regard to the recommendations of the United Nations, and it should include evidence on wrongdoing, where collection is possible, to increase accountability and to allow us, as members of the Council, to focus on those responsible. If the risk of famine continues, the Council needs to take action to improve the protection of civilians and work against denial of humanitarian access in whichever situation that occurs. We believe that the Council must remain fully engaged in this agenda over the coming weeks. We believe that we should return to this discussion later this autumn and hear from our briefers whether the situation has changed for the better or for the worse, and consider what further action we could take. Famine and hunger should not be inevitable consequences of war and conflict. A famine declaration means that it is already too late to save lives. It is a collective failure, including by us here. We must not stand idly by and allow ourselves to get to that point. We must act now to prevent a catastrophe in the coming months.
