Mr. Ruiicka (Slovakia): At the outset, may I
express our solidarity with the victims of the recent and
brutal attacks of terror in Paris, Beirut, Baghdad and
many other places throughout the world. We must join
efforts, overcome our differences and take all possible
steps to fight any kind of violent extremism, terrorism
and brutality based on hatred. That is our primary task.

Slovakia thanks the United Kingdom presidency
for having taken the initiative to convene today's
open debate focusing on the correlation between the
maintenance of peace and security and development
through the promotion of peaceful societies. I also wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador
Skoog, the Permanent Representative of Sweden and
Mrs. Bouchamaoui for their respective briefings.

While we align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union,
I would like to make some remarks in my national
capacity.

No one questions any longer the importance of
security for development and the role that development
plays in preventing conflict. The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) offers a unique opportunity to create
a continuum linking peaceful, inclusive and safe
societies and development efforts. The inclusion of
Goal 16 and its related targets in the new post-2015
development agenda reflects the growing recognition
of the importance ofpeace, safety and good governance
within the traditional development paradigm. As was
outlined in the concept note (S/2015/845, annex) for this
debate, we fully recognize the need to understand more
deeply the shared objectives that cut across the security/
development spectrum and would require joint action in
the fields ofboth security and development. Support for
security sector reform is one of those shared objectives
that link the security and development spectrums.

Slovakia and South Africa, as co-Chairs of the
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform (SSR),
organized a high-level event that took place during the
general debate to discuss the link between development
and the security sector. We looked in particular at the
impact that the adoption of Goal 16 might have on SSR.
The outcome and recommendations of that meeting
were made available to all Member States. Slovakia
welcomed the Security Council meeting, held in August
under the presidency of Nigeria (see S/PV.7508), that
focused on the further implementation of resolution 2151
(2014). As a result of recent discussions, we would like
to put forward three key points and recommendations.

First is the issue of transition and national
ownership. Successful SSR will allow for the transition
from instability and repeated cycles ofviolence to a path
of stability, institutional development and maturity. As
outlined in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), we
should work more effectively and consistently on
political strategies that will support the emergence
of a nationally owned vision and full commitment to
reforms that address the source of conflict.

Second is capacity-building. To solidify commitment
to SSR, development partners need to be ready to
support targeted capacity-building for institutions and
training for security forces, including by enhancing
their understanding of human rights norms and
obligations and gender-related issues, among others.
Support for the reintegration of former combatants is a
huge challenge and currently remains a gap area from
which development partners have withdrawn in recent
years.

Third is the issue of partnerships. We welcome
the progress made in strengthening the partnerships
between, inter alia, the African Union and European
Union on SSR. Going forward, we should ensure that
the Council is more closely engaged when concerted
action is needed to support partnerships and coherence
beyond the United Nations. South Sudan, the Central
African Republic and Mali are cases in point. Too often,
we have gone ahead with building up capacities and
institutions without a political strategy underpinning
those initiatives. In the area of SSR, this can have
abysmal consequences for the safety of people and
communities.

Finally, I would like to commend the work of the
United Nations Security Sector Reform Task Force,
which brings together the security and development
arms of the Organization to develop coherent United
Nations strategies. As we concluded during the high-
level event on SSR held in October in New York, the work
of the inter-agency Task Force should be strengthened
and complemented through an international delivery
network on security sector reform.

