Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
President Ramos-Horta at this debate of the Security
Council. We thank him for his important speech and
also the Secretary-General for his very comprehensive
report on the situation in Timor-Leste.

We are pleased to note that, following the attacks
of February 2008, under the leadership of President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmao calm
quickly returned to the country. The settlement of the
issues of the petitioners and the internally displaced
persons resulted in political dialogue among the
different factions of the country further intensified.

The history of the past two years in Timor-Leste
has shown that only full cooperation among the various
political forces, and in particular between the
Government and Frente Revolucionaria do East Timor
Independente, has made it possible to effectively
resolve the security issue. We hail the efforts of
President Ramos-Horta for national reconciliation. We
call on all the parties in Timor-Leste to take into
consideration the stability of the country and the
interests of the people, take advantage of the present
situation, which is conducive to peace and
development, avoid futile controversy and focus on the
process of peace and the reconstruction of the country.

Achieving peace and lasting stability in Timor-
Leste requires significant efforts to further develop the
economy and improve living conditions in the country.
In the existing circumstances, we support the
Government's action in giving priority to developing
infrastructure, rural development and human resource
capacity-development, in particular for young people,
with a view to eliminating factors for instability from
the outset.

The international community should also
continue to do its utmost to step up the peace process
in Timor-Leste. We hope that the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, signed last year
between the Government and the United Nations, will
be effectively put into practice. As part of its
peacekeeping tasks, UNMIT should also assist the
Government of Timor-Leste in strengthening its
capacity for independent governance.

From the very beginning, the history of
independence and development in Timor-Leste has
been closed linked to the United Nations so as to
ensure that Timor-Leste is on the path to success. The
United Nations therefore bears a clear responsibility.
We support the extension of UNMIT's mandate. In
continuing its peacekeeping operations, the police
component of UNMIT must guarantee public security
and redouble efforts to help the Timor-Leste police in
strengthening its law enforcement capacity. In the
future, United Nations police should give priority to
training and transferring experience to the Timor-Leste
police. After a comprehensive review of the division of
resources and work of the United Nations, the staffing
of UNMIT needs restructuring.

China and Timor-Leste are both members of the
great family of nations of a peaceful Asia. We attach
great importance to the development of the situation in
Timor-Leste. We hope that Timor-Leste will achieve
development beneficial to the people and their
happiness as quickly as possible. In so far as possible,
China will continue to provide assistance to Timor-
Leste.

