Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.

Let me take this opportunity to express our
sincere appreciation for the convening of this open
meeting of the Security Council to review the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in the last
three months. We would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, who has demonstrated
effective leadership in steering the CTC, as well as to
thank the Vice-Chairmen, the members of the
Committee and all the experts involved for their
dedication and hard work.

We take note of the Committee's eighth ninety-
day work programme, which will run from 1 July to 30
September 2003. It is our belief that it will continue to
enhance the effectiveness of our counter-terrorism
measures.

In that connection, ASEAN supports measures
intended to enhance the counter-terrorism capability of
States requesting aid. We also reiterate the importance
of cooperation and coordination among United Nations
Member States in the area of capacity building vis-a-
vis States needing assistance, including States in the
South-East Asian region.

Allow me to provide an update on ASEAN's
continuing efforts to combat international terrorism
since April 2003.

ASEAN continues to condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We emphasize the need to
address the root causes of terrorism, and we reject any
attempt to associate terrorism with any religion, race,
nationality or ethnic group. That stance was reiterated
during the ministerial meeting in Phnom Penh on 16
and 17 June 2003. During that meeting, ASEAN
Foreign Ministers expressed their satisfaction with
current counter-terrorism measures and reviewed the
intensified cooperation that exists between member
States, which has facilitated the arrest of persons
engaged in terrorist activities and helped to prevent the
occurrence of terrorist acts. While renewing the
regional resolve to pursue the purposes of the
declaration on terrorism issued at the eighth ASEAN
summit on 3 November 2002, the Foreign Ministers
also affirmed their commitment to continue working
with ASEAN law enforcement authorities to carry out
the specific measures set out in the ASEAN
Declaration on Joint Action to Counter Terrorism,
which was issued in November 2001, as well as in the
work programme adopted by the special ASEAN
ministerial meeting on terrorism held in May 2002.

Furthermore, within the context of more
effectively combating global terrorism, ASEAN
Foreign Ministers welcomed efforts towards, and
renewed their determination to enhance, cooperation
with the international community. They also welcomed
the results of the International Conference on Anti-
Terrorism and Tourism Recovery, which was held in
Manila in November 2002; the Regional Conference on
Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing,
held in Bali in December 2002; and the Inter-sessional
Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and Transnational
Crime of the ASEAN Regional Forum, held in
Karambunai, Malaysia, in March 2003.

Additionally, the issue of transnational crime was
addressed on several occasions. The Foreign Ministers
recognized the successful outcomes of the ASEAN
Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime
(SOMTC) as well as the first ever SOMTC+3 and
SOMTC+1 meetings with China, the European Union
and the United States, which were held from 9 to 13
June in Hanoi. Also, the fifth meeting of the ASEAN
law ministers, held in Bangkok in June 2002,
underlined the importance of enhancing linkages with,
and supporting, the ASEAN ministerial meeting on
transnational crime in preventing and combating
transnational crime. The next ASEAN ministerial
meeting on transnational crime will be held in Bangkok
from 10 to 14 January 2004.

Furthermore, ASEAN member States look
forward to enhancing their capacity to fight terrorism
and therefore underscore the importance of
implementing the undertakings and commitments
outlined in the ASEAN-United States joint declaration
of 1 August 2002, the ASEAN-China joint declaration
of 4 November 2002 and the ASEAN-European Union
joint declaration issued on 28 January 2003.
In recognition of the necessity of developing
further measures for effective crossborder cooperation
against transnational organized crime and terrorism, a
meeting of Attorneys General of interested regional
countries was held in Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, from
30 June to 2 July 2003, to discuss means of enhancing
cooperation in dealing with such criminal matters.

In addition to the regional initiatives just
mentioned, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
continues to play a key role in enhancing counter-
terrorism among the ARF participants, as reflected in
the discussions at the official level and in the series of
counter-terrorism workshops conducted under its
auspices.

In order to coordinate and to give greater focus to
ARF counter-terrorism efforts, an Inter-Sessional
Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and Transnational
Crime was held for the first time in Karambunai,
Malaysia, on 21 and 22 March 2003. The meeting
adopted the statement on ARF cooperative counter-
terrorist actions on border security, which outlines
various concrete and cooperative measures to
strengthen security at their borders. The statement was
adopted by the tenth ARF ministerial meeting in
Phnom Penh on 18 June 2003.

The ARF remains fully committed to
strengthening counter-terrorism cooperation among
ARF participants. Gratified by the outcome and
conduct of the Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-
Terrorism and Transnational Crime, the ARF agreed
that the Inter-Sessional Meeting should continue its
work and welcomed the offer of the Philippines and
Russia to co-host it in the next inter-sessional year.

ASEAN Foreign Ministers welcomed the
establishment of the Southeast Asia Regional Centre
for Counter-Terrorism in Kuala Lumpur, which was
officially launched on 1 July 2003. The centre's
emphasis is on creating public awareness through
conferences, seminars, sustained education
programmes, training on terrorism and counter-
terrorism measures, as well as the management of post-
terrorism consequences, including those involving
chemical, nuclear, and biological warfare.

In closing, ASEAN reiterates its support for the
work of the CTC and the full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). ASEAN welcomes the
opportunity to participate in future CTC meetings in
order to present updates on the progress made in our
region in the fight against terrorism.
