Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to join those who have condemned in
the firmest possible manner today's cowardly terrorist
attack on a school in Peshawar, Pakistan, which killed
many innocent children and wounded numerous others.
Our thoughts and condolences go out to the families
of the victims and to the people and Government of
Pakistan.

I thank the Chadian presidency for organizing
this public debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
particularly the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. Your presence, Sir,
demonstrates the centrality of this partnership and
Chad's commitment to strengthening it. I thank the
Secretary-General and the High Representative of the
African Union for Mali and the Sahel for their opening
statements.

Luxembourg fully endorses the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

The Security Council rightly recognizes the role and
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. The strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and these organizations is
not only desirable, but necessary.

It is in Africa that the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is the most developed. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
extends to many areas. I highlight one area to which
attach particular importance - the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. The Security
Council has emphasized the valuable contribution that
regional and subregional organizations can make in this
sector, and has welcomed in particular the signing on
17 September 2013 of the joint statement of the Office
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union Commission. In that
regard, I welcome the discussion held on 6 June within
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
with the the African Union Commission for Peace and
Security, Ambassador Smail Chergui. It is important to
pursue these efforts to institutionalize child protection
mechanisms in all activities of the African Union in the
field of peace and security.

The examples of Mali and the Central African
Republic highlight the operational impact of the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. In both countries, in 2013 and 2014
African-led missions turned into Blue Helmet
operations - the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. As part
of this partnership, we believe that the interaction
between the members of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and all the members of the Security
Council, permanent and non-permanent alike, would
benefit from being strengthened in New York and in
Addis Ababa. This would improve the exchange of
information at an early stage and thereby contribute to
better informed decision-making on both sides.

One year after the outbreak of hostilities in South
Sudan, despite the concerted efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (GAD), the situation
remains appalling. The main protagonists continue to
give pride of place to military strategy, and with the end
of the rainy season there is a growing threat of renewed
large-scale fighting, with incalculable consequences
for the already traumatized civilian population. Given
the situation and the statements issued by IGAD and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, we
believe that the Security Council should take restrictive
measures against any party responsible for violations of
the ceasefire, obstructing political negotiations, or even
violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law. The country's natural
resources, including oil, must also be used for the
benefit of the South Sudanese people rather than to fuel
rearmament and war. We believe that these measures
are necessary to bring the parties to the conflict to
finally engage in good faith in political negotiations
for a lasting settlement of the conflict, in the primary
interests of the people of South Sudan. The strength of
a partnership is tested at moment such as this.

Luxembourg welcomes the strong partnerships
that have been established both between the United
Nations and the European Union and between the
African Union and the European Union. The United
Nations and the European Union have developed
synergies that benefit Africa in the fields of immediate
crisis response, humanitarian action, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. That is the case in the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and Mali, especially in the area of
security sector reform.

Europe supports the development of African crisis
management capacities through training and equipment.
In 2016, more than 17,000 African soldiers were trained
with the support of the Europeans - some, in Mali and
Somalia, by instructors from Luxembourg. The support
of the European Union and its member States is also
demonstrated through their substantial contributions to
the budgets of United Nations operations and African
missions, particularly through the African Peace
Facility.

The presence of several operations in the same
country, such as at present in the Central African
Republic, reinforces the need for coordination at
the political, operational and financial levels. Such
coordination involves an ongoing exchange of
information and experience at all levels of the chain of
command. In this spirit, we support the deepening of
triangular cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union and the European Union. We welcome
the fact that the synergies among the three organizations
figure prominently in the presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/27, which we have adopted at Chad's
initiative. Luxembourg will continue to commit itself to
strengthening the bonds of solidarity among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union
in order to better address the root causes of instability
represented by the absence of development, inequality,
exclusion, poverty and inadequate governance.

