Mrs. Viotti: I am pleased to brief the Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I
would like to extend a warm welcome to the Minister
of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration of
Guinea-Bissau, Her Excellency Ms. Maria Helena
Nosolini Embalo.

I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his
briefing and for his work as head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). I welcome Ambassador Ismael Gaspar
Martins, Permanent Representative of Angola and
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP).

Since I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.6569), I
had the opportunity to visit Guinea-Bissau in early
September. During my trip, I witnessed visible signs of
progress, in terms of both stability and economic
growth. The Government of Guinea-Bissau has made
considerable efforts to implement key peacebuilding
priorities in recent months. Concrete achievements in
the realm of macroeconomic improvements, fiscal
discipline and infrastructure development have induced
an important virtuous circle, in spite of the difficult
global economic environment.

On the political side, I was glad to note that
stability is taking hold. The current Government has
been the most stable and long-lasting since 1997. I also
11-57874
noted, however, that most interlocutors continue to
view stability as fragile. In this context, the full
implementation of security sector reform (SSR)
continues to be considered one of the highest priorities
and a step that will greatly contribute to sustainable
peace and development. Stability taking root is, of
course, contingent upon achieving other peacebuilding
priorities, notably upholding the rule of law, expanding
job creation and combating organized crime, including
illicit drug trafficking.

The urgency of focusing on SSR was widely
recognized by all interlocutors during my visit. To this
end, the launching of a pension fund for the armed
forces and security forces personnel to be demobilized
is regarded as an important instrument to assist the
reform. This process, coupled with the training of the
remaining contingent and the recruitment of new
personnel, will gradually improve the professionalism
of the armed forces and internal law enforcement
personnel.

The road map on SSR developed by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries offers a very relevant tool to
support governmental SSR efforts. It makes those
efforts part of a wider international cooperation
framework, built through a tripartite dialogue among
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and
CPLP. This commendable example of regional
cooperation also enjoys the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The Government of Guinea-Bissau has already
implemented some of the requested measures, such as
instituting a follow-up committee on the pension fund,
revamping the SSR national steering committee, and
drafting a tripartite memorandum of understanding for
the implementation of the joint ECOWAS/CPLP road
map, which has been officially presented to ECOWAS
and CPLP for comments. The negotiations on the
memorandum of understanding are at an advanced
stage, and its signature is expected soon.

Coinciding with my visit to Bissau, the
Government deposited, on 2 September, a total of
$200,000, as a first tranche of its initial contribution to
the pension fund. The Government is also considering
making an additional contribution by the end of this
year. These are welcome signs of Guinea-Bissau's
commitment and engagement in this process.
11-57874

During my stay in Bissau, I felt that the
Government is fully committed to SSR. It is now
essential that the international community provide
timely and steady support, in particular through
technical expertise and financial resources, to make the
pension fund operational. Although resources have
been pledged, they have not yet been disbursed.

In this regard, the Government of Guinea-Bissau
requested the assistance of the Peacebuilding
Commission to organize a high-level event on SSR in
New York by the end of this year. The holding of such
a high-level meeting can contribute to building trust
and to bringing international partners together to
support Guinea-Bissau in addressing key peacebuilding
challenges.

Members of the configuration have agreed that
the Peacebuilding Commission should present a list of
elements for the Government's consideration, to assist
in the preparations for the proposed high-level event on
security sector reform, especially on the
operationalization of the pension fund. I wrote to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau on
24 September, listing those elements for the
Government's consideration.

I am pleased to say that progress has also been
made in the fight against drug trafficking. The
Government of Guinea-Bissau adopted the operational
plan to combat drug trafficking. The Transnational
Crime Unit (TCU) is operational and its Management
Board has met regularly. INTERPOL has set up an
office in Bissau. Continuing international cooperation
will be needed to support the TCU in implementing its
ongoing activities. The configuration also shares that
concern, and intends to advocate for an increase in the
financial resources disbursed in support of the West
Africa Coast Initiative.

As I indicated previously, the Government of
Guinea-Bissau has been able to achieve important
progress in macroeconomic policy over the past few
years. Improvements in the economic sector resulted
from an exceptional cashew nut harvest, enhanced
financial and fiscal discipline and the implementation
of public work projects.

It is also worth noting that the Secretary-General
has allocated up to $16.8 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) to the implementation of the
2011-2013 Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Guinea-
Bissau. Likewise, the PBF Joint Steering Committee
5
has approved the four draft projects jointly designed by
the Government and the United Nations country team.
Those projects focus on supporting security sector
reform, promoting job creation as a peace dividend for
youth and women, and boosting political dialogue and
national reconciliation.

The Peacebuilding Commission continues to be
committed to a proactive approach in its engagement
with Guinea-Bissau. This will involve improving
coordination efforts with other actors. The national
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and international partners
must work towards a deeper relationship of mutual
commitment and trust, geared towards sustainable
peace and development for Guinea-Bissau and the
subregion. The international community should rise to
the challenge of supporting the maintenance of
political stability and economic progress that the
country has experienced over the past few years.

We must take advantage of this positive
momentum and persevere in our collective efforts to
support Guinea-Bissau.

