Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the Security Council's unanimous adoption
of resolution 1817 (2008) on combating the trafficking
in chemical precursors of heroin in Afghanistan, which
is one part of the overall fight against drug production
and trafficking, on the eve of the international
conference in support of Afghanistan, which will be
held in Paris tomorrow, 12 June 2008. The conference
reflects France's renewed commitment to Afghanistan,
as decided upon by the President of the French
Republic, Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy. Its primary aim is to
reaffirm the international community's political and
financial support for reconstruction in Afghanistan. It
will also serve to review the objectives and approaches
of donors, in the context of its consideration of the
Afghanistan Compact adopted at the London
Conference in 2006.

The Paris conference will give the Afghan
Government an opportunity to present its national
development strategy to the international community.
France shares the hope expressed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, that the conference will
make it possible to craft a new agreement between the
international community and Afghanistan. It is in that
spirit of enhanced partnership that the issue of
combating the drugs trade will be addressed at the
conference; clearly, this is a major cause of concern for
the international community. Drug trafficking in
Afghanistan undermines efforts to attain good
governance. It is a source of financing for terrorism
and fuels threats to the country's stability and security.

Here, France fully supports Afghanistan's
National Drug Control Strategy and international
efforts to combat the scourge of drugs. It is particularly
important to support regional initiatives. Indeed, the
entire international community should act to shoulder
this collective responsibility. We particularly commend
the efforts and sacrifices made by Afghanistan and its
neighbours to combat drug trafficking.

Combating drug trafficking requires an integrated
approach taking into account all dimensions of the
phenomenon. For that reason, the London Pact sets out
cross-cutting priorities involving security, governance
and economic and social development. In particular,
08-37563
developing alternative livelihoods is essential to
success, as stressed in the resolution we have just
adopted.

France has sought an emphasis by the Security
Council on a particular element of the problem of
narcotics trafficking: combating trafficking in the
chemical precursors that are essential for processing
opium into heroin. That is a weak link with respect to
which we can and should step up our endeavours. A
system already exists for monitoring the trade in
chemical precursors; here, it should be emphasized that
the vast majority of these materials are used for
perfectly legitimate purposes. That system, which
seeks to prevent the diversion of these precursors for
illicit purposes, is based on the 1988 Vienna
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances. The Paris Pact initiative,
begun in 2004 by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in the context of follow-up to the
Conference on Drug Routes from Central Asia to
Europe, includes specific section on the trafficking of
precursors. It is also a good framework for enhancing
cooperation in this field.

But increased efforts by all are needed to use
existing mechanisms more effectively. We hope that
the adoption of today's resolution will provide fresh
political impetus that will mobilize the international
community, in support of Afghanistan and its
neighbours and in close partnership with the relevant
agencies, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the International Narcotics Control
Board, on the issue of combating the trafficking in
chemical precursors in Afghanistan.

The adoption of this resolution on the eve of the
Paris conference indicates the international
community's determined and unanimous commitment
to combat drugs - of which Afghanistan itself is the
primary victim. I thank the Afghan authorities for their
unflagging support for our initiative. My thanks go also
to the other countries of the region for their
constructive partnership in discussing the text of the
resolution, as well as to all members of the Security
Council for their very constructive participation,
including those that, along with Afghanistan, agreed to
sponsor the draft resolution we have just adopted.

