Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I congratulate
Judge Theodor Meron on his able presentation on the
activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) during the period in
question. I also warmly congratulate the ICTY on its
tenth anniversary, which is, happily, marked by
important and praiseworthy achievements.

Our full appreciation also goes to Judge Erik
Mase, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor
of the ICTY, and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the ICTR, for their very comprehensive
and instructive presentations. I welcome Mr. Jallow
here, and wish him success in his mission. I reaffirm
my appreciation for the positive achievements of his
predecessor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte, whom we encourage.
We pay a warm tribute to them all for the performance
of their institutions in promoting and protecting human
rights, international humanitarian law and the
attainment of the rule of law.

Analysis of the reports shows the vast experience
of the two Tribunals in creating legal institutions and in
international cooperation, of which they have been the
foundation in recent months.

What I have to say today concerns primarily the
functioning of the ICTR, my questions having already
been asked and my comments about ICTY having been
covered by previous statements.

Thanks to reforms intended to improve its
functioning, reforms invigorated by the recent
appointment of Prosecutor Jallow, the ICTR now has
better conditions in which to fully accomplish its
mission and achieve its mandate within the set
timeframe. In the new context described in the report,
the ICTR is better able to achieve its main objectives
defined in the completion strategy. However, for its
part, the ICTR should draw up a detailed strategy, in
keeping with our requests, to defer to national
jurisdictions, including Rwanda, accused persons of
middle or lower rank.

We take note of the commitment of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) to present his plan of action before the
end of this year. My delegation in this regard endorses
the recommendations made by the President of the
ICTR and we very much encourage our Council: firstly,
to endorse the elimination of the prohibition of ad litem
judges to take part in pre-trial proceedings - this
requires the amendment of the ICTR rules; and
secondly, to increase from four to nine the number of
ad litem judges for the ICTR. We believe these requests
are feasible inasmuch as we have already taken similar
measures in regards to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). These
reforms will contribute to a more rapid resolution of
the cases before the Tribunal.

My delegation also calls on the Secretary-General
to appoint as soon as possible the remaining three ad
litum judges so that the ICTR can improve its ability to
function.

I would also ask the question, already posed by
China, that is whether, once these conditions are met,
the Tribunal will indeed be in a position to complete its
work within the time limit requested by the Council.

We invite the international community to help
with the strengthening of the national jurisdictional
capacities involved here, to enable them to take up the
cases that would be referred to them by the ICTR. We
particularly urge our peace partners to support Rwanda
in its sustained efforts to consolidate its national
judicial system. We believe that this is essential for
restoring security and lasting reconciliation in that
country so torn by genocide.

My delegation reiterates its appeal for the full
cooperation of all States of the Great Lakes region in
arresting at-large persons who are charged with grave
violations of international humanitarian law by the
ICTR. Undoubtedly, that willingness would facilitate
the calling of witnesses before the Tribunal, whether
for the prosecution or for the defence, and of the
accused. In any event, we have the conviction that no
country has the right to help fugitives escape international
justice by offering sanctuary in their territory.

To conclude, we would stress that the completion
strategy of the work of the ICTR is under way already
and is on the right track, with the proper impetus. By
giving the Tribunal appropriate resources, consolidating
it and responding to its requests to the Security
Council, the international community would guarantee
the success of a unique enterprise in Africa for
promoting and protecting human rights.

Finally, I would like to commend the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the ICTY and the ICTR for the
progress they have achieved and especially for their
commitment and dedication to the rapid restoration of
lasting peace and reconciliation, both in the Balkans
and in Central Africa.

