Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Since this is our firstpublic
meeting under the presidency of Italy, Mr. President, I
would like to congratulate your country on assuming
this post and wish you every success in steering the
Council's work during this month.

I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for his comprehensive overview of the
situation with refugees globally and for outlining the
main challenges, operational and policy priorities of his
Office, with prevention featuring prominently among
them. We commend the endeavours of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to tackle problems that refugees are facing in
different parts ofthe world. Its efforts are indispensable
in addressing and solving related humanitarian crises
that, unfortunately, are still a sad reality in the twenty-
first century.

Ukraine commends the activities of the United
Nations High Commissioner in this field, in particular
the adoption of its five strategic directions for
2017-2021, which will guide the Office's engagement
with all people of concern. Given the scale of conflicts
on the global map and the constantly growing number
of affected persons, the process of reforming UNHCR
and its capabilities to respond to new challenges is very
welcome. The persistent work to involve international
development actors in the search for long-term solutions
to humanitarian crises is noteworthy. We commend and
encourage further progress on this track.

The historical commitments made by Member
States in September 2016, here in New York, through
the adoption of the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants should lead to the successful elaboration
of the global compact for refugees so as to address
forced displacement situations more comprehensively
and provide all affected people with better protection.
Ukraine welcomes UNHCR's significant efforts and
engagement to protect and assist internally displaced
persons throughout the world, who represent a major
percentage of persons of concern to UNHCR under
its mandate.
We welcome the High Commissioner's visit
to Ukraine last year, which generated a positive
momentum in response to the situation of internally
displaced persons in my country. As a result of the
ongoing Russian aggression against Ukraine, there are
1.7 million internally displaced persons in my country.
All these persons were forced to leave their homes in
Crimea and certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions following the military occupation of these
territories by the Russian Federation, which, as we just
heard, presents itself as a humanitarian donor while in
fact it has been a donor of heavy weaponry, mercenaries
and regular troops in the Donbas.

Population displacement on this scale on the
European continent is not something to be overlooked,
brushed aside or glossed over, and those people deserve
to be mentioned, just as the High Commissioner rightly
did, along with refugees and internally displaced
persons in Syria, Yemen, South Sudan, Myanmar and
other countries. In that light, we thank UNHCR and
its international partners, including individual Member
States, for the valuable assistance provided in response
to the displacement crisis in Ukraine. For our part, we
will continue to actively support the activities of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, including those in my country.

