Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro;
as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for presenting the valuable report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/ 189). Mediation is a
critically important tool among the limited responses
available to the international community for conflict
management. It can be applied at all stages of the
conflict cycle, from prevention and peacemaking to the
implementation of peace agreements. When it works
well, the world might not even notice that a potentially
harmful conflict has been defused. When it fails,
extinguishing the crisis requires much more effort and
resources. That is why we must further improve the
practice of international mediation and see to it that
negotiated settlements to conflicts bring long-lasting
stability with increasing frequency. The Secretary-
General's report contains a large number of lessons
learned and useful recommendations which must now
be implemented in order to make mediation even more
effective in the future.

The success of international mediation rests on
partnership, cooperation and the mutual support of all
actors concerned. The United Nations has been
involved in mediation for over 60 years, and enhancing
its capacities will further strengthen the collective
impact of its mediation initiatives. The European
Union supported the establishment of the United
Nations Mediation Support Unit within the Department
of Political Affairs and continues to contribute
financially to its activities, through both the European
Commission and individual European Union member
States. We also support the proposed system-wide
approach to mediation and the development of a
standby team of regional and thematic experts.

One of the prerequisites for effective mediation
initiatives is the availability of flexible financial and
human resources. The Secretary-General's report
points to the fact that mediation tends to be most
effective when launched early, and the European Union

regards positively the recent establishment of a
mediation start-up fund. In order to further enhance our
cooperation in mediation, the European Union and the
United Nations should develop a mechanism of sharing
expertise and lessons learned, develop joint training
opportunities and work together on the establishment
of a roster of mediation experts.

The European Union supports the promotion of
mediation as an efficient and cost-effective instrument
of conflict prevention and resolution and is - as
underlined in the Secretary-General's report -
increasingly engaged in mediation efforts. The
involvement of the European Union in mediation is
twofold - direct and indirect. There are a number of
actors within the European Union who, on occasion,
play a role in international facilitation, mediation and
dialogue processes. The European Union Presidency,
High Representative Javier Solana and the European
Union special representatives and members of the
European Commission are among the most visible
actors, but the heads of European Commission
delegations and the heads of the European Security and
Defence Policy mission are also frequently engaged in
mediation activities.

The European Union is in the process of
strengthening and professionalizing its mediation and
mediation support capacity so as to use that tool more
effectively. We appreciate the continuing cooperation
with the Mediation Support Unit in that endeavour.

Like all other regional organizations, the
European Union has its own interests, which may
sometimes compromise our ability to serve as impartial
mediators. The European Union has therefore
developed a system of indirect support to third-party
mediators, which also builds on the capacity and
knowledge of non-governmental organizations.
Specifically, the Instrument for Stability administered
by the European Commission includes the Facility for
urgent actions involving Policy Advice, Technical
Assistance, Mediation and Reconciliation.

The African Union is also playing an increasingly
important role in mediation, and the European Union is
committed to assisting in further developing its
capacities. Under the African Peace Facility, an Early
Response Mechanism has recently been established to
support the mediation efforts of the African Union and
other African regional organizations.

Today's debate gives us the opportunity to reflect
on what has been achieved through mediation and to
identify the challenges of negotiated settlements. We
should not consider mediation in isolation. Peace
agreements have too often fallen apart, partly owing to
the lack of a clear implementation plan. The United
Nations and its partners need to build coherence across
the conflict spectrum, including in the post-conflict
peacebuilding phase, to improve the effectiveness of
mediation, minimize the threat from spoilers and
ensure that the agreements reached are sustained. As
the report points out, it is important that transitional
justice issues be adequately covered in the agreement
and that the rule of law be re-established. Where
serious crimes have been committed, the culture of
impunity often leads to a cycle of violence that
undermines sustainable peace.

Finally, the European Union appreciates the
Secretary-General's commitment to improving gender
expertise and balance at all levels. Women's absence
from peace negotiations and the lack of gender
expertise in mediation teams seriously limit the extent
to which women's experiences of conflict and
consequent needs for recovery are addressed in those
processes. An analysis by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women shows that, in 13 major
comprehensive peace agreement processes since 2000,
not one single woman was appointed as a mediator.
These statistics need to change if future peace
agreements are to be achievable, representative and
likely to secure durable peace. Sustainable peace
cannot be managed through the marginalization of such
a large and vital constituency.

