Mr. Takasu (Japan): Before speaking in
explanation of vote, I would like to join others in
paying a warm tribute to our departing friend,
Ambassador Khalilzad, an extremely capable

representative of the United States. We are very
pleased and fortunate to have worked with him, albeit
briefly. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

Japan shares the serious concern over the
situation in Somalia: first, over the lack of political
stability and security; and secondly, over the
continuing piracy and armed robbery off its coast.
Concerted and intensified efforts by the international
community are essential to address those concerns.

With regard to bringing about peace and stability
in Somalia and the region, we appreciate the important
role played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the States Members of the African
Union, and recognize the need to strengthen the
Mission.

Initially, in his latest relevant report (8/2008/709)
and in various letters, the Secretary-General
recommended that the establishment of a multinational
force would be an appropriate option in view of the
situation on the ground. Subsequently, in his most
recent letter, dated 19 December 2008 (8/2008/804),
the Secretary-General offered his assessment that
supporting AMISOM. operations would pave the way
for the eventual deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, subject to progress in the
political process and an improvement in the security
situation.

Japan supports a two-stage approach to bringing
about peace and stability in Somalia. In the first stage,
AMISOM. would be strengthened and then, as the
necessary conditions are developed, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation would be established in the
second. Therefore, we are pleased to join in the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1863 (2009), and we
appreciate the leadership role played by the United
States in particular. The Council has confirmed its
intention to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-up force to AMISOM,
subject to a further decision by 1 June, based on
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General to
be issued by 15 April.

On this occasion, I would like to emphasize two
principles that are important for my delegation,
concerning the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and extending United Nations
support to an operation authorized but not necessarily
established by the Security Council.
First, the United Nations has learned many
important lessons over the years in various
peacekeeping operations throughout the world. In
Somalia itself, the United Nations has learned hard
lessons from its previous engagement in authorizing a
multinational force and from earlier peacekeeping
missions. Among those many lessons, one is strikingly
important and cannot be overemphasized. When the
Council takes a decision to establish a new operation, it
must be not only desirable, but also effectively possible
to implement. It is the Council, not the Secretary-
General or the Secretariat, that should take the primary
responsibility for the consequences of the decision.

In resolution 1327 (2000), the Council confirmed
its determination to give peacekeeping operations
clear, credible and achievable mandates. The Council
has also undertaken to ensure that the mandated tasks
of peacekeeping operations are appropriate to the
situation on the ground, including such factors as the
prospects for success.

Japan will study most closely the assessment that
the Secretary-General will submit in his April report,
including with regard to developments in the political
and security situations in Somalia. We will actively
participate in the discussion in the Council aimed at
deciding on the possible deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, fully
taking into account all relevant considerations. As a
responsible member of the Council, Japan believes that
it is of the utmost importance that such a decision be
made after careful consideration of the feasibility and
effectiveness of the proposed deployment, so that the
decision will be effectively implemented.

My second point concerns logistical support. I
would like to stress the importance of respecting the
established rules and mechanisms of the United
Nations, as clearly provided for in the Charter,
including in its Article 17. It is also important to
respect the competence of the General Assembly on the
financial and administrative aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and other activities, such as
AMISOM, which are authorized by the United Nations
but implemented by non-United Nations entities. Japan
would have serious reservations about compromising
the principle of financing only the expenses of United
Nations activities through mandatory assessments,
particularly if that is done by the Security Council.

In that regard, the resolution just adopted requests
the Secretary-General to provide a logistical support
package for AMISOM. so that its forces can be
incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Japan considers it important that the
package, requested by the Security Council, be
carefully reviewed by the General Assembly in the
light of previous resolutions. Furthermore, the
proposed logistical support package should be
implemented in a transparent and accountable manner,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations rules
and regulations.

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm the importance of
promoting the political process, which is key to
bringing about peace and security. Japan supports the
Djibouti peace process, which should be given
additional impetus and facilitated in a more secure
environment. We hope that a strengthened AMISOM
will contribute to this political process. We expect the
United Nations to take a coherent approach, including
through the role of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.

It is also important to advance Somalian
ownership of the process by building the capacities of
the Transitional Federal Government at the federal and
local levels. The joint transitional security forces and
the police should be supported by the international
community.

We have recently contributed to the improvement
of the Somali security sector and the country's border
control by providing $5 million through the
International Organization for Migration and the
United Nations Development Programme. With the
concrete support of the international community,
durable peace and stability should be promoted on the
ground.

