Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Iwish at the outset to thank Ms. Angela Kane for the
information she presented to the Council. We agree
with her that we now face a grave crisis - not an
ordinary crisis such as that to which, sadly, we are
accustomed in the region. This meeting is occurring at
a time when the security and humanitarian situation in
the Middle East is deteriorating in an alarming manner.
The events of recent days have the potential to
destabilize the entire region. My country is extremely
concerned by the situation and thus appeals to the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
take urgent measures to de-escalate the conflict in
order to prevent a large-scale confrontation.

The abduction of the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit
by extremist Palestinian groups is an unacceptable and
provocative act. We reiterate our appeal to the
Palestinian Authority, immediately and without
preconditions, to free him and hand him over, safe and
sound, to the Israeli authorities. We also voice our
concern at, and condemn, the abduction and killing of
another Israeli citizen, in the West Bank, which
occurred in the last few days. We believe those
responsible for the death of innocent civilians should
be brought to justice, as there can be no justification
whatever for such acts.

Similarly, I would like to reiterate that the
Palestinian Authority must take every possible measure
to put an end to Qassam rocket attacks on Israeli
territory launched from Gaza, in particular those that
target the town of Sderot. In addition to those measures
that must be taken by the Palestinian side, let us not
forget that the conditions set out by the Quartet remain
in force and must be complied with by the Hamas-led
Government.

The Israeli Government also has significant
obligations and responsibilities. Argentina is extremely
concerned by the military operations being carried out
in the Gaza Strip and by other Israeli activities that
have affected the civilian population in the territory.
The unilateral reoccupation of the Gaza Strip can only
fuel tension and violence. I believe that, as we have
seen since September 2000, there can be no military
solution to the conflict. We therefore believe that Israel
must take a series of urgent measures to put an end to
the military operations in the populated areas of Gaza.
It must withdraw its troops from that territory back to
their positions before the beginning of the current
military campaign.

Similarly, we believe that all Israeli practices in
contravention of international humanitarian law must
cease, in particular those that violate the Fourth
Geneva Convention. These include extrajudicial
killings, destruction of infrastructure and housing and
collective punishment. The detention of elected
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council and
other Palestinian Government officials is an additional
cause of concern. For that reason, we call upon the
Israeli Government to reconsider its decision, as it
could have extremely negative repercussions -
including for the Government and the people of Israel.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
and of Mr. Egeland for the humanitarian situation in
the Gaza Strip. Israel must take measures to prevent
suffering among the Palestinian people, in particular by
facilitating access for food, medical supplies and fuel.
Similarly, measures must be taken to restore the supply
of basic services such as electricity, on which the water
supply and sanitation system for large parts of the
population depend.

At the regional level, we feel it is imperative to
put an end to all acts of provocation, of which there are
many. All countries in the region must contribute to
resolve the crisis. They must refrain from taking
measures that would increase tension and must respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their
neighbours. We cannot fail to stress the necessity of
avoiding any confrontation that could have
destabilizing repercussions for the entire Middle East.

Throughout this process, the international
community and the Security Council have a significant
role to play. We cannot and must not remain indifferent
when confronted by the renewed cycle of violence,
reprisals and revenge. In this difficult situation, we
hope the Security Council will remain cohesive and
that it will send a clear and unambiguous message to
all parties, emphasizing that the only way to a solution
to the Middle East conflict is through good-faith
negotiations based upon the resolutions adopted by the
Council, the Madrid terms of reference, earlier
agreements and the principle of land for peace.

