Ms. Hotovely (Israel): I would like to thank the
Russian Government for initiating this important debate
on a topic that is deeply troubling to all peace-loving
countries and peoples.

The scourge of terror is not new to Israel. Since
before our establishment and throughout our existence,
we have been contending with an ongoing terror
campaign. The Middle East and Africa have witnessed
a broad expansion of terror throughout the region.
Terror groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIS), Houthi militants, Hamas and Hizbullah
have a territorial dimension, which poses a particular
challenge. Moreover, the terror inspired by groups
such as Al-Qaida and ISIS has struck as far afield as
Australia, Belgium, France and elsewhere. If some
thought at first that the so-called Arab Spring would
give rise to a newly democratic Middle East, the vast
spread of terror regimes throughout the region has been
an alarming wake-up call.

Israel is surrounded by terror groups. They are to
be found on all of its frontiers: Hizbullah and Jabhat
Al-Nusra in the north, ISIS in the south and Hamas
in Gaza. Last year we were starkly reminded of the
magnitude of the threat we face when Hamas launched
thousands of missiles against Israeli civilian targets
and tunnelled under the border to strike at innocent
Israeli civilians.

Israel dealt with that huge security threat while
abiding by international law, and in many cases going
well beyond its requirements. Perhaps that explains
why many democracies have expressed an interest
in learning from our experience. One of the greatest
challenges is the fact that terror groups often exploit
and misuse the principles of international law in order
to advance their aims. For example, in the 2014 Gaza
war, Hamas turned the principles of international
humanitarian law on their head in its attack on Israel,
making massive use of human shields and deliberately
launching attacks on innocent civilians from United
Nations facilities and from playgrounds, hospitals,
mosques and schools.

Like a crime syndicate, Middle Eastern terrorism
would be nothing without its godfather, Iran. Empowered
in the wake of its agreement with the P5+1, Iran has
made no secret of its intention to use the sanctions
relief to expand its support for terror, especially for
terror proxies in the region and in the world. To defeat
that terror threat, the moderate States in the Middle
East must act together in confronting extremism and
in addressing its root causes: the absence of democracy
and the rule of law, the absence of women's rights and
the lack of education about tolerance.

Palestinian society, where Hamas and other terror
groups maintain strong support, exemplifies the effects
of education towards violence and extremism. Any
society in which public squares are named for mass
murderers and children are encouraged to become
martyrs - shahids - will be fertile ground for
extremism and terrorism.

Terror has two main goals: to kill and to dispirit.
Of the many things needed to defeat terrorism, the one
thing in particular that stands out is clarity clarity
of purpose and clarity of moral conviction. United, the
democratic world is capable of defeating the tidal wave
of terror sweeping the Middle East and threatening the
international community at large. To do so effectively,
international norms and laws need to be adapted to the
changing nature of the twenty-first century battlefield,
especially to the unique challenges that arise in
conflicts against rivals and those that deliberately
blur the distinction between military personnel and
non-combatants. In that regard, Israel is eager to

 
continue playing an active role in the work of United
Nations bodies in their international counter-terrorism
strategy.

The fight of democracy against terror will always
involve a balancing act between civil liberties and
national security. Israel has for decades been contending
with that dilemma and has succeeded in protecting
its civilians from terrorism while obeying the rule of
law. All countries facing the threat of terror today are
dealing with similar challenges.

As Israel has learned in its own prolonged
campaign against our ability to defeat terror, terror
belies our reverence for the sanctity of human life
and our fierce conviction to do battle with any and all
who strive to defile it, even when they cynically try to
use our principles against us. It is this conviction that
will ultimately ensure that the democratic world will
prevail.

