Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
thank you for coming back to New York to join us at
this meeting. I would like to also present our thanks to
your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Russia, for his distinguished efforts
during his presidency in the month of May. Our high
appreciation also goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom
we are going to miss, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Iraq, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) team in Iraq and
New York for their tireless work in assisting the
Government and people of Iraq.

Having reviewed the reports of the Secretary-
General on UNAMI's work in Iraq contained in
documents S/2009/102 and S/2009/284, my delegation
would like to make the following comments.

With regard to the political and security sectors,
following the great success achieved by the Iraqi
people in the provincial elections held on 31 January
2009, the political forces that gained the majority of
seats in those elections have formed provincial
councils in 14 of the provinces that held elections. That
is an accomplishment that the Government of my
country considers to be an important step within the
framework of the plan to provide those councils with
increased responsibilities and the power to play an
important role in supporting the federal Government in
the reconstruction of Iraq.

National reconciliation remains a top priority for
my Government. In that context, last March, more than
4 million Iraqis visited the Holy Shrines in the city of
Samarra, in an atmosphere characterized by a spirit of

brotherhood and tolerance. There were no breaches of
security during that event, which marked a day of
national unity among Iraqis from different ethnic and
sectarian groups, who overcame the painful past that
had resulted from the bombing of the Holy Shrine in
Samarra on 22 February 2006 and the subsequent acts
of sectarian violence. The reconstruction of the Shrine
symbolizes the process of rebuilding the national fabric
of all components of Iraqi society.

Iraq today is a democratic State that respects
freedoms and is governed by a Constitution. The
principle of the peaceful rotation of power forms the
basis of an open and transparent political process. All
Iraqi political forces operate within that process and
work through constructive dialogue to reach all
important decisions, including on the key issues of
building a federal system, legislation on the
distribution of natural resources, constitutional
amendments and internally disputed borders. That will
lead to the reaching of a political settlement to resolve
most outstanding issues in order to preserve the gains
achieved within the framework of the political process.

The Iraqi people, driven by a belief in their
mission to build a free and democratic Iraq, are
building a democracy through mechanisms based on
ballot boxes and not bullets. The Kurdistan region will
hold council elections this July, while the central
Government is preparing for the parliamentary
elections to be held on 16 January 2010 to reinforce the
political process and build State institutions.

The security situation in Iraq continues to
improve, despite some security violations. Official
statistics indicate that in the period between March and
May 2009 there was a 76 per cent decline in the
number of acts of violence as compared to the same
period in 2008. That improvement attests to the
development of the capability of Iraqi security forces
and to the significant decline in the capabilities of
terrorist groups. The latest figures indicate that Iraqi
security forces have been able to dismantle and destroy
90 per cent of those groups. On 23 April 2009, the so-
called Emir of the Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar
Al-Baghdadi, was arrested.

The Iraqi Government, in cooperation with the
United States Government, continues to take necessary
measures to take over security responsibilities from
American troops, in accordance with the security
agreement signed between the two countries. Iraq is

already responsible for 90 of the 138 military sites. By
the end of June 2009, the Iraqi Ministries of Defence
and the Interior will be responsible for an additional
48 military sites.

The process of building Iraqi defence capabilities
to fill the security vacuum created following the
withdrawal of friendly forces continues successfully. It
should be noted that Iraqi security forces have taken
over security responsibilities for the province of
Salahadin, which was the home province of former
dictator Saddam Hussein.

The Council of Ministers has approved the
agreement that was signed between Iraq and the United
Kingdom to protect Iraqi oil platforms and provide
training and support to Iraqi naval forces. We would
like to thank friendly countries that are participating in
the multinational forces and have, for the past six
years, helped Iraq to maintain security and stability.

An essential element of the political process is to
guarantee the Iraqi people's full enjoyment of their
fundamental rights, as stipulated in the Iraqi
Constitution. To that end, the Iraqi Parliament has
decided to establish an Independent High Commission
for Human Rights to monitor the human rights
situation in Iraq and assist the Ministry of Human
Rights to perform its core functions. The Iraqi
Government also continues to modernize the Iraqi
judicial system in order to harmonize it with the
requirements of the new democratic order in Iraq.

The improved security situation in Iraq and the
Government's systematic plan for the return of
displaced Iraqis abroad has contributed to an increase
in the number of Iraqis who have returned to the
country. For example, recent statistics indicate a
decrease in the number of Iraqis registered with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees in
Syria, from 224,000 to 207,669. The Iraqi Government
is launching a new programme to ensure the voluntary
return of displaced Iraqis in Jordan and Egypt. It is also
distributing 220 million Iraqi dinars to displaced
Christian families in Hamdania as a form of temporary
assistance until they can return to their home areas.

The Presidential Council ratified the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance on 14 May 2009. On 11 May
2009, it also decided on Iraq's accession to the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification. Lastly,
on 19 March 2009, it passed legislation on
compensation for people who have lost body parts
owing to the criminal practices of the former regime.

In the social and economic sectors, the Iraqi
Government is convinced of the importance of foreign
investment in Iraq in helping to rebuild an open
economic system. In that connection, under the direct
sponsorship of the Prime Minister, the Government held a
conference in London, England, on the theme "Invest in
Iraq - 2009", in order to encourage foreign investment
in the country. The conference was attended by about 400
investors and representatives of governmental bodies and
private companies. The Government presented an
investment plan consisting of about 500 strategic projects
worth approximately $500 billion. Also at the conference,
some 300 companies announced their intention to invest
in Iraq. A similar conference will be held in Washington
this October. Japan will also hold a conference in
Baghdad on the subject of reconstruction in Iraq.

As part of the ongoing efforts by the Iraqi
Government to rebuild Iraq, the Iraqi Council of
Ministers approved a comprehensive plan to
reconstruct service sectors and infrastructure. The
estimated budgetary cost of that plan is about
$65 billion. Under the plan, 38 per cent of the budget
will be allocated to the housing sector, 27 per cent to
the agricultural sector, 14.2 per cent to the
transportation sector, 8.4 per cent to the water and
sanitation sector, 8.5 per cent to the education sector,
5.7 per cent to the health sector and 0.9 per cent to the
communications sector.

Within the framework of the joint efforts between
Iraq and the international community, the Baghdad
Coordination Group for the International Compact with
Iraq held a meeting in Baghdad on 26 May, which
included the participation of the Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser on the Iraq Compact, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, to discuss the latest developments and prepare
for the next conference of the International Compact,
which will hopefully take place in Baghdad later this year.

As a part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
resolve the ongoing issue of external debt, the
Government recently reached an agreement to settle its
debts with Tunisia and Greece, which amount to
$186 million and $259 million, respectively. The
Government has also settled its debt to trade creditors,
which amounted to $470 million. In that regard, my
Government has renewed its invitation to Arab
countries to cancel the debt owed by Iraq and to settle
the debt issue as several sisterly and friendly countries
have done based on relevant Security Council
resolutions to assist Iraq, including paragraph 1 of
Security Council resolution 1483 (2003).

As a part of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
support the most vulnerable social elements in Iraq, a
conference on the orphans of Iraq was held on 15 April
2009 to launch a project for capacity-building,
rehabilitation and coordination among organizations
working with orphans in Iraq. The Iraqi Government
and the World Health Organization have organized a
working group on the role of the media in responding
to the swine flu (H1N1) pandemic. A budget of
approximately $30 million has been allocated to
prevent the spread of the pandemic.

The Prime Minister has launched an initiative to
protect the Iraqi heritage and antiquities and in this
regard, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities has
recovered a large number of stolen antiquities.

On the regional and international levels and
within the framework of regional and international
openness, there have recently been several high-level
Visits to Iraq, which included His Highness Sheikh
Mohammad Al-Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah, Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Kuwait, on
26 February 2009; His Excellency Mr. David Miliband,
British Foreign Secretary, on 26 February 2009; His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the
League of Arab States, on 21 March 2009; His
Excellency Mr. Abdullah Gill, President of Turkey, on
23 March 2009; His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Naji
Ottri, Syrian Prime Minister, on 21 April 2009;
Mrs. Hillary Clinton, United States Secretary of State,
on 25 April 2009; Mr. Ali Afsn, Adviser of the
President of Azerbaijan, on 20 May 2009; Mr. Murad
Oozglic, Turkish Special Envoy to Iraq on 25 May
2009; Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
International Compact with Iraq, on 25 May 2009; and
His Excellency Mr. Karel De Gucht, Belgian Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, on
27 May 2009.

In return, the Iraqi President Mr. J alal Talabani
Visited Ankara on 7 March 2009 and Tehran on 27 March
2009. The Prime Minister Mr. Nouri al-Maliki visited
Moscow on 8 April 2009 to meet with his counterpart,
His Excellency Mr. Vladimir Putin, and the United
Kingdom on 29 April 2009 to meet with His Excellency
Mr. Gordon Brown, British Prime Minister, and France on
5 May 2009 to meet with His Excellency Mr. Nicolas
Sarkozy, President of France and His Excellency
Mr. Francois Fillon, Prime Minister of France.

The exchanges of visits led to the signing of
several agreements on bilateral cooperation between
Iraq and friendly countries, including a comprehensive
economic and security agreement with Syria, a joint
declaration of friendship and cooperation between Iraq
and the United Kingdom, a Convention on Economic
and Technical Cooperation between Iraq and the
United Kingdom and a visit by a Deputy Prime
Minister Mr. Rafi Al-Issani to New York, where he met
United States and United Nations officials to talk about
a friendly relationship, economic and trade relations
and reviewed Security Council resolutions at the
United Nations.

In a recent development, Egypt has nominated
His Excellency Ambassador Sherif Kamal Shahin as
Extraordinary Ambassador to Iraq in Baghdad. The
Iraqi Government's efforts to build bridges with
friendly countries stems from the sincere wish of the
Government and people of Iraq to establish relations
with all nations of the world in order to build
communication and contribute to the return of Iraq to
its natural place in the international community.

The Iraqi Government has begun consultations
with the Secretary-General to review Security Council
resolutions on Iraq pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1859 (2008). Based on our review of those
resolutions, we have determined that Iraq has fulfilled
all its obligations under those resolutions, with regard
to both the impact of the occupation of Kuwait and
issues related to arms.

I would like to point out a number of obligations
that Iraq has fulfilled with regard to Security Council
resolutions on the situation between Iraq and Kuwait.
Iraq has recognized the State of Kuwait and its borders
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions and both States continue to cooperate in the
maintenance of border markers. Iraq has returned the
remains of 236 missing Kuwaitis found in Iraq. Since
2003, Iraq has handed over to Kuwait numerous items
belonging to that country and most recently the
Kuwaiti authorities have received 4,539 audio and
video tapes belonging to the Kuwaiti Ministry of
Information. Next week, the Iraqi Government will
hand over to the Kuwaiti authorities 24 boxes

containing old currency and stamps. As of April 2009,
Iraq has paid $27.1 billion of the total compensation
due for the invasion of Kuwait. However, $25.5 billon
remains due and that is a heavy burden on Iraq, which
needs the money for services, reconstruction and
development.

As for the area of disarmament, Security Council
resolution 1762 (2007), which ended the mandate of
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), stated that Iraq had
fulfilled all its commitments with regard to
disarmament. Moreover, the letter of the United States
and the United Kingdom annexed to that resolution and
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
dated 22 and 27 June 2007, indicated the complete
destruction of Iraq's special programmes to produce
weapons of mass destruction.

We hope that the Secretary-General and the
Security Council will assist Iraq in returning to the
international status it held before the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990; an invasion which was one of the most
atrocious crimes committed by Saddam Hussein and
for which the Iraqi people continue to pay a heavy
price.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for UNAMI's role in Iraq and
for Mr. Staffan de Mistura's support offered at the
Government's request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms. With the imminent completion of his
responsibilities in Iraq, I wish him all success in his
future endeavours, both personal and professional.

