Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to the French delegation for
devoting a public meeting to consideration of the
situation in Somalia. That is a positive initiative that
reflects our interest in that country. We also thank Sir
Kieran Prendergast and the representative of Djibouti
for the useful information they have provided the
Council.

I wish to make a number of comments on the
situation in Somalia. First, I stress the urgent need for a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the crisis in
Somalia based on respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of that
country. In that context, the priority objective must be
the restoration of State authority in that country, which
has been afflicted by years of war.

Secondly, and along the same lines, the Security
Council should fully support efforts to resolve the
crisis in Somalia, in particular the peace initiative of
President Guelleh which the representative of Djibouti
has just described. I would recall that the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) has great hopes for that
initiative, to which it has already given its complete
support. The initiative is a positive development
towards the settlement of the crisis in Somalia and is
therefore a sign of hope that deserves to be welcomed.
That is why we encourage the efforts under way to
bring that initiative to fruition.

Thirdly, the Security Council must follow the
process of national reconciliation, the main
responsibility for which, I would recall, lies with the
Somali people themselves. In that connection, we await
with interest the completion of the Somalia National
Peace Conference. The representative of Djibouti has
just described the progress that has been made in that
connection. I take this opportunity to appeal to all the
Somali parties, including the warlords, to join the
process now under way. We also welcome the efforts of
the Government of Djibouti to ensure that the
Conference proceeds satisfactorily.

Fourthly, I want to express my delegation's grave
concern about the very difficult humanitarian situation
and about attacks against humanitarian personnel. We
call upon all the parties to ensure the security, safety
and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel
and to ensure free access to those who need assistance.
We note with satisfaction the international
community's coordination efforts.

Fifthly, the return of peace to Somalia will
require considerable political and financial support
from the international community, and we encourage
all States to respond generously to United Nations
appeals so that the Organization's relief and
reconstruction activities can continue.

Sixthly, the Security Council must ensure strict
implementation of the arms embargo. Because of the
violations to which many sources attest, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) should be revitalized.

The draft presidential statement which I
circulated in yesterday's consultations on behalf of the
non-aligned caucus for consideration by the Council, is
centred on those points.

