Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): We
would first like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and
the Former Yugoslavia for introducing their biannual
reports. May I specifically congratulate Judge Patrick
Robinson on becoming President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).

The Tribunals are at a very delicate moment in
their existence: the conclusion of their work. The
strategy that the Council established in 2003 and 2004
provided for completion of trials in 2008 and of all
work in 2010. Those dates were chosen taking into
account forecasts made at the time on how matters
would proceed, and they served as a reasonable goal.

Today we know that those deadlines will not be
met because of judicial vagaries and procedural
constraints, and also because of the late arrest of a
number of fugitives. We also note the difficulty of
implementing the procedure for transferring lower-
ranking accused to national jurisdictions, a procedure
that is one of the main elements of the completion
strategy. In any event, we are in a situation where trials
will not be completed in 2008, and one could fear that
all the work will not be completed before 2012.

We know that the Tribunals are working as fast as
they can, and we acknowledge their efforts to speed up
the work and rationalize trial procedures. Everything
must be done to complete the completion strategy as
quickly as possible, ensuring, of course, that conditions
for a fair trail are always provided. It is for the Council
to give the Tribunals the means to achieve that goal, as
it did this morning in extending the authorization for
the ICTY to recruit ad litem judges beyond the
statutory deadline. We expect that similar requests
from the President of International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) will also receive favourable
handling. France wishes to ensure that Tribunals have
the judicial capacity needed in this difficult time.

It is not yet time to draw up a final balance sheet
of what the Tribunals have done, but we can already
say that they fulfilled what the Security Council
wanted to accomplish when it set them up. Since their
creation the Tribunals have embodied the will of the
international community to reject impunity for the

most serious crimes against humanitarian and human
rights law. They have established jurisprudence that
can be useful to all jurisdictions that must deal with
such crimes. They helped calm the tensions and to
restore peace and security in a decisive manner within
their respective areas.

Now they have to complete their work. It will not
be complete until all the main accused and fugitives
have been brought to trial. All States must cooperate
fully with the Tribunals to achieve that goal. Recent
arrests of Mr. Karadziz and Mr. Zupljanin represented
considerable progress for the ICTY, and they were
made possible through the cooperation of Serbia. We
noted the positive comments by Prosecutor Brammertz
on that cooperation, and we trust it will continue so
that the last two fugitives - Mr. Mladic and
Mr. Hadzic - can be arrested. I wish to recall that full
cooperation with the ICTY is an essential element in
the stabilization and association strategy for all of the
countries of the region, and we call on those countries
to give all necessary assistance to the Tribunal. With
regard to the ICTR, there are still 13 accused at large.
There, too, we urge all States concerned to strengthen
their cooperation with the Tribunal and to fulfil their
commitments regarding arrest and transfer of indicted
persons at large. In particular, we call on the
Government of Kenya to do its utmost for the arrest
and transfer of Felician Kabuga to the ICTR.

If the problem of fugitives is not resolved before
the closure of the Tribunals, it must be resolved within
the context of the management of their legacy, for it is
simply not acceptable that the closure of the Tribunals
would mean impunity for criminals at large. It is one of
the principal functions that will be taken over by the
residual mechanism that is to be established after that
closing. The Council's informal Working Group on the
International Tribunals worked for more than a year on
that issue, under the very effective chairmanship of
Belgium. In that regard my delegation wishes to thank
the delegation of Belgium, especially its legal
counsellor, Mr. William Roelants, for the remarkable
work they have accomplished. I also wish to thank the
Presidents, Prosecutors and Registrars of the two
Tribunals for the excellent cooperation they established
with the Working Group, particularly during its recent
visit, in autumn.

The Security Council is already able to indicate
several points of agreement on the management of
residual functions, among the first of which is bringing
to international justice fugitives bearing the heaviest
responsibility. That requires a mechanism that can
reconstitute the capacity to try those individuals once
they have been arrested. It is established that the
mechanism, which will be within the United Nations, is
to be compact, temporary and effective, as well as
economical. Protection of victims and witnesses and
the judicial management of the archives will be among
the functions of the mechanism. We believe it will also
have to supervise the carrying out of sentences
imposed by the Tribunals and review contempt
proceedings. Despite the progress achieved, the
situation is not yet ripe for adoption of a resolution by
the Security Council on this matter, but it is our hope
that the Working Group will be able to move quickly
toward resolving the major difficulties.

It is essential that the Security Council take the
necessary steps to ensure the integrity and the
permanence of the legacy of the Tribunals. The
administration of justice will not end with the
Tribunals. The management of their residual functions
must be equal to the demands of equity and justice that
governed their creation.

