Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to introduce to the Security Council the
twentieth 90-day report on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution. The report covers
the period from 1 September and 18 December 2011,
during which the Committee held informal
consultations on 7 December and considered additional
matters in accordance with its agreed rules of
procedure.

On 7 December, the members of the Committee
heard an oral briefing provided by the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts. The presentation summarized the
essential points contained in Panel's midterm report of
1 November 2011, submitted to the Committee in
accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011).
In its report, the Panel of Experts outlined the activities
undertaken since the renewal of the Panel's mandate on
9 June. During that time, among other things, the Panel
held a series of consultations in Brussels, Minsk and
Yerevan, with a view to consider its programme of
work and receive information relevant to its mandate.
The Panel also investigated a complaint of a violation
of the provisions of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007), which prohibits the export of all types of
weapons and associated materials from Iran. It also
began an investigation on the alleged violation by Iran
of the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
2
(2010), and it presented its third quarterly assessment
of reports by Member States on their implementation
of resolutions in accordance with paragraph 31 of
resolution 1929 (2010).

During the debate that took place following the
oral briefing, the members of the Committee welcomed
the midterm report of the Panel of Experts, referring to
it as factual and informative. The Committee
considered the Panel's efforts to raise awareness as part
of its visits, inspections and participation in seminars.
The members of the Committee also considered the
publication of the Panel's final report presented in May
2011 and committed themselves to continue
negotiations. With regard to the guidelines notes
drafted by the Panel on the implementation of
resolutions at the request of the Committee, some
members of the Committee expressed the hope that an
agreement could be reached to make the notes
available in the coming weeks.

Acknowledging the importance of the disclosure
activities vis-a-vis Member States, the Committee
considered the possibility of holding an open
informational meeting in the near future, presided by
the Chair and with the participation of the Panel of
Experts. The purpose of the meeting would be to
inform Member States as to the mandate and activities
of the Committee and its Panel of Experts. Some
members of the Committee also expressed a desire to
meet again soon to consider two reports presented by
the Panel with regard to two alleged cases of non-
compliance submitted by States.

In the period under review, the Committee
received four notifications - three from one Member
State under paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007), concerning the
unfreezing of assets in order to settle a debt related to a
contract entered into prior an entity's inclusion on the
list; as well as one submitted by a Member States under
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the
delivery of items for use at the nuclear power plant at
Bushehr, Iran.

The Committee answered a query from a Member
State seeking information on whether an Iranian entity
indicated in the letter was the same as an entity listed
in annex III to resolution 1803 (2008). Based on the
information provided by one of its members, the
Committee concluded that the two entities were one
and the same. The Committee is currently considering
11-64673
its answer to a query sent by another Member State
seeking additional information on the reasons for the
designation of an entity as subject to the assets freeze.

With regard to an incident reported to the
Committee by a Member State in November 2010, the
Committee received a letter from a Member State
concerning extensive internal compliance measures
taken by the shipping company CMA CGM. to prevent
the unwitting shipment by its vessels of items
prohibited under Security Council resolutions. CMA
CGM. has cooperated fully with the Panel of Experts in
its investigation of the case.

That concludes my briefing to the Security
Council today.

