Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Like many of our colleagues, we thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Ameerah Haq, for presenting the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/85) on the work of the United

10-2486]
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and for her informative briefing on developments in
the country. We congratulate Ms. Haq on her recent
appointment as head of UNMIT and wish her success
and productivity in her work in this post.

We would also like to thank Mr. Jose' Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, for
his thorough remarks. We welcome the report's
comments on the strengthening of stability in Timor-
Leste. That country has managed to overcome the
consequences of the crisis of 2006 and achieve
promising improvements in the political situation and
in the area of security. The tented camps have been
closed and internally displaced persons are returning to
a normal life, although some problems in this area still
remain and require a prompt response.

In October 2009, in a peaceful and calm
atmosphere, local elections were held for village -
suco officials, confirming the national electoral
system's growing capacity. All political parties are
interested in strengthening national unity and
endeavouring to resolve their differences through
democratic means. We understand, however, that the
progress achieved remains fragile. The institutions of
authority in this young State are not yet consolidated,
and national security organs still need support. Dili is
encountering serious socio-economic problems; the
unemployment and poverty levels remain,
unfortunately, very high. In such conditions,
strengthening the national security forces is of critical
importance in establishing stability, and is an important
indicator of the State's self-sufficiency.

 

We are intently following the pace of the
handover of responsibility for the maintenance of law
and order from UNMIT to the Timorese police, which
has already been done in a few districts. We also
welcome the approach of the Timorese Government to
the process of handing over responsibility for the
maintenance of law and order to the national police as
early as the end of this year. This requires that both
Dili and UNMIT continue to step up their efforts to
strengthen police capacity, training and logistical and
technical support. It is important that the timeline for
the handover be arrived at using criteria developed
jointly with the country's leadership: this means basing
it on the preparedness of police units, not on artificial
deadlines.
We were interested to study the proposals of the
Secretariat's technical assessment mission regarding
the possible future reconfiguration of UNMIT. Bearing
in mind the fragility of the progress achieved, we
support the Secretary-General's recommendation on
extending the current mission mandate for 12 months,
with a subsequent gradual drawdown by mid-2011 of
the number of police by 328 officers. We also support
the Secretary-General's plan for beginning the
drawdown of mission personnel before 2012. We await
further recommendations on the reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence, taking into consideration the
position of Dili and developments in the country.

In conclusion, we would like to express to the
head of UNMIT, Ameerah Haq, and to all the mission
staff, our appreciation for their professionalism and
selfless efforts. Russian police officers are serving in
the police component of UNMIT, and Russia will
continue to support their noble mission.

