Mr. Yafiez Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Spanish delegation has also joined in the adoption
of Security Council resolution 1544 (2004), which
from our point of View represents a swift, united, firm
and balanced response by the Council to the very
worrisome situation that has been developing in the last
few days in Gaza. That situation not only has very
grave consequences from the humanitarian standpoint,

but also jeopardizes the entire peace process in the
area.

The Spanish Government has followed these
events with great concern and alarm. Today it issued a
communique emphasizing that the recent military
operations carried out by the Israeli army have grave
consequences and therefore that the Spanish
Government, given its commitment to the quest for a
peaceful solution to the conflict, cannot fail to
condemn those Israeli operations against Rafah's
civilian population, who were protesting the demolition
of Palestinian houses. At the same time we once again
reaffirm the need for the Palestinian Authority to meet
its obligations to deal with terrorist groups that oppose
peace.

Spain - which together with the other members
of the European Union, as emphasized in the statement
of the Council of the European Union a few days ago,
recognizes the State of Israel's legitimate right to
defend itself within the framework of international
law- urges the Israeli authorities to put an end to
such actions, which in no way help to advance the path
of peace, but rather only impede the creation of an
atmosphere of dialogue and negotiation that is
necessary to meet the commitments included in the
road map. As highlighted at the Quartet's recent
meeting in New York, it is essential that the parties
return to the path of dialogue and compliance with the
commitments of the road map in order to emerge from
the current situation.

The Spanish Government, for its part, is doing
everything it can. Yesterday and today, we had high-
level contacts with Israeli and Palestinian authorities in
Madrid. The representative of the European Union
foreign policy, Mr. Solana, also participated.

Having said this, we hope that the appeal
contained in the resolution just adopted by the Council
will be heeded by the parties and that the march
towards peace will be resumed as soon as possible and
that these serious events, particularly those occurring
in Gaza, will end.

