Mr. Radisic (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): Allow
me, Mr. President, to express my sincere gratitude for your
invitation to the Members of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to participate at this important meeting
dedicated to the implementation and results of the Dayton
Peace Accord, whose fourth anniversary we mark this
month.

It is a special honour and satisfaction for me to
personally address this Council as a Member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where I represent
the Serb people and the Republika Srpska,

I would like to extend my condolences on the tragic
plane crash several days ago in which personnel of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
lost their lives.

Also allow me at the outset to express my agreement
with the global assessments of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the views presented by the other Members
of the Presidency.

I assure the Council that the Dayton/Paris General
Framework Agreement for peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was a monumentally important historic event;
it established peace and equality among the nations that live
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Peace Accord and its
annexes guarantee a balanced relationship between the two
multi-ethnic entities, which are treated equally, the three
constituent nations and the common institutions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Our experience so far indicates that there
is no alternative to this document and that it has an
excellent chance of being a permanent basis on which
relations should be built in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
prosperity and stability as its goal, as well as being a factor
for overall stability in the entire region.

I would therefore like to pay a special tribute to the
authors of this very important document and the entire
international community for their efforts to establish peace
and for their assistance in the reconstruction and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, it
has contributed to the nations of Bosnia and Herzegovina
turning to their future, their economic development and an
affirmation of constitutional institutions and democratic
practice. We note that since Dayton our mutual
understanding and tolerance have been enhanced, thus
reducing the hatred and fear that led us astray.

The Dayton Peace Accord has strong support in the
Republika Srpska from all its citizens, political parties
and State institutions. That support is an expression of the
belief that the Accord paves the way to peace, economic
development and the development of democracy, respect
for the political will of the voters, the acceleration of
economic reforms and cooperation and integration with
Europe and the international community. For the nations
and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Dayton Peace
Accord ended a very difficult period - marked by
destruction and suffering, an inter-ethnic, religious and
civil war - with enormous loss of life, demographic
turbulence and extreme material destruction. But it also
marked the beginning of a new phase which offers
realistic chances of bringing about a brighter future,
peaceful and stable development, and guarantees of
human and national rights, freedoms and values. That is
why respect for the norms set out in the Dayton Accord
and their consistent implementation encourage the nations
and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, just as the
destruction of those norms disappoints them and leads
them into uncertainty.

In the past four-year period, important results have
been achieved in the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accord. Peace and the freedom of movement of people
and goods have been established throughout the territory
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The military aspect of the
Dayton Peace Accord has been implemented with
enormous success, without any incidents or resistance.
Common institutions have been established at the level of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Mutual tolerance and
understanding are increasing at all levels of work and
decision-making. Initial results have been achieved in the
reconstruction and economic recovery of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Important reforms which ought to contribute
to the establishment of a market economy and the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina internationally
have begun.

A significant advance has been made particularly
during this year, on the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their dwellings. Over a 10-month period this
year, more families of minority people have returned to
the Republika Srpska than in the past three years. The
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has taken a
decision on the reduction of military contingents and
military spending by 15 per cent compared with last year.
The demilitarization of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the

 

wider region has the potential of being our final goal, since
in that way we can create conditions for lasting peace and
rapid economic development.

Thanks to the overall assistance and engagement of the
international community, and the understanding and
tolerance in institutions, we have created the conditions for
the entry of Bosnia and Herzegovina into wider
international structures and its willingness to become a real
part of Europe and the world. The best example of this is
the successful organization of the South-Eastern Europe
Stability Pact Summit and Bosnia and Herzegovina's
readiness and willingness to actively work on this regional
integration. In addition to that, there is intensive activity to
create conditions that will enable Bosnia and Herzegovina
to become a member of the European Council, hopefully
early next year, and the day when conditions are ripe for its
membership in the World Trade Organization.

More importantly, we stress the significance of
understanding that there is no alternative to peace, and that
creating a climate of trust, understanding and tolerance
prevents and decreases fear, hatred and ethnic and human
tensions and creates the potential for global affirmation of
cultural, spiritual and social values in the progress of
contemporary civilization.

I am convinced that the results achieved in
implementing the Dayton Peace Accord would be even
greater had the norms and the spirit of Dayton been fully
and consistently respected. The arbitration decision on
Brcko has infringed on the premise of the territorial
integrity of the entities and caused crisis and dissatisfaction
among the citizens of the Republika Srpska. Economic aid
pledged by the international community at the donors'
conferences has up to now been uneven, and this has
resulted in the slowing down of the economic recovery and
development of the Republika Srpska, as well as its lagging
behind in development compared to the other entity. I
believe that the behaviour on the part of certain institutions
of the Republika Srpska has also had an impact in that
field.

As the Council is well aware, direct damage resulting
from the tragic war in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
estimated at over $50 billion, and the international
community has up to this time approved around $5.1 billion
in various forms of aid. Financial support for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina
must be continued with the goal of creating minimum
conditions for establishing a self-sustaining economy as a
factor for achieving economic and political stability for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is why we expect that the
Council will support our request to hold more donors'
conferences, and we wish to reassure the Council that we
will, on our part, create the institutional conditions and
favourable environment for the entry and security of
foreign investments.

Life in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still very difficult.
We have not even achieved 50 per cent of our pre-war
level of development, and it is well known that even then
we were lagging behind Europe and the rest of the world.
It is our belief that economic development and social
stability must now given absolute priority in all our
efforts. That is the only way we will be able to stem the
mass emigration of our citizens, increase the conditions
for a faster return of refugees and displaced persons to
their homes and further strengthen the institutions of a
State based on law, as well as successfully fight against
crime, corruption and terrorism, which already pose a
threat.

Our vision of Bosnia and Herzegovina assumes a
stable and democratic State with accelerated progress in
all aspects, equal security for all, full equality of nations
and citizens and a free flow of people, goods, information
and ideas. The consistent implementation of the Pact for
Stability in the region will provide an additional incentive
to achieve that goal. That is also an opportunity for the
Dayton Peace Accords, whose preservation and consistent
implementation I strongly advocate.

Contrary to the clear stipulations of the Peace
Accord, the Peace Implementation Council for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, at its regular sessions in Sintra, Bonn,
London, Luxembourg and Madrid, frequently expanded
the authority of the international community and that of
the international organization. As a rule, that was done at
the expense of the responsibilities of the entity bodies, as
well as at the expense of the politically expressed will of
the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I advocate the affirmation of the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entities, as well as the
rights and responsibilities of the parliaments of the
entities and the joint institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and less imposition on the part of anybody.
That does not bring into question the role and importance
of the High Representative or a number of other factors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina with whom cooperation is
more and more likely, but involves the strengthening of
the role and the responsibility of the legal and
constitutional bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

 

Today's Declaration and the document to which we
agreed in New York last night provide support and a
challenge, not only as a declaration, but above all our
decisiveness and readiness to make additional efforts in
further implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord.

Our fundamental goal remains the preservation of
peace and stability on the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and beyond. It is possible to guarantee
prosperous development, democratization of society and
integration into Europe and the world only if the Dayton
Peace Accord is respected much more consistently and
clearly. Every forced revision of Dayton and its unilateral
interpretation will lead to the instability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I am convinced that, in the interest of peace
and stability, the values and results achieved will be kept
and preserved and that new possibilities for the
implementation of Dayton and the affirmation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will arise.

Bosnia and Herzegovina provides a great challenge
and opportunity for all of us and for the entire world. For
some, it also provides a sort of experiment in new
conditions. For the nations and citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is even more than that - it is the hope that
there will never again be a war, displacements, fear, hatred
and lagging in development. Bosnia and Herzegovina is,
and must forever be, a part of a contemporary, democratic
and prosperous Europe and the world.

