Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates the Russian Federation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. We are convinced that,
under your leadership, Mr. President, the Council will
have a fruitful month ahead. China affirms its full
cooperation and support for your work. We also wish to
thank Poland, as President for the month of August, for
its contribution to the smooth conduct of the Council's
work. China thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Salame and Ambassador Schulz for
their briefings. I also listened carefully to the statement
by the civil society representative, Ms. Mohamed.

The situation in Libya has been in turmoil for
more than eight years, subjecting the Libyan people to
tremendous suffering and leading to the deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situation in the
surrounding region. The international community must
take effective measures to help Libya to bring about a
cessation of hostilities and the resumption of a political
dialogue. China wishes to make the following remarks.

First, the political process should be Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned. China commends the relevant parties in
Libya for honouring the commitment to a truce during
the Bid al-Adha festivities. All parties must build
upon that, bear in mind the overarching interests of
Libya and its people, strengthen mutual trust and seek
solutions through dialogue and consultations, with a
view to ultimately achieving lasting peace, prosperity
and stability in the country.

Secondly, the international community must play a
constructive role in seeking a solution to the situation
in Libya. It is imperative to uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Libya. Priority must be given to issues
such as foreign terrorist fighters and the influx and
proliferation of weapons in Libya. Council resolutions
must be strictly implemented. Countries with influence
must strive to promote peace negotiations and move
the parties towards the cessation of hostilities and the
resumption of dialogue.

Thirdly, support must be given to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and Special Representative
Salame. It is also important to leverage the advantages
and roles of the African Union (AU), the League of
Arab States and other regional organizations. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame has
put forward a three-step proposal, which provides a
practical approach to resolving the situation in Libya.
The international community must create conditions
conducive to its implementation, in particular the
second and third steps. The AU and the League of Arab
States are well placed to mediate between the parties to
the conflict and should be supported in that task so as
to build synergy with the United Nations.

Fourthly, the issue of sanctions must be properly
addressed. Under the current circumstances, it is
important to strictly implement the arms embargo on
Libya. At the same time, the purpose of the sanctions
is to facilitate a political settlement. Caution should
be taken to prevent other sanctions from negatively
impacting Libyan civilians or any third countries.
Nor should sanctions compromise the overall national
interests of Libya or the normal lives of Libyans and
their humanitarian needs. The Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
its secretariat and the Panel of Experts should carry out
their work impartially and in strict accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions.

China supports the Libyan people in the pursuit of
peace and stability. China always takes an impartial
stance on the Libyan question and will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Libyan issue. China will work together with the
international community and actively contribute to
restoring peace and stability in Libya.

