Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): Last week's visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo made possible a better analysis of the
challenges facing the country in the run-up to the
elections. I would like to thank the representatives
of France, Bolivia and Equatorial Guinea for their
preparatory work and their very thorough briefings this
morning. I would also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui
and Mr. Said Djinnit for their briefings just now. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands continues to provide them
with its full support.

Today I would like to dwell on three points. First,
I would like to share some of the highlights of the
Security Council's visit. Secondly, I will emphasize the
importance of confidence-building in the final phase
of the election preparations. Lastly, I will address the
role of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in relation to Action for Peacekeeping.

On my first point, I would like to share some
reflections on our recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I thank the Congolese authorities and
MONUSCO for their hospitality. Our various interviews
revealed to what extent the political differences among
the different parties affect people's lives. Our meeting
with the female candidates particularly struck me. They
were bursting with positive energy and had the clear
will to improve Congo's future.

During our visit, the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded
to Dr. Denis Mukwege. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
admires his commitment to the health and the dignity of
women in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That honour sends a political signal to all
countries of the world and calls on them to continue the
fight against sexual violence in conflict areas. We also
welcome President Kabila Kabange's reaffirmation of
that message of zero tolerance for sexual violence. We
look forward to seeing its further implementation.

My second point concerns the two months
remaining to prepare the elections. Several important
steps have been taken to ensure the holding of the
elections on 23 December. I am thinking of the
training of national observers and the provision by
the authorities of the necessary logistical materiel. As
pointed out by our French colleague, the outstanding
problem can be summed up in one word - trust.
There are deep political divisions. We call on all
actors to strengthen their cooperation so as to reach
agreement on outstanding issues. We call on the
Independent National Electoral Commission to increase
transparency and openness. We underline the need for
all political parties to be able to campaign safely. We
call for the full implementation of the New Year's Eve
agreement, in particular the opening of political space.
We encourage the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to invite independent observers.
Such confidence-building measures are crucial to the
credibility of the elections.

My third point concerns MONUSCO. I recall that
MONUSCO is ready to provide logistical support
to the electoral process. However, it is important to
look beyond that deadline because the elections will
not remove the root causes of the conflict, which still
affects millions of civilians in eastern Congo.

During our visit, I was impressed by MONUSCO's
efforts towards Action for Peacekeeping. Last March,
our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, helped to launch
that initiative here in the Security Council in support
of Secretary-General Guterres (see S/PV.8218).
MONUSCO has shown itself able to act more proactively
and more flexibly. We commend the Force Commander
for his commitment to Action for Peacekeeping. His
goal is to save lives, not to count the bodies. At the
same time, I noted the need for resources to implement
the new protection-through-projection strategy. That
includes air assets, night-vision goggles and intelligence.
The strategy will need to be evaluated in order to draw
lessons for other peacekeeping operations.

It is also imperative that MONUSCO rapidly
have access to all the materiel that has not yet entered
Congolese territory. The primary task of the Mission
remains the protection of civilians. The violence
perpetrated by the Allied Democratic Forces in the
vicinity of Beni - an area affected by the Ebola
virus - once again illustrates the importance of
that task.

The visit clearly showed me the need for a
realistic mandate and for MONUSCO to focus on the
key tasks. That clearly demonstrates that any exit
strategy for MONUSCO should be considered only
with the utmost caution, taking into account the needs
of Congolese civilians. Moreover, a possible early
reduction ofMONUSCO troops risks having significant
consequences beyond the national territory.

In the context of regional aspects, the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region remains highly
relevant, as the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism emphasized. Only the political
will of the stakeholders will be able to fully realize the
potential of the Framework.

In conclusion, the time remaining before the
elections on 23 December will be crucial. All parties
must step up their efforts to ensure free, credible
and peaceful elections that enhance the prospects for
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
They can count on our support. For the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we must maintain
the unity of the Security Council.

