Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Mr. President,
and the mission of Nigeria for organizing this debate to
discuss this pertinent topic. We would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe for their very informative briefings.

This issue is of particular importance for our
increasingly globalized world, in which social and
political crises have the potential to create an
atmosphere of tension that can erupt into acts of
violence or lead to instability for countries or regions.

In the past decade, peacekeeping has become the
most important instrument of the United Nations in
solving disputes and conflicts. Overstretched as it
currently is, peacekeeping must encompass new
initiatives and innovative methods for solutions
helping to preserve or maintain peace. Those measures
not only represent a peaceful alternative but are also
less costly.

Addressing and solving contemporary conflicts
requires an integrated approach with complementary
tools such as mediation, negotiation, dialogue or
conflict resolution and management. Bosnia and
Herzegovina emphasizes the role of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue in advancing regional
cooperation and solving some of the difficulties. We
are convinced that this is a necessary measure in order
to build confidence and trust.

The links between security and development are
mutually reinforcing. Therefore, conflict prevention
should address the root causes of conflict in a
comprehensive manner, including the promotion of
sustainable development, good governance, rule of law,
national reconciliation and poverty eradication.
Building preventive diplomacy capacity involves
national, regional and, finally, United Nations
expertise. The assessment of early warning information
coming from the United Nations system should be
timely in order to enable good policy options and
decisive actions.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to enhanced cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations and the United Nations.
Strengthening cooperation and strategic partnership
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
European Union is of key importance for enabling
early responses to disputes or emerging crises.
Pursuing effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding
strategies should be based on flexibility and on making
use of each partner's comparative advantages. This is
relevant not only in terms of knowledge on the ground
and exchanges of experience, but also for the training
of military experts and the development of civilian
expertise.

We welcome the progress made in recent years in
the implementation of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme. We urge the United Nations to increase its
engagement to make African Peace and Security
Architecture fully operational as soon as possible, in
particular in the areas of early warning, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and training. Furthermore,
we consider it crucial for the African Union to ensure
leadership and ownership of the process.

The United Nations and the Security Council,
which have the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, should invest more
effort in conflict prevention, through such means as
fact-finding missions, mediation and confidence-
building measures and the appointment of special
representatives, who could provide useful
recommendations for the peaceful settlement of
disputes prior to preventive deployment or enforcement
measures.

We are convinced that support for regional
mediation initiatives, in close consultation with
regional and subregional organizations, is an important
element of ensuring peace and security, not only within
countries but also between countries.

It is of vital importance that the Security Council
be provided with regular reports and analyses on
developments in regions of potential armed conflict in
Africa, as well as on ongoing preventive diplomacy
initiatives. Regional conflict management structures
should provide the Security Council with timely and
rapid information to facilitate adequate and proper
decision-making.

We must not exclude or underestimate negative
developments in the economic, social and security
sectors. Special attention should be given to
monitoring tensions arising from economic and social
issues and actions against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and high-value commodities.

Particular emphasis should be placed on
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, as an integral
element of peacebuilding activities. Strengthening the
role and capacities of civil society groups and women
and their involvement in post-conflict peacebuilding
activities are necessary for the promotion of a culture
of peace and economic empowerment.

In conclusion, cooperation should be
strengthened in the deployment of peacekeepers and to
more closely involve regional and subregional
organizations in peacebuilding, post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction processes through the
framework of the Peacebuilding Commission. Linking
United Nations expertise and experts from regional
organizations will significantly contribute to increasing
the pool of available expertise.

Multilateral endeavours and actions should be
focused on conflict resolution in a more transparent
and open way. Short-term solutions should only pave
the way for long-term approaches that require proper
understanding of the root causes of conflict, which
often lie in political grievances, underdevelopment,
backwardness, lack of good governance or concerns
related to the preservation of ethnic, cultural, national
and religious identities.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
enhancement of consultations between the Secretariat
and its counterparts at the regional and subregional
levels will enhance complementarity and minimize
duplication of efforts. Strengthening the input of
regional organizations in decision-making and the
peaceful settlement of disputes is crucial. At the same
time, regional organizations can act as bridges when
the ownership of peace processes is transferred from
international to domestic authorities.

