Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I thank Secretary
Tillerson for calling this important meeting of the
Security Council.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the gravest regional and international security
concerns. This threat does not respect national borders,
and the proliferation of such weapons must end. We all
have a part to play in this.Our shared rules and norms
are designed to keep the world safe. The Council has
a responsibility to prevent proliferation, tackle threats
and respond when these weapons are used. Individual
nations also have a responsibility to implement the
measures imposed by the Council and indeed to be
ready to go further when the situation requires.

Individually and collectively we must enforce these
rules, working through bodies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), or as
groups of concerned States. If we are to succeed, the
Council and strong multilateral institutions must be at
the heart of that approach and we must persist when
countries continue to defy the international rules-based
system. That is why it is right that we have collectively
developed a framework of sanctions against North
Korea and continued to strengthen those sanctions in
the face of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
dangerous provocations. I was in Seoul only last
month and was struck by the focus of President Moon
Jae-in's Government in trying to resolve the situation,
recognizing that what has long been a regionalized
dispute now has truly global ramifications.

Secretary Tillerson has made it clear that the United
States does not regard it as desirable to work for regime
change or accelerated reunification of the peninsula,
to garrison its forces north of the thirty-eighth parallel
or indeed to harm the North Korean people. Yet the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has responded
with more missile tests and another nuclear test. While
the regime prioritizes its military programmes, the
people of North Korea suffer deprivation and hardship.
That is why we must all continue to press North Korea
to respect the Council's resolutions and, even at this
late stage, to change its reckless course. We must
enforce the measures that we have adopted and be
prepared to expand them if North Korea continues on
that reckless path.

Turning to the very different case of Iran, we
now know that the multilateral system can and will
continue to deliver results. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) has succeeded in limiting
Iran's nuclear capability. Iran has rolled back its nuclear
programme, and the International Atomic Energy
Agency has had unprecedented access. The British
Government will therefore continue to abide by its
commitments under that deal and urge the other parties
to do the same. Iran must also continue to do so if we
are all to have confidence in the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. However, while the JCPOA has
dealt with one risk, others, as we all know, remain. Iran
continues to play a destabilizing role within its region
and its ballistic-missile testing is still inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran must respect the call of the
Council and cease such activities.

As other members have said, the situation in Syria
also poses the most serious proliferation challenges.
This year, sarin gas has again been used as weapon,
in a clear violation of the international prohibition
of the use of chemical weapons. There must be no
impunity for the perpetrators of such terrible crimes
against humanity. The United Kingdom Government
urges Council members to support the vital work of
the Council-mandated OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and to renew its mandate, and
we must keep up the efforts to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction,
based on resolution 1540 (2004).

We all recognize that these proliferation challenges
are very complex. They require a persistent and united
approach in line with existing treaties and norms. That
is why the Government of the United Kingdom, for
one, does not believe that the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons, which was opened for signature
yesterday, is helpful. I believe that it will only create
unnecessary divisions and undermine the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which rightly
sits at the heart of all of our non-proliferation efforts.

The Security Council has a heavy responsibility
to protect international peace and security. Member
States share that responsibility and must play their part
in implementing the Council's resolutions. We now
need to work tirelessly together to stop proliferation,
save lives and make the world a safer place.

