Mr. Eman (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in
my capacity as Prime Minister of Aruba. We welcome
the initiative of New Zealand to hold this meeting of
the Security Council to address the peace and security
challenges that small island developing States (SIDS)
are facing. We are also very grateful for the briefings
given today by the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime
Minister of Jamaica and our friend the Minister of
Finance of Seychelles.

Today's topic is of particular interest to the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, since three of the four
autonomous countries within the Kingdom - Aruba,
Curacao and Sint Maarten - are in fact SIDS. I am
very pleased and take a great interest in representing
the voice of small island States both within and outside
of the borders of our Kingdom.

Let me ask the Council to take a moment to imagine
life in many of the small island developing States.
The first image that comes to mind might be that of a
tropical paradise, pictures of a small island with palm
trees, surrounded by a placid turquoise sea. And yes,
that image is entirely correct for Aruba, Curacao, Sint
Maarten and many other SIDS. At the same time, even
the inhabitants of paradise have to deal with their share
of serious challenges. Some of these are local, some are
regional and some are global challenges.

When we were at the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States in
Samoa, small island States, together with large
countries and large corporations, had the opportunity
to share the challenges and the permanent handicaps
that small island States face. It was very encouraging
in Samoa to see how, maybe for the first time, large
countries, major institutions and large corporations in
a very concrete way committed themselves to working
towards the future and the improvement of the quality
of life within the SIDS. Let me briefly share with the
Council today three ofthe challenges and some insights
on what we can do to respond to challenges facing so
many of our small island States.

First, on the effects of climate change, the sheer
horror of having to survive an extreme tropical storm is
a familiar phenomenon in my region, the Caribbean. We
know the storm is coming, and on some islands we know
that there is no high ground for escape. Meanwhile, ever
higher seas and more powerful cyclones are destroying
the little plots of land, one's family home and the local
school. In March, the South Pacific witnessed just such
a devastating extreme weather event when Cyclone
Pam swept through the region.

Climate change affects us all. In the Council
today, we have heard from Prime Ministers, Ministers
and representatives of countries that not only face
devastation from a possible natural disaster, but already
know for a fact that within 20 years, 50 years or 60
years, they may not exist any more as an island. That is
a dramatic given that we, the Security Council and the
United Nations and the world, must deal with. Today,
as we look at how climate change affects us already,
we know that extreme risks are developing in ways that
are very threatening to fragile States, which have fewer
resources and the least capacity to cope with them. We
need to leave the Chamber with a stronger commitment
than when we left the Conference in Samoa to work
with these islands. As the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
we recognize the need to strengthen resilience to
climate fragility risks. That is one of the reasons we are
working hard towards the adoption of a new, ambitious,
legally binding and global agreement in Paris later this
year.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands will convene
the first international conference under the them
"Planetary security: Peace and cooperation in times of
climate change and global environmental challenges",
on 2 and 3 November at the Peace Palace in The Hague.
The conference will be an annual event aimed at
maintaining an ongoing focus on this important topic.

Some may believe that only large nations can
effectively fight climate change. but each country, no
matter how small, can contribute to the fight against
climate change. In Aruba, we are a small country, but
we are seeking to transition from fossil fuels by 2020
and to share the lessons we learn with other countries,
especially SIDS. We, like many others engaged in
this fight, believe that small island nations can be
laboratories to demonstrate how this transition can
occur in all countries. In Aruba, we view the move to
renewable energy as part of a broader vision of shared
and sustainable prosperity in which we take strong steps
not only to preserve our physical environment for the
future and future generations, but also to ensure that
our socioeconomic culture and environment prospers
as well. Let us not forget that inequality also breeds
insecurity.

A second problem for many SIDS is the challenge
of transnational crime. Many lack the capacity to patrol
the immense waters surrounding our islands. This has
a negative impact on our ability to fight transnational
crime. The threat posed by criminal networks dealing
in drugs and arms can have truly destabilizing effects
on our islands. We have combated these threats on
Aruba and the other parts of our Kingdom together
with the Dutch Caribbean Coast Guard, which patrols
a large part of the Caribbean waters to the north-
west of Aruba, Curacao and Bonaire. Howeverm
regional and international cooperation needs to be
further strengthened in order to be more effective.
Such collaboration helps increase the possibilities for
countering transnational crime.

Thirdly, a lack of maritime patrolling capacity can
also sustain the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
including illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing. This can negatively impact the sustainable
yield of fish stocks. The damage to unique coral reefs
can affect the livelihood of SIDS. That is why a stand-
alone sustainable development goal on oceans and seas
is important, as it will seek to regulate harvesting and
end overfishing, IUU fishing and destructive fishing
practices by 2020.

This morning, the Secretary-General called for
partnership with SIDS to address current security
challenges. That is what the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
as a partner for peace, justice and development,
hopes to do. Allow me to cite some examples. With
Seychelles, we are fighting piracy. With Grenada,
we have started cooperation on blue growth and food
security. After Cyclone Pam, the Kingdom was among
the first countries to provide assistance to Vanuatu and
Kiribati. Aruba and the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
together with Carbon War Room and the Netherlands
Organisation for Applied Scientific Research, are
reaching out to 10 other Caribbean islands to share
with them our experience on the path to total energy
sustainability.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the interest of the Security Council in SIDS
and in the challenges we face. Stronger regional and
international collaboration is needed in order to meet
the security challenges we encounter in the Caribbean
and other regions where SIDS are situated. That is
also one of the motivations for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands to seek a seat on the Security Council
for the 2017-2018 term. We best know our challenges
and keep the interests of small and medium-sized
countries close to heart. We welcome and encourage
further discussions on the international challenges
affecting SIDS, now and in the future, with a view to
strengthening the solidarity between larger and smaller
Members of the United Nations family. We in Aruba
have grown in modest nest of six SIDS. When we think
of our smaller brothers and sisters - Bonaire, Saba
and Saint Eustatius - we feel compassion and a sense
of solidarity a responsibility towards them. So too,
the larger countries, world institutions and even large
corporations should think of small island developing
States with the virtuous thought, "I am my brother's
keeper".

