Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to congratulate you, Sir, and your country on
presiding over the Security Council during the month
of December. We commend your initiative to convene
this debate on the challenge represented by the world
drug problem, under the agenda item "Peace and
security in Africa". Likewise, we welcome the
presentation made by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

The conclusions reached at the fifty-second
session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March
are particularly relevant in view of the challenge that
the world drug problem continues to pose 11 years
after the convening of the twentieth special session of
the General Assembly. In the Political Declaration and
the Action Plan adopted in March this year, the high-
level segment of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
reaffirmed the fundamental principle that each link of
the world drug problem must be addressed within the
framework of common and shared responsibility and
through international cooperation.

The achievements of the Colombian Government
in the fight against the global drug problem over more
than three decades are widely recognized. The
Colombian State, through a strategy based on taking
action against illegal groups, reducing demand,
weakening the economic structure of drug trafficking
and reducing supply with an emphasis on the
eradication of illicit crops, has achieved sound results.

The UNODC World Drug Report 2009 recognizes
the results achieved in decreasing illegal crops in
Colombia. Since 2002 to date, the manual eradication
and spraying of illegal crops have increased by 72 per
cent. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs

and Crime, the coca cultivation area in Colombia,
which had reached 160,000 hectares early in the
decade, was reduced in 2008 to 81,000 hectares,
representing a 50 per cent decrease. Moreover,
UNODC estimates in its report that the total volume of
the potential production of cocaine in Colombia
decreased by 28 per cent from 2007 to 2008, an even
greater decrease than that observed in the cultivation
area.

As a consequence of the achievements in
Colombia, among other factors, the adaptability of
transnational organized crime has led to the geographic
dispersal and extension to a greater number of
countries of the cultivation, production, trafficking and
consumption of narcotic drugs. In its comprehensive
and determined fight against the global drug problem,
Colombia has gained experience and capabilities which
it has actively shared through various cooperation
projects. We have addressed requests for training and
technical assistance from countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean, Central America, West Africa and
Asia. The conclusions of the Regional Summit on the
World Drug Problem, Security and Cooperation, held
in Cartagena in 2008, give us a solid base for tackling
the problem we are discussing in today's debate. At
that Summit, a number of countries from Latin
America and the Caribbean reaffirmed, among other
things, their commitment to strengthening mechanisms
for technical and institutional coordination and
experience-sharing, with a view to reducing illicit
cultivation and the production of illicit drugs.
Furthermore, the Political Declaration and Action Plan
adopted at the Ministerial Conference of the Economic
Community of West African States, held in October
2008, offer a significant contribution.

The two meetings I have mentioned offered
opportunities that promoted interregional dialogue,
which is a valuable instrument in the fight against the
global drug problem. We appreciate the role that the
United Nations can play in increasing and facilitating
such dialogue.

Colombia has joined the efforts of the
international community aimed at tackling the problem
of drug trafficking to Europe via the West coast of
Africa. We are participating actively in an initiative for
cooperation and information exchange between State
security organs against the trafficking of cocaine from
Latin America to West Africa.
On February of this year, Colombia hosted the
first meeting with African countries organized with the
support of the United Nations, the European
Commission, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the Inter-American Drug Abuse Control
Commission of the Organization of American States,
the American Police Community, the Latin American
and Caribbean Community on Police Intelligence and
the Colombian National Police. Nineteen countries
participated in this meeting, including seven from the
African continent. During that meeting, training in
specialized techniques to combat drug trafficking was
provided, and channels of communication were opened
to facilitate the exchange of information.

With regard to the problem of the trafficking of
drugs to Europe through the West Coast of Africa,
operational coordination, while indispensable, is only a
first step. Efforts must be focused on developing
coordinated strategies to address the various
components of the problem. The capacity of United
Nations is invaluable in the coordination of these
efforts.

The experience of Colombia confirms that only
through a balanced approach to decreasing both the
supply of and the demand for drugs will it be possible
to move forward efficiently and progressively in the
fight against the world drug problem.

It is indispensable to tackle all the links. All the
countries involved, be they producer, transit or
consumer countries, must tackle the various aspects of
the problem in unison and with the same resolve.

Colombia reaffirms its unwavering commitment
to continue working at the bilateral, regional and
multilateral levels, through effective cooperation
activities that address the transnational, dynamic and
multidimensional nature of this crime.

