The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to imperil prospects of peace and stability in the Middle East. At a time when we need a spirit of reconciliation and political determination, Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian territory undermine the two-State solution and the established parameters for a just and durable peace. The use of excessive and disproportionate force against civilians, arbitrary arrests, attempts to erode the status of Jerusalem, the inhumane blockade in Gaza and the illegal settlements have all been part of a recurring pattern that severely curtails the fundamental rights and freedoms of Palestinians. During the past few years, Israel has intensified its expansion of illegal settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. We all agree that the settlements undermine the perspective of a two-State solution and lay the foundation for the annexation of these areas. Today the most immediate and pressing challenge is the Israeli Government's illegal plans for the annexation of the West Bank. The annexation would be a grave violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It would increase the grievances and suffering of Palestinians at the hands of the occupying Power. Palestinian land and the people of Palestine should not be sacrificed for the sake of Israel's brazen policies of violence and occupation. An overwhelming majority of the international community objected to Israel's plans. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation Executive Committee meeting held on 10 June delivered a strong message against Israel's initiatives for annexation and provided its full support to the Palestinian people in their quest for justice. This message should be supported by all members of the international community to prevent Israel from taking this dangerous step. We once again urge the Israeli Government to immediately cease its illegal settlement activities and not to proceed with its illegal annexation plans. The situation in the Gaza Strip is also deeply worrisome. Gazans, who are under blockade, continue to live in tremendous despair and insecurity. This tragedy is compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the worst financial crisis in the history of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA). The Palestinian Government has implemented effective public health measures against the spread of the virus. We welcome and support these measures. Yet decades of Israeli occupation and blockade have severely damaged the Palestinian economy, infrastructure and health system. As in the rest of the world, the public health restrictions have had serious effects on the economy of Palestine. We therefore call on the Government of Israel to fulfil its responsibilities. We also call upon the international community to support UNRWA. Until a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestine conflict is reached, the work of UNRWA remains vital. It is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency. Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance with international law and Security Council resolutions emboldens Israel's recklessness. The international community, in particular the Security Council, cannot turn a blind eye to the situation. There is an urgent need to revitalize the peace process. The only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the two-State solution based on the 1967 lines, with Palestine and Israel living side by side. The rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination, are not up for negotiation. For decades, the basis for peace negotiations have been the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. This was explicitly reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). These terms of reference should be upheld. Any initiative for peace should be based on these established parameters. It is high time that the international community uphold the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, ensuring that they live in a free Palestine in peace and dignity. Turkey's firm commitment to stand with its Palestinian brothers and sisters remains as strong as ever.
