Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Mr. President, first of all my
delegation would like to commend you for arranging this
open briefing on the situation in Sierra Leone. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report and to Mr. Bernard Miyet for the update.

It is gratifying to note that progress has been made,
notably the participation of the rebels in the Government
and the registration of the Revolutionary United Front of
Sierra Leone (RUF) as a political party. Similarly, in the
vital area of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), although the response of the ex-combatants appears
timid and slow, there is reason to believe that with the
continued support of the donor community the programme
will gather momentum. We are delighted to learn that some
child soldiers have reported to the DDR programme. This
is very encouraging indeed. As Mr. Miyet has rightly
pointed out, this is an ongoing process and we need to
monitor it closely.

At this juncture, my delegation would like to place on
record its appreciation for the support given to the DDR
programme by a number of Governments led by the United
Kingdom in collaboration with the World Bank.

Au revers de la medaille - on the flip side of the
coin, as the French saying goes - my delegation is
perturbed by the poor human rights situation that continues
to prevail in the country. Both RUF and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) are still holding adults and
children in captivity. It is difficult to understand how
leaders of RUF and AFRC are part of the Government and
yet their followers continue to wreak havoc around the
country. It is our fervent hope, however, that with the full
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), the overall security situation would
be improved tremendously and we urge the Secretariat to
accelerate the process.

As far as the Gambia military observers are
concerned, we are ready to deploy as soon as we are
given the green light by the Secretariat. However, we
have a question for Mr. Miyet concerning possible
civilian police for Sierra Leone. We understand that there
are 6 police advisors in Sierra Leone at the moment, and
my delegation would like to know what plans the
Secretariat has to deploy civilian police to Sierra Leone.

