The Secretary-General: Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting on the situation
in the Middle East.
Before I start, let me say just a few words on the
situation regarding the talks on Syria. Participants
will be aware of the latest developments concerning
the Geneva conference on Syria. Intensive and urgent
discussions are under way, and I will have more to say
about the situation later in the day. For the moment, let
me just appeal again to all involved to keep the needs of
the Syrian people foremost in mind.

I have just returned from the region and my fifth
visit to Iraq. The country is again facing serious threats
to its stability. I discussed my concerns with many
Iraqi leaders and urged all sides to remain committed
to political dialogue and to uphold respect for the rule
of law and human rights. I was reassured by their
pledge to hold parliamentary elections as scheduled
on 30 April. Today, I reiterate my message to the
Iraqi political leaders to fulfil their responsibilities to
ensure inclusive dialogue, social cohesion and concrete
political progress.

I also visited Kuwait. I am extremely grateful to
the many countries that pledged generous funding
at the Second International Humanitarian Pledging
Conference on Syria. In addition, I had a meeting
with the emir of Kuwait, and I am encouraged by the
improving bilateral relations between his country
and Iraq. We also discussed the implementation of
resolution 2107 (2013).

Turning to Lebanon, I commend President Sleiman's
leadership in upholding the country's disassociation
policy. That is vital to prevent the Syrian crisis from
exacerbating tensions in Lebanon, as we have seen with
the recent acts of terrorism and bombings. Nine years
after the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri, last week's opening of the trial of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon is a reminder of the fight to end
impunity in Lebanon.

Violations of Lebanon's border with Syria continue,
including a worrying escalation of rocket firing and
airstrikes into Lebanon's Bekaa region. Refugees
continue to cross into Lebanon in large numbers, now
totalling over 860,000 - a sixfold increase over last
year.

The situation in the area of operation of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remains relatively
stable thanks to the cooperation of the Lebanese and
Israeli authorities to contain recent incidents. All must
build on the stability that has prevailed along the Blue
Line under resolution 1701 (2006).

The Security Council and the International Support
Group for Lebanon have called for generous support for
the humanitarian response and stabilization efforts, as
well as for the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia has pledged $3 billion in assistance to
the Lebanese army.

I welcome the momentum to form a Government,
and encourage all parties to ensure that presidential
elections are held on time. The people of Lebanon look
to their leaders to work together to steer their country
through this difficult time.

The year 2014 will be decisive in helping Israelis
and Palestinians draw back from a perilous and
unsustainable status quo. United States Secretary
of State Kerry has worked diligently to lay out a
framework on all core issues to address Israeli and
Palestinian aspirations in a fair and balanced manner
and to allow for continued negotiations towards a final
status agreement. I also pay special tribute to Jordan for
its essential role.

Israeli and Palestinian leaders will be required
to make bold decisions and painful compromises
for peace. They must prepare their peoples for these
necessary steps. The failure of political progress could
fuel a downward spiral on the ground. I am alarmed by
recurrent violence and incitement on all sides, as well
as by continued settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law. Building settlements is not
consistent with building a long-lasting peace agreement.
Both parties must act responsibly and with restraint.
Gaza also remains a cause for concern. Ultimately, a
sustainable two-State solution will require Palestinians
to overcome their divisions.

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will
begin 2014 with an expected end-of-year shortfall of
$67 million under its regular budget. I encourage all
Member States to explore ways to strengthen their
cooperation with UNRWA and provide additional
funding, in particular to its regular budget.

I hope that the parties will reach a framework
understanding. It must be fair and consistent with
principles on all core issues outlined in Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles - including
land for peace - the road map and the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. Palestinians must be able to realize their
legitimate aspirations to statehood, self-determination,
dignity and freedom, including an end to the occupation
that began in 1967, with a just solution to the plight
of refugees and a resolution of the status of Jerusalem.
Israelis must be able to live in peace and security within
recognized borders, paving the way for their increasing
integration in a stable and secure region.

The realization of the Arab Peace Initiative will
yield socioeconomic, trade, and security benefits for
all the peoples of the Middle East. For Palestinians, a
comprehensive peace settlement holds the promise of
becoming a fully recognized Member State of equal
standing. There is no substitute for negotiations to
achieve this end. Only then can the United Nations
relationship with Palestine be truly transformed so
as to fully implement and complete the Palestinian
statebuilding agenda.

For Israel, too, only a negotiated solution will bring
security and recognition in the region and beyond.
Israel would be in a position to reap the full benefits
of all forms of cooperation within the United Nations
system. The United Nations and its Members would,
in turn, greatly benefit from what Israel has to offer.
I do not underestimate the difficulties, but the risks of
inaction or surrender are far greater. We face possibly
the last attempt to salvage the two-State solution. Quite
simply, this is too important to fail.

My message to President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu is clear. If they are prepared to take the bold
decisions required, I will push ahead on the positive
agenda of peace dividends for both sides and ensure
that the United Nations works towards realizing the
legitimate aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples within the framework of a comprehensive
regional settlement. We must make the most of the
prospect that Secretary Kerry has unlocked in order
to see the creation of two States living side by side in
peace and security that their peoples so desperately
desire and deserve.

