Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his realistic
briefing and for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1846
(2008) (S/2009/590). The United Kingdom expresses
its appreciation of the contribution of the United
Nations and its agencies to this effort, including the
Special Representative and his team.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the
achievements of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia in coordinating the efforts of the
international community to address piracy in the region
and the constructive contribution being made to these
efforts by the Transitional Federal Government and the
regional authorities of Somalia. We are pleased to lead
work in the Contact Group on operational coordination
and regional capacity development.

The level of coordination being achieved in the
region by naval forces from a wide range of States is
unprecedented and impressive. Close cooperation
among these forces, in particular the establishment of
patrolling of the internationally recommended transit
corridor in the Gulf of Aden, has managed to ensure
that only one ship following that route and adhering to
agreed best practice has been hijacked in the Gulf since
December 2008. The statistics in the Secretary-
General's report on the protection of World Food
Programme aid and the supplies of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) underline the
successful role of the military operations in
safeguarding essential shipping. But we cannot
underestimate the significant challenge that we face.
Even though the proportion of successful attacks
continues to fall, the overall number of pirate attacks
continues to increase, and 11 ships and 254 crew
members are currently hijacked.

Pirates are now willing to venture further out to
sea in search of targets, and to counter that, we need a
different type of military response, led by intelligence.
The military commanders know what they need in
terms of military capability, and the international
community must help to deliver it. But one message
from the military commanders remains consistent.
They are shocked by the lack of adherence by sectors
of the merchant shipping community to the guidance
that is given by the International Maritime
Organization and industry bodies. Estimates suggest
that a quarter of merchant shipping fails to follow this
guidance. That failure makes them much easier targets.
We have joined other major flag States in signing the
New York Declaration on Best Management Practices
to Avoid, Deter or Delay Acts of Piracy, and we are
pressing all United Kingdom ships to adopt those
practices when in the region. We urge all flag States to
do the same.

The release of the Spanish fishing boat Alacrana
earlier this week is obviously a welcome development,
and we hope that all other hostages will soon be free,
including British nationals Paul and Rachel Chandler,
who were seized from their yacht on 23 October.

We pay tribute to Kenya for its leadership within
the region in taking forward the detention and
prosecution of pirates. The United Kingdom also
welcomes the agreement by the Republic of Seychelles
to accept pirate suspects for trial and detention. We
stand ready with other partners to provide assistance to
signatories of the Djibouti Code of Conduct concerning
the Repression of Piracy and Armed Robbery against
09-61200

Ships in the Western Indian Ocean and Gulf of Aden
who have undertaken to enact national legislation to
enable the prosecution of pirates. We strongly support
the work being taken forward by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime to help the Transitional
Federal Government and regional authorities of
Puntland and Somaliland to deal with suspects within
Somalia.

The Secretary-General's report clearly highlights
the need to address the situation on land in Somalia.
The Contact Group decided on a number of measures
at the meeting of its working group in London this
week. Donors now need to commit themselves to
providing financial and technical support to Somalia
and to States throughout the region, including work on
governance, rule of law, justice, alternative livelihoods
and strategic communications. The implementation of
the Djibouti Code of Conduct remains at the heart of
regional capability development, transforming regional
political will into action.

Piracy is only one of the symptoms of instability
in Somalia, and, as the Special Representative has said,
we must also address the root causes of that instability.
I pay tribute to the efforts led by the Special
Representative to support the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia in developing effective
political and security structures. I should like to thank
AMISOM, and in particular Uganda and Burundi, its
two troop-contributing countries, for their outstanding
efforts to support the Government against insurgents. I
hope that others will join them to bring the Mission up
to full strength.

The international community has shown unity
and resolve in taking action to contain the threat of
piracy, but we now need to show more of the same
determination and unity on shore if we are to address
its roots and causes.

