At the outset, we extend our deepest condolences to the families, the Governments and the peoples of Cambodia and El Salvador for the recent death of two peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) from coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic adds an element to the eminent danger that these heroes of peace face every day. Similarly, we strongly condemn the cowardly attacks on MINUSMA peacekeepers, including the most recent attack in northern Mali, in which three members from Chad were killed. Our deepest condolences go to the families of the victims, the Government and the people of Chad. Attacks such as those, which are increasingly frequent and deadly, indiscriminately claim the lives not only of MINUSMA personnel and members of national and international forces, but also of hundreds of innocent civilians, including women and children. In every period assessed, the latter have been the main victims of endemic terrorist groups and intercommunal violence. The latest period has not been an exception, with a worrisome deterioration of the security situation in Mali and the Sahel region, including Burkina Faso and the Niger, where terrorist groups continued their wave of violence against security forces and civilians, as well as among themselves, competing for control over areas of influence with limited State presence. Furthermore, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Mali and the Sahel, which the terrorist groups are using to increase their attacks and challenge authority, is also worrisome, as an additional element of the complex prevailing security situation that exacerbates the existing humanitarian crisis to alarming levels. At a time when humankind is facing one of its greatest threats resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we understood and supported, based on principle and logic, the call for a ceasefire in all conflicts during the pandemic in order to focus resources and attention on the populations in need. However, the sad reality is that Mali and the Sahel continue to be destabilized and hijacked by violence generated by terrorist groups and intercommunal conflict, thus calling on us to reaffirm our commitment and strengthen our support, given the complexity of the challenges and the corresponding need for comprehensive solutions to achieve peace and security. We reiterate the importance of maintaining momentum and consolidating the achievements made thus far in Mali and the Sahel with the essential support of MINUSMA, with a view to effectively implementing, without delay, the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali as the most viable path towards the country's political stability and security. We recognize and commend the Government and the parties for the progress achieved in critical areas since the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue. Regarding the empowerment of women, it was encouraging to see the election of 41 women to the National Assembly in the May elections, three times more than in the last legislature, thanks to their significant and broad participation in the peace process and political life in Mali. We urge that progress continue to be made to increase the participation, training and acceptance of women in the various decision- making bodies. Similarly, the progress in the redistribution of the reconstituted units of the Malian army to the north of the country, with the essential support of MINUSMA, is also encouraging, as is the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force towards Mali's greater independence in the defence of its territory. In the light of the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate, we should be aware of the fact that the political, security and humanitarian situation in Mali and the Sahel remains precarious, of the progress achieved so far and of the adjustments needed to make the support provided more efficient. We call for greater collaboration among the various actors. Finally, we emphasize the importance of establishing responsibility and respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, especially in the context of the fight against terrorism, thus strengthening the credibility and acceptance of the efforts to achieve peace and security.
