Mr. Ryan: The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola was, of course, dissolved last week by the
Security Council on adoption of resolution 1448
(2002). I cannot, therefore, speak as Chairman of the
864 Committee, as it no longer exists. Even if it did
exist, I believe the comments I make here today could
be made only in a personal or national capacity. There
will, of course, be the annual report of the 864
Committee. I believe, in fact, that Council members
will already have received a draft copy.

The circumstances surrounding the termination of
the 864 Committee are happy ones, the sort that the
international community hopes for. The positive
military and political developments in Angola since
early this year provided the Council with the basis to
take the welcome action that it did last week. It is
difficult to measure precisely how much impact the
Council's sanctions - and, by extension, the 864
Committee's efforts - had on events in Angola. I
believe, though, it is right to say that the Council's
efforts did indeed have some influence on what has
transpired.

Perhaps the most straightforward measure to use
is to contrast how the international community was
implementing the sanctions at the beginning of 1999
with the situation at the beginning of 2002. For a
number of years previously, we had witnessed
widespread, if not total, disregard for the Council's
measures against UNITA. That prolonged the conflict
in Angola, and it did nothing to enhance the reputation
of the Council or of the United Nations. It will be
recalled that, under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Fowler of Canada, a whole new dynamic was
introduced to this file. I will not retrace the details
here. In summary, though, the Council, through its
innovative resolution 1295 (2000), put the international
community on notice that the sanctions against UNITA
should no longer be treated as a paper tiger: impunity
would be met with the full force of the resolutions
concerned.

Resolution 1295 (2000) provided for a number of
steps. None was more important in providing the
sanctions regime with teeth than the establishment in
July 2000 of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
Sanctions. The Mechanism allowed the sanctions
Committee to be furnished with additional and detailed
information about the violations of the sanctions and to
investigate where that information led. Its very
existence sent a strong warning that the Committee had
an additional arm that would systematically and
constantly monitor sanctions violations and the
violators. I am convinced that this acted as a strong
deterrent to those who had already engaged in
sanctions-busting, or who might have considered doing
so. I would like to pay personal tribute to the
dedication and the work of Ambassador Juan Larrain,
the Chairman of the Monitoring Mechanism, and his
colleagues in the Mechanism.

The harmonious atmosphere of the 864
Committee and the related absence of political
differences on the conflict in Angola itself were
important contributing factors to the success of its
work. As Chairman of the Committee, I took the view,
which was supported by all members, that a firewall of
sorts should exist between the sanctions regime and the
political track being pursued by the Secretary-General.
It was, in my View, crucial to maintain the distinction
between the Committee's work and that political track.
The dovetailing of these lines that has occurred in the
past few weeks, when the sanctions regime and the
work of the Joint Commission set up under the Lusaka
Protocol overlapped, was an inevitable and welcome
development in the circumstances. But, until that
historic moment, it was important for our joint
objectives to avoid any entanglement. And I believe
that this has worked very well.

The Committee's united approach opened the way
in September 2001 for the adoption of a revised list of
senior UNITA officials and adult members of their
immediate families. Those whose names appeared on
the list were subject to travel and financial restrictions.
A renewed signal of the Committee's seriousness was
being sent to UNITA and its supporters. Directly
arising from this, seven United Nations Member States
froze bank accounts of individuals included in the list.

The Committee also engaged a private sector
organization to investigate UNITA's international
financial networks. Although the investigation did not
reveal significant new information on UNITA's
financial operations, another strong signal was, I
believe, being sent to UNITA and to the international
financial community of the Council's determination to
close off as many avenues as possible.

The cooperation of Committee members and
other Member States extended well beyond New York.
In my capacity as Chairman, I visited 11 States, where
I raised, often at Government level, the priorities of the
sanctions Committee. Such visits proved extremely
useful for familiarization and direct contact with
Governments and other interested parties, both to
gather information and to convey the message of the
Security Council's continuing determination in seeing
the implementation of its measures.
An important aspect of the sanctions Committee's
work in the past two years has been the high level of
cooperation it received from the Government of
Angola. It is no secret that the relationship between the
United Nations and Angola has not always been a
happy one. However, I believe that the work of the
Committee and the impact this had on eroding UNITA's
capacity to wage war have increased the credibility of
the United Nations and of the Security Council in
Angola's eyes.

The Angolan authorities played their part in this,
particularly over the past two years, when they engaged
in bilateral discussions with a number of States that
had provided support to UNITA. The African Union
also played a part, establishing an Ad Hoc Committee
on the Implementation of Sanctions Against UNITA,
which visited a number of States, including some that
had caused concern to the Monitoring Mechanism. I,
myself, had a number of useful meetings with the Ad
Hoc Committee.

As Chairman, I followed very closely the
Kimberley Process, with its focus on the diamond
industry, and I engaged with the Wasenaar
arrangement, given its focus on weapons. Both of these
areas were central to the Angolan conflict. Although
there are highly complex issues at stake, including
valuable commercial interests, I am pleased to note that
significant advances were made by the Kimberley
Process. Some of the same issues - for example, in
the marking of weapons and the registration of
weapons dealers and brokers - should be addressed
more urgently in the weapons field.

The 864 Committee and its investigative arm
grappled with many sensitive and complicated aspects
that have not been without controversy. Matters such as
the compilation of lists of individuals subject to
financial and travel restrictions, the use of outside
contractors to assist in the work of the Committee, the
role of arms brokers, the capacity and willingness of
the diamond industry to police itself better and how to
encourage individual Member States to take action in
support of the sanctions regime have all given plenty of
cause for thought. Many of these issues remain the
subject of debate and, perhaps out of necessity, or for
other reasons, can be dealt with only on a case-by-case
basis.

An issue that I would like to add to the sanctions
agenda is what line the Council should take towards
sanctions-busters when a sanctions regime has been
dissolved. In such circumstances, is the Council
prepared to allow past transgressions to be quietly
forgotten or, in the interest of deterrence, should the
Council contemplate pursuing the transgressors? If
follow-up activity is required, the question of who
would carry this out raises itself.

It is not my intention to provoke a debate on a
permanent monitoring structure. However, the issue of
follow-up is a legitimate one to raise. We believe it is
an important element in favour of a permanent body
which could collect evidence and intelligence and help
create an institutional memory within the United
Nations in this regard.

Many of the issues raised in the work of the 864
Committee have simultaneously occupied the time of
other sanctions committees, most notably those dealing
with Sierra Leone and Liberia. On balance, the more
imaginative and, frankly, more intrusive methods
adopted by the Council and its committees in the
period since the publication of the Fowler Report in
March 2000, and the adoption one month later of
resolution 1295 (2000), have paid real dividends. The
advances should not lead to complacency, however.
Innovative thinking and refinement of practice could
possibly lead to further success.

I know from my time as Chairman of the 864
Committee, and as a representative of a member of the
Council, that there is plenty of thinking going on inside
and outside the Council in New York and elsewhere. I
would encourage this to continue and, where profitable,
use of the experience offered by the work of the 864
Committee to allow sanctions to play a positive role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

