I wish to thank Germany for having convened this important meeting, and we wish you well, Sir, for your presidency of the Security Council. It is important that we convene together to discuss this subject. In doing so, I join others in paying tribute, particularly at this time of a global pandemic, to the leadership of the Secretary-General and thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Maurer, and Ms. Elfadil Mohammad for their very helpful and constructive briefings this morning. We all now know that, with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we face a crisis of unprecedented scope, and indeed complexity. Across the world it has triggered health, humanitarian, economic, development and security challenges, with ramifications that are both immediate and long-term. Those challenges are interwoven and require a coordinated, collaborative response. Therefore, may I first welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) yesterday, and in doing so wish to thank both France and Tunisia for their efforts in that respect. The full extent of this pandemic is still unfolding before our eyes. I know that we all fear its impact as it spreads in States that are vulnerable or affected by conflict. As we see around the world, in places such as Yemen, Libya and the Central African Republic, contested or fragmented Government authority severely restricts local capacity to respond effectively to the spread of the pandemic. Health systems are overstretched and underresourced and cannot detect, or indeed monitor, the spread of the disease. As the impact becomes clearer, so we see evidence of COVID-19 compounding existing problems, such as in the Lake Chad basin and in the Sahel. Our efforts to prevent or resolve conflict are complicated by COVID-19. Peacekeepers themselves are quarantined, humanitarian access is restricted and impeded, and peace processes have been paused. So it is important that we act both to tackle the pandemic and to give an effective response to prevent or resolve conflict. We must ensure a strong international health response led by the World Health Organization. In that regard, the United Kingdom has already committed £764 million to support humanitarian and public-health needs. We must ensure the development and equitable distribution of a vaccine. In that regard, the United Kingdom has already pledged more than £300 million in funding for research into vaccines, tests and treatment. And as many present know, last month we hosted a very successful global vaccine summit that raised more than $8.8 billion to support the immunization of 300 million children against coronavirus and, indeed, other vaccine-preventable diseases. At the same time, we must, of course, redouble our efforts on peace and security. The Security Council has a key role to play. We welcome the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire, and we should all stand firm on our peacekeeping troop contributions and, importantly, the resources they need. The devastating impact of COVID-19 on fragile societies underlines the moral duty of outside parties that influence conflicts in Syria, and indeed elsewhere. Importantly, everyone must come together to support peace. We need to also act smartly to prevent new peace and security crises from emerging. The pandemic has clearly demonstrated the importance of the coordinated and multidimensional international responses for which the United Kingdom has long argued. The United Nations must work smarter across its pillars and with partners. We commend the United Nations system for delivering under immense pressure. I think that we all acknowledge that more is needed to deliver a holistic response that limits instability in the face of complex challenges. We therefore recommend three actions. First, United Nations responses must be more sensitive to conflict risk and build this into strategic planning, prioritization and financing. Secondly, there needs to be joint risk assessment and planning with the international financial institutions to combine macroeconomic, social and political considerations. And, thirdly, we need to focus on what works to build a country's resilience to shocks. Strong, inclusive and accountable institutions, the rule of law, good governance and human rights are the fundamental basis of that very resilience. We need to see this in our coordinated response and in our planning to build back better. This pandemic has brought into sharp focus the urgent need for efforts towards the development objective. Sustainable peace and security cannot be solved as separate issues, and they cannot be solved alone. Together, we have this expertise. Together, we have the resources. We must use them and respond to this challenge. And together, we will succeed.
