Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
expressing our appreciation to Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
presenting the latest report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Afghanistan (S/2008/ 159).

I would also like to congratulate Mr. Kai Eide on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan. My delegation
also commends Mr. Tom Koenigs, who completed his
assignment in December 2007, for his hard work and
his contribution to reconstruction efforts in
Afghanistan.

In the past few years, Afghanistan has made notable
achievements in various sectors. Representative political
institutions have steadily been taking root, and economic
development has been progressing. Yet, my delegation is
concerned over the increasing activities of the insurgency,
which are affecting those achievements in a harmful way.
Most perturbing are the increase of concerted insurgency
in the south and east of Afghanistan and attacks against
local and humanitarian workers. Those violent attacks
risk undermining the current efforts by the Afghan
Government to achieve peace and stability in the country.
The attacks have also prevented access by the
Government and aid organizations to some districts.

Indonesia welcomes the commitment of the
Afghan Government to address the security challenges
as a priority. We recognize the increasing need for
capacity-building efforts for the Afghan National
Army. We acknowledge the importance of the measures
taken by the Afghan National Army, in collaboration
with the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), in responding to insurgency activities. My
delegation also attaches great importance to respect for
the principles of international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law, as
well as the safety and security of civilians when
security matters are addressed through military
measures.

Indonesia also believes that a military approach
alone cannot fully address the root causes of the
current security challenges in Afghanistan. We
therefore underline the importance of political dialogue
and reconciliation involving all factions in
Afghanistan, within the framework of the Afghan
constitution. Like the Secretary-General, we too see the
merit of a common approach to meet the security
challenges and to stabilize Afghanistan, an approach
which integrates security, governance, rule of law,
human rights and social and economic development.

Addressing the drug economy is also an urgent
matter, as it is particularly linked to sustaining the
insurgency. In this regard, we welcome the fact that the
counter-narcotics regime has gained momentum and
that the prioritized implementation plan for the
Government's National Drug Control Strategy has been
endorsed.

In the political area, we are aware of continued
efforts to harmonize views between the legislative and
executive branches of the Afghan Government. More
specifically, the 2009 and 2010 presidential and
parliamentary elections will open a new chapter in
Afghanistan's democratic transition. We welcome, in

that regard, the Government's approval in November
2007 of a draft electoral law, which is being reviewed
by the National Assembly. We also attach particular
importance to the participation of all Afghan political
stakeholders in providing views on such critical issues
as the electoral system.

Regional cooperation continues to be pertinent to
the strengthening of Afghanistan's engagement in
regional dynamics and of its capacity to address
transnational challenges. Indonesia, therefore,
welcomes the hosting by the Afghan Government of
the seventeenth meeting of the Council of Ministers of
the Economic Cooperation Organization in Herat. The
Kabul Declaration on Promoting Regional Electricity
Cooperation between Central and South Asia is a
landmark achievement in Afghanistan's regional
diplomacy. We also welcome bilateral partnerships
between Afghanistan and neighbouring States in
finding mutually acceptable solutions to, among other
issues, the challenge of Afghan refugees.

We believe that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) remains critical to
Afghanistan. UNAMA's support in achieving the
country's national goals will continue to be needed. As
the political elements of the Bonn process have been
formally completed, UNAMA's role will continue to be
important in assisting Afghanistan to execute various
activities on other pillars of the Bonn Agreement.

In this regard, we concur with the assessment of
the Secretary-General on the importance of enhanced
coordination, political outreach, support for
subnational governance, humanitarian coordination,
electoral assistance and strengthened cooperation with
ISAF as points of emphasis for UNAMA's programme
of work in the months ahead.

Considering the continued importance of
UNAMA in supporting the Afghanistan Government in
achieving its national goals and the daunting
challenges it continues to face, Indonesia supports the
Secretary-General's proposal for the extension of the
mandate of UNAMA for a further 12 months.

Finally, our appreciation goes to Mr. Bo Asplund,
who served as Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to all UNAMA personnel for
their dedication and tireless efforts in the discharge of
their important responsibilities.

