Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We commend
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi for presenting
his briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which he has
chaired with great effectiveness and dedication.

The current briefing is particularly important
because it deals with the issue of a comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
This is the second such review since its adoption, and
it is taking take place at a time when the measures and
steps that States can take to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction are more
relevant than ever.

Venezuela attaches great importance to the
efforts of the international community to promote
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We would like to express our full
commitment to strengthening the international regime
applicable to such materials by meeting the obligations
flowing from the relevant legally binding instruments
and the measures and controls that States might adopt
on a voluntary basis to cope with this serious threat.
As the Chair of the Committee mentioned in his
report, extremist violence perpetrated by terrorists in
Africa, Europe, the Middle East and North America
has increased. In the current circumstances, therefore,
it is all the more important to coordinate measures
more closely at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels with a view to providing a more
comprehensive and robust response to this serious
challenge and threat to international security, as well
as to coordinate the measures and controls that States
might adopt to face up to this grave threat.

My country reiterates its categorical rejection
of all terrorist acts in any form, for any reasons,
wherever they are committed and by whoever they
are committed. They are a flagrant violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In that context,
the use of toxic chemical agents by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Iraq and Syria underscores the
need to redouble efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. That is why we
have insisted on the fact that the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction is the most effective way to prevent
terrorist groups from acquiring such weapons. We

call on States possessing nuclear weapons to conduct

negotiations in good faith aimed at eliminating those

arsenals in favour of international peace and security.

Venezuela is fully committed to the process
of the comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We will
actively participate in all the phases of the review.
The goal is for as many States as possible to adopt on
a voluntary basis the largest quantity of measures and
controls so that non-State actors are unable to acquire
materials, delivery systems or financing in order to
produce, finance, transfer or threaten or use weapons of
mass destruction. To achieve that, the Committe should
optimize its communication, assistance and advice to all
States Members of the United Nations, with particular
emphasis on those countries that need greater support.
We commend the work of the Chair of the Committee
with the support of the Group of Experts.

In conclusion, we reiterate our full commitment and
support to the work of the Committee in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), with the aim of preventing
terrorist groups from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, through cooperation among Members
States and the support of the relevant international
organizations.

