Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I would like to join
other colleagues in thanking the Italian presidency
for convening this important debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
contributions earlier today.

My country, Georgia, aligns itself with the
statement delivered previously by the observer of the
European Union, and I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.

Trafficking, one of the most terrible violations of
human rights, is being used by criminals and terrorist
groups not only as a source of revenue but also as a
weapon of terror. The ever-growing numbers of refugees
and migrants, if left unaided, will only play into the
hands of criminals and enhance their recruitment base.
The Secretary-General's report also states that

"the activities ofterrorist groups... and other armed
groups engaging in human trafficking continue to
raise grave concerns" and that "more needs to be
done to address human trafficking in areas affected
by conflict" (S/2017/939, paras. 4 and 3).

In addressing human trafficking, therefore, we should
also address the root causes of migration, including the
issue of internal displacement. We must confront this
challenge at all levels, especially in conflict or post-
conflict settings. Just yesterday, we were all appalled
to see the disturbing footage of slave markets in Libya.
Crime thrives where the rule of law is weak. The
international community needs to do much more, and
urgently, to help the Government of Libya in asserting
its governing rights and laying the groundwork for
the country's sustainable development, which can
stop modern-day slavery from recurring. Human
trafficking respects no borders. We must strengthen
cooperation on law enforcement, investigations and
intelligence-sharing.

Combating human trafficking has been a key
priority for Georgia for more than a decade. We have
seen increasingly positive assessments of our counter-
trafficking efforts in global reports. According to
the 2016 Global Slavery Index, Georgia is one of the
countries taking the most effective action to end human
trafficking. For instance, the second evaluation report
of the Council of Europe's Group of Experts on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings ranked Georgia
top among countries in Eastern Europe taking most
action in terms of gross domestic product, and second
worldwide. It also ranked Georgia as the seventeenth
of 167 States taking the most effective action to end
human trafficking generally.

To review the key factors and lessons on what has
worked in my country, we have shown a sustainable
political commitment and established a constantly
evolving legislative framework that explicitly
criminalizes trafficking. We have taken a multisectoral
and multi-stakeholder approach that in our case involves
an inter-agency coordination council, our various law-
enforcement agencies, a State fund for protecting and
assisting victims, and civil society organizations. We
have focused on proactive investigations by mobile
inspection groups and special anti-trafficking units
and, lastly, we have worked to raise awareness of
trafficking, which is an essential preventive measure.

Georgia, as a signatory State to the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, reiterates its
commitment to sparing no effort to prevent trafficking,
punish perpetrators and protect their victims. However,
the illegal occupation of the Georgian regions of
Tskhinvali/ South Ossetia and Abkhazia is still the main
obstacle to my Government's full implementation of its
counter-trafficking measures. There are no mechanisms
to effectively identify, investigate or prosecute alleged
cases of trafficking in persons in occupied regions
while the occupying Power continues to place undue
restrictions on the local population, particularly ethnic
Georgians. Systematic human rights violations there
have included, among other things, the violation of
the right to life and security, torture and ill-treatment,
kidnapping and arbitrary detention.

In closing, I want reiterate our pledge to expand
international cooperation on effective cross-border
control measures and prevent and combat conflict-
related human trafficking. We also call for the
international community to pay more attention to the
issue of granting international human rights monitoring
mechanisms unhindered access to the occupied regions
of Georgia.

