Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, let me join
the previous speakers in thanking the French presidency
for convening today's open debate.

I fully align myself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make the following comments in my national capacity.

I will focus on two main issues proposed by the
presidency of our debate, beginning with the one related
to adapting the response of the international community
to the changing nature of the terrorist threat.

There have recently been a number of important
developments in advancing new counter-terrorism
standards and further consolidating and amplifying
international action to counter the threat of terrorism,
which have provided a basis for the introduction of a
more nuanced approach to combating the financing of
terrorism. In that regard, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019), which was
co-sponsored by 51 States, including Ukraine. We
believe that the resolution will be another practical
tool at our disposal. Indeed, we are witnessing
growing challenges related to the abuse of legitimate
financial institutions and businesses, the emergence
of new payment methods and the use of non-profit
organizations to transfer funds for terrorist purposes. In
addition, the resolution provides specific measures for
assessing and addressing the potential risks associated
with innovations in financial technologies, products
and services.

Despite the efforts undertaken to counter terrorism,
including legal, diplomatic and military measures, more
should be done to eradicate the phenomenon, which has
become rampant at the regional and global levels, and
particular emphasis should be placed on the underlying
causes of terrorism. Therefore, the following further
efforts need to be undertaken.

First, the capacity of States in the area of collecting
credible evidence of terrorist activities should be
enhanced in order to introduce more universal
criminalization of the actions of all perpetrators,
organizers, mentors and sponsors of terrorism and
ensure the eventual prosecution and punishment of
those who provide funding for terrorist activities in any
form and by any means.

Secondly, cooperation should be promoted between
Governments and the private sector, including through
social media.

Thirdly, awareness should be raised regarding
existing risks in the area of the financing of
terrorism and regarding financial flows with links to
terrorist activities.

Fourthly, effective international cooperation and
mutual assistance should be ensured at the level of
financial intelligence and law enforcement agencies.

Such efforts should be based on relevant
international legal instruments, including Security
Council resolutions, as well as recommendations
made within the framework of the Financial Action
Task Force.

That brings me to the issue of compliance with
international obligations in the area of counter-
terrorism. It is crucial to ensure the effective
implementation of all international instruments for
combating terrorism, including the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Unfortunately, not all States respect their
international obligations in that area. For example, by
joining the Convention, States have pledged to suppress
the financing of terrorism, but in reality we continue
to witness the opposite from some States, which has
already caused tragic consequences, including in my
own country.

For already half a decade, the policy of terror has
become one ofthe key elements of the hybrid aggression
cruelly and shamelessly launched against my country in
2014, in blatant violation of fundamental international
norms and principles, including key counter-terrorism
obligations. The reports of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine and the United Nations human rights
mission in Ukraine confirm the continuous flow of
ammunition, weaponry and fighters from the Russian
Federation to the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine. Those military assets are delivered either
openly or under the guise of so-called humanitarian
convoys. With that and other Russian support, illegal
armed groups attacked Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-
17, taking nearly 300 innocent lives. With that and other
Russian support, almost 13,000 people were killed in
Donbas, while nearly 1.6 million people were forced to
leave their homes.

In temporarily occupied Crimea, the aggressor
State discredits international efforts, including those
of the Council, to counter terrorism, by producing
fake accusations of terrorist activities and by illegally
sentencing innocent people. Just few days ago, on the
fifth anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 68/262, entitled "Territorial integrity of
Ukraine", the Russian occupation authorities again
chose to use the so-called Hizb ut-Tahrir case - already
used to fabricate cases against Crimean Tatar activists
and their subsequent convictions - as a pretext for
punitive actions against them. Considering that Islamic
extremism had never been part of the history of the
Crimean peninsula before the Russian occupation, the
frequency with which the occupation authorities use
that accusation to justify their searches and detention
of Crimean Tatar individuals strongly suggest that it
is a pretext for discrimination, in blatant violation of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination.

Those and other violations of the international legal
framework prove, time and again, that combating the
activities of individual terrorists and terrorist groups
will be insufficient if the problem of State-sponsored
terrorism is not effectively and comprehensively
addressed. The issue of bringing to account not only
individuals and organizations but also those States
responsible for organizing, financing or otherwise
supporting terrorist activities should be duly dealt with.
The sanctions imposed on the aggressor State should be
maintained and further strengthened. The perpetrators
of heinous terrorist acts must be brought to justice.

