Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to join others in expressing our deepest condolences
to our Chinese colleagues and friends on the tragedy
that took place in the kindergarten. Our thoughts and
prayers are with those affected.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this briefing. I would also like to welcome
the briefers and to thank the Secretary-General for
his personal dedication to strengthening the United
Nations-African Union (AU) partnership.

It is evident that over the past decade, especially
in recent years, the role of the relevant regional
arrangements in promoting peace and security has only
expanded. The engagement of the Economic Community
of West African States in the Gambian post-electoral
crisis is the most recent case in point. The decision of
the interested countries on the establishment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) force represents
yet another practical regional action.

The United Nations should continue working on
building and enhancing its strategic partnership with
regional and subregional organizations on the African
continent, working in concert with them and using the
competitive advantages of each actor in peacekeeping
and conflict management. In this light we are encouraged
by the recent increased efforts of the Secretary-General
aimed at strengthening the cooperation between the
United Nations and the AU, particularly the signing
the joint United Nations-AU framework for enhancing
partnership in peace and security. Ukraine looks
forward to translating this document into reality.

Let me highlight several issues of the current United
Nations-AU cooperation that are worth considering in
the light of the relevant report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/454).

First, and we have to be honest with ourselves, the
United Nations has yet to succeed in taking timely and
effective preventive measures in response to situations
of tension that could possibly erupt into full-scale
conflicts or where the civilian population is endangered
and urgently requires protection. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the African Union, which
should continue to act as a first responder to crises,
with the authorization of the Security Council.

Under such circumstances, it is important to
continue to make efforts to eliminate the shortcomings
of the AU peace support operations, in particular the
capability gaps in connection with uniformed personnel
and equipment. We believe that ensuring deployment,
readiness and increased performance requires collective
and coordinated actions by both the United Nations and
the African Union.

Secondly, it is crucial to ensure sustainable and
predictable financing of the AU operations authorized
by the Council. In this respect, the proposals presented
in the Secretary-General's report give the Council
and the General Assembly a range a viable options
for consideration. Given the complexity of the
peacekeeping endeavour, we are convinced that there
can be no single approach that will fit all situations and
missions. We therefore support preserving a maximum
degree of flexibility in considering this issue for every
single mission.

Thirdly, it is well known that taking military
measures to counter terrorism is the primary
responsibility of national Governments and the relevant
regional arrangements. The United Nations should
therefore continue to provide the necessary advice and
expertise in support of the relevant regional endeavours,
including the aforementioned G-5 Sahel force. It is also
important to ensure proper coordination among United
Nations missions and such initiatives in order to avoid
any overlap.

Lastbutnotleast,inkeepingwiththepeople-centered
approach to United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities, we believe that the protection
of civilians is a decisive factor for the success ofthe AU
operations endorsed by the Council. It is clear also that
there can be no peace without human rights. Thus this
component should become an indispensable element of
all AU operations authorized by the Security Council,
with proper adherence to the United Nations human
rights due-diligence policy.

