Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the representative of the Russian
Federation for requesting the convening of today's
meeting, and Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for
his briefing on his recent visit to Yemen and other
countries. We commend the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for its work to ease the
humanitarian situation in those countries, and call on
the international community to extend a helping hand
in order to alleviate that crisis.

We have frequently discussed the situations in
South Sudan and Somalia, so in order to save time I
will focus on the situation in Yemen.

China is troubled by the escalating conflict there
and concerned about the worsening humanitarian
situation, the recurring attacks on civilians and civilian
facilities, the famine facing the Yemeni people and other
risk factors. The humanitarian situation is crying out
for improvement, and the Yemeni people need external
support. China urges the parties to the conflict in Yemen
to abide strictly by international humanitarian law, stop
the attacks on civilians and civilian targets, actively
support the United Nations in its humanitarian relief
efforts and ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access. The international community should also join
the efforts to improve the humanitarian situation. China
has been providing humanitarian relief to the Yemeni
people, including a shipment of medical supplies worth
¥2,000-million that is expected to be in place very
soon, in the first half of the year, and we will continue
to provide such assistance as we can.

Peace and stability in Yemen are essential to efforts
aimed at fundamentally relieving the humanitarian
situation in that country, and political dialogue is
the only way to achieve lasting peace there. China
urges all the parties to demonstrate a sincere desire
for reconciliation, cease hostilities immediately and
prevent the situation from escalating. We support
Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed in the scaling up of
his good offices and in supporting regional countries in
their work to facilitate peace talks and build confidence
in order to help Yemen restore stability at an early date.

