Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), Ambassador Nestor Osorio of Colombia,
for his briefing to the Council on the Committee's
work in recent months. We appreciate the effective
work that was done during the reporting period. It is
important that this work be carried out within the
Committee's mandate. The Committee must continue
to work along those lines, as must the Panel of Experts,
which provides useful, practical assistance to the
Committee.

It is very important that the work of the Experts
be impartial and independent, and that they use only
reliable sources of information when making
recommendations or conclusions. No unverified or
politicized information should be used to promote any
initiatives in the Security Council or the Committee.
We expect that the new practice of discussing the
preliminary programme of work of the Panel in the
Committee will enhance the Committee's guidance of
the work of the Panel and should help to increase the
effectiveness of its efforts.

Russia continues to comply strictly with the
sanctions regime against Iran. To ensure the maximum
effectiveness of this regime overall, all members of the
international community must strictly comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and not
deviate from them.

With respect to the current situation regarding
Iran's nuclear programme, we are in favour of dealing
with the problems that have arisen through dialogue
with the country. Russia continues to focus on
diplomacy and on involving Tehran fully in talks.

The statement made at the International Atomic
Energy Agency meeting several weeks ago by the
group of six States - Russia, the United Kingdom,
Germany, China, the United States of America and
France - which was already mentioned by the
representative of the United States, reaffirmed the
quest for a comprehensive solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue, recognizing Iran's right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy under the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Following a meeting on 15 June between the
Presidents of Russia, Kazakhstan and Iran, Iran
recognized the importance of the six-country forum
and stated its readiness to cooperate with it, including
with respect to nuclear activities. However, during
talks, Iran expressed an interest in addressing other
issues, such as the easing of sanctions and other
regional issues. Such an approach to dealing with the
Iranian nuclear programme, tying it to regional
economic issues, is fully in line with what is being
promoted by the six countries. We hope that nothing
will hinder the resumption of talks between Iran and
the E3+3 on the basis of mutual respect.

