Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your very timely call for an open
debate on peace and security in Africa. This is a
necessary debate, and my country is closely following
its course.
The report we are studying (S/2008/813)
originated in an initiative of the Secretary-General, laid
out in resolution 1809 (2008), on cooperation between
our Organization and regional organizations, which set
up a panel to study and recommend modalities to
improve the support to - and the predictability and
sustainability of funding for - peacekeeping missions
under United Nations mandates.

The panel's report contains valuable observations
and a number of action-oriented proposals, which I will
briefly highlight, as they closely coincide with our own
analysis of the matter.

First, we agree that the armed conflicts and the
very political instability prevailing in some regions of
Africa are clear obstacles to the economic development
of those countries. The vicious cycle of poverty and
violence that we see in many parts of continent, where
conflict is almost constant, is a trap. This trap impedes
progress in societies and clearly causes the effects of
such conflicts to be even more harmful and deep-
rooted than the conflicts themselves.

Security is thus a prerequisite for long-term
sustainable development. It is clear that we must face
these challenges with a comprehensive approach. In
such an approach, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation is a response when necessary, but prevention
of conflicts before they begin would make a
comprehensive approach that also encompasses
response capacity.

Ever-increasing participation by the African
Union in conflict-prevention, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconstruction efforts is therefore essential.
More than ever before, threats to security require a
collective approach based on various types of
cooperation. In turn, that requires close coordination
with regard to both strategies and programmes. At the
same time, there is a need to optimize the advantages
that the regional organizations could bring. In that
regard, we believe it is essential to establish the
necessary capacities, including in subregional
organizations, to arrive at coherent responses that are
part of a joint strategy that encompasses the widest
possible range of conflict-prevention, peacekeeping
and post-conflict reconstruction efforts.

Finally, with regard to the report's
recommendations on financing issues, we agree with
what the Secretary-General said this morning in his
intervention, that such issues call for thorough
consideration, especially by the relevant bodies of the
Organization.
