The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti and Eritrea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime
Minister of Djibouti, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime Minister of
Djibouti, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Dileita Mohamed
Dileita, Prime Minister of Djibouti.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joao
Honwana, Director of the Africa Division of the
Department of Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Alice Mungwa, Adviser in the Permanent
Observer Mission of the African Union.

It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 11 June 2008 from
the Permanent Representative of Djibouti addressed to
the President of the Security Council, which is
contained in document S/2008/3 87.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Joao Honwana, Director of the Africa
Division of the Department of Political Affairs, to
whom I now give the floor.


