Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
think that the first thing to say is that there will be a
written report available very soon. I think it would be
rather good if we had an opportunity to consider that,
to have experts look at it, and perhaps to schedule
some sort of open discussion on it, which might
include the countries of the region. Let us have a
transparent debate - I would very much favour that.

The report, when you see it, goes into far greater
detail, obviously, than the three of us have sketched
out, but it does explain the extent of what we are doing
in Cote d'Ivoire. It raises some issues. Of course, what
the mission is doing in C6te d'Ivoire is with the full
agreement of the Government, and in everything we
were talking to the Government about it was all in the
best of atmospheres. We were very clear about what we
expected, but I detected - especially by the end of the
day - a very cooperative response and appreciation of
what the United Nations was trying to do and what the
Security Council mission actually intended.

In terms of Guinea-Bissau and the military, I
should say that, for those who have sat in briefings
with the military in other countries, it was a salutary
experience. We were in a fairly large room with lots of
strip lighting, only one of which worked. It was near
darkness. We had, I think, 12 military officers and the
chief of the defence staff of Guinea-Bissau, and by
agreement with the mission, I did a lO-minute
presentation on the importance of political control of
the military and the importance of restructuring, and
discussed aspects which all our military face in terms
of adaptation to tomorrow's challenges. In a very frank
response, the chief of the defence staff explained why
there was a coup and made it clear that it was the last
thing they wished, but that they had got to the point
where, in their view, the interests of the country were
being put at risk.

What is significant about that coup is that the
Economic Community of West African States was on
the ground within 24 hours and that, within another 24
hours, a path for the restoration of civilian control had
been established. We did not get the impression, I
think, that this was a military that wanted to hang on to
power. Quite the opposite, there is a new Government
after elections and all that has happened in the space of
nine months. Thus, I think we came away believing in
the commitment to political control. I do not think we
were necessarily convinced that the steps that need to
be taken on restructuring are actually going to be easy
or rapid, but certainly we set out what we thought was
necessary.

Child soldiers were a theme throughout and,
certainly in the case of Liberia, we hammered this
consistently. Thus, we addressed the horizontal themes,
as I said at the beginning, as best we could. That does
not mean that, on each of them, we got full satisfaction
in every place - of course not - but we did register
our total opposition to what had taken place, our wish
especially that the people who recruit child soldiers be
prosecuted, and our belief that the problems of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration for
child soldiers are particularly acute. Again, we
recognized in the case of Liberia that some 300
children had been reintegrated into schools and with
their families as a result of the United Nations effort,
but child soldiers are one of the abominations of West
Africa and it will require a substantial effort to tackle
them.

