Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this important event,
which underscores once again the importance that the
Security Council and the entire international
community give to the protection of children who are
victims of armed conflict.

Belgium welcomes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/250) that Ms. Coomaraswamy
presented to us and the practical recommendations that
it contains. 1 would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her tireless
commitment.

We welcome with enthusiasm the establishment
of the fourth criterion for acknowledgement, namely
recurrent attacks against schools or hospitals. This
development is an important step in terms of
strengthening the normative framework regarding
children and armed conflicts. Moreover, I would like to
congratulate the German presidency of the Council and
you yourself, Sir, as well as the other members of the
Council for its important decisions. As you know,
Belgium was happy to co-sponsor this resolution.

I would like to illustrate the topic of this debate
with the case of children in the Central African
Republic, on the basis of my experience as Chairman
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Regarding the situation
throughout the Central African Republic, I would like
to very briefly make five points.

First, with respect to the LRA - the Lord's
Resistance Army - it still runs rampant in the south-
east of the country, where it is to this day recruiting
children as soldiers or sex slaves. Those who manage
to escape it are in urgent need of psycho-social
support. The communities who welcome them also
need humanitarian support, instruction and medical
care, and just as urgently. Above all, this problem
requires a regional response.

Secondly, in the north-west of the country, more
than 500 children have been demobilized from the
ranks of the Armee populaire pour la restauration de la
Republique et la democratie, the APRD. Nonetheless,
there is still no assistance provided for these children
through a reintegration programme that would go
beyond, and last longer than, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. That is
my second point: the demobilization of child soldiers
must go hand-in-hand with reintegration programmes.

Thirdly, in the north-east of the country, on
12 June the Government concluded a ceasefire
agreement with the Convention des patriotes pour la
justice et la paix, the CPJP. Through that agreement,
which should facilitate humanitarian access, one of the
recommendations of the latest report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict in the Central
African Republic (S/2011/241) is taking effect. And
that is my third point: the reports of the Special
Representative are having tangible effects.

Fourthly, given the enormity of the challenges in
terms of protecting children, I noted, during my
numerous visits to Bangui, that the United Nations
system is lacking in resources and capabilities. While
the Council prepares to include attacks against schools
and hospitals as a criterion to be taken into account, it
must be remembered that strengthening the system at
the level of principle, an expansion of triggers, is not
sufficient. We should also ensure that those who work
to protect children have the necessary resources and
capabilities to carry out their duties. Without that, the
gap between the observed needs and the support
provided will only widen in countries such as the
Central African Republic, where attacks against
schools and hospitals are undeniably still being
perpetrated today.

Fifthly and finally, I wish to underscore the
existence of two categories of child victims of armed
conflicts who do not receive the attention they deserve:
children born of rape, who are often treated as pariahs
by society, and those who witnessed the rapes of their
mothers, their sisters or other members of their family.
To date this is a forgotten matter in the Central African
Republic, in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elsewhere.

I know that Ms. Coomeraswamy is aware of the
existence of these two categories, who have so far been
forgotten or neglected, and is determined to give them
all necessary attention.

I wish in particular to commend the decision of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Bangui to strengthen the work of the United Nations to
protect children as soon as she arrived a few weeks
ago. Her team has already made a very important
initial step by relaunching the work of the technical-
level inter-agency group on the monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave child rights violations.
The mechanism is finally up and running in Bangui.

In conclusion, I wish to welcome the efforts of
the Government of the Central African Republic to set
up a national council for the protection of children, and
I encourage it to implement the recommendations in
the first report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa (S/2009/66), especially in
the area of children and armed conflict.

