Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): Allow me to join others in
welcoming Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo to the
Chamber again. I also thank him for presenting his
tenth report submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), updating the Council on the judicial and
investigative activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) relating to the Darfur situation. It is a
situation of continuing instability, criminal activity and
lawlessness, where civilians and displaced persons
continue to suffer and where stress on humanitarian
operations has been compounded by the erosion of
humanitarian principles.

My delegation reiterates its serious concern about
the ongoing lack of cooperation by the Government of
the Sudan with the ICC Prosecutor. The arrest warrants
issued by the Court remain unfulfilled. The Sudanese
Government, led by President Al-Bashir, continues
with its policy of contempt towards the victims of the
conflict in Darfur and has invested no credible efforts
to end impunity for crimes committed.

The messages contained in resolution 1593
(2005) and the presidential statement of 16 June 2008
(S/PRST/2008/2l) remain clear and relevant. The
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict should fully cooperate with the Court and
provide any necessary assistance to the ICC and the
Prosecutor.

In that context, we welcome the voluntary
appearance before the ICC of the indictee in the
Haskanita trial. We take note of the Juba declaration of
September and hope it will mobilize other parties to
cooperate with the Court.
My delegation welcomes the focus of regional
organizations, notably the Arab League and the African
Union, on efforts to close the impunity gap in Darfur
while addressing peace and justice, promoting
accountability and strengthening national capacities for
combating impunity. We especially welcome the report
of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur

(S/2009/599, annex I) and its recommendations. We
hope that the measures it proposes will be met by
meaningful response from the Sudanese side in order to
put an end to impunity and enable healing and
reconciliation. We look forward to hearing more from
the Panel in the Council soon.

The principle of complementarity is of paramount
importance for the international criminal justice
system. Regrettably, the Sudan has yet to offer a
credible domestic alternative to the jurisdiction of the
ICC. As the Prosecutor's report notes, there have been
no developments in that regard during the reporting
period.

My delegation welcomes the increasing
international and regional efforts to promote dialogue
and to reactivate the political process, focusing on both
peace in Darfur and implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in order to achieve
the overall objective of sustainable peace and stability
in the Sudan. Having said that, my delegation also
believes that it is vital to preserve respect for the
independent judicial mandate of the ICC and its
Prosecutor.

Last month, the Security Council reaffirmed its
resolve to strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and reaffirmed its strong opposition to
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, emphasizing
the responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations and end impunity. It would be
misleading to see those goals as incompatible with the
Wider objective of maintaining international peace and
security. The ICC has a clear complementary role in
that regard. Croatia will continue to fully and
unequivocally support the activities of the Prosecutor
in carrying out the mandate under resolution 1593
(2005), as well as the role of the ICC in general.

