Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Mr. President, I
wish to congratulate you on your astute steering of the
Council during the month of July. Our appreciation
goes to you and your team, Sir, for your patient,
professional and diligent work during a demanding
and difficult month where multiple crises had to be
tackled simultaneously. We appreciate the number of
open events held by the Rwandan presidency, including
this open wrap-up session in the public briefing format,
the first since 2005. Open debates and public briefings
play a vital role in keeping United Nations membership
abreast of deliberations in the Council, which is only
right, given that the implementation of Council's
decisions behooves the entire membership.

With respect to sanctions, for example, the Council
may adopt all the sanctions it wants, but if the wider
membership is unaware of the decisions or is unable
or unwilling to engage with them, sanctions, no matter
how well designed, will have no impact on the ground.
Open briefings and direct engagement with a country's
neighbours and other interested States raises awareness
of existing sanctions regimes and helps to advance their
implementation.

As Chair of the Central African Republic sanctions
regime during an open briefing in July (S/PV.7215), I
stressed the need - and stress it once again - for the
neighbours of the Central African Republic and the
wider membership to cooperate on the implementation
of resolution 2127 (2013), including by providing
full support and access to the Panel of Experts. For
sanctions to work, in this as in other cases, we need
coherent and determined actions by all actors. To do
so, the complexity of targeted sanctions, existing legal
challenges, lack of enforcement capacity and other
relevant issues need to be addressed. In that regard,
we found the informal discussion on sanctions with
Under-Secretary-General Feltman earlier this month
very timely. We encourage the Department of Political
Affairs and other relevant United Nations departments
and entities to continue their efforts and further engage
with the Council on the matter.

Peacekeeping is another area where Council
decisions affect the wider membership, through assessed
contributions, troop and material contributions, and
at times by the loss of peacekeepers' lives. For some
time now, the Council agenda has been expanding
to unprecedented levels. The risk of peacekeeping
overstretch may no longer be an issue for a distant
future. Unless we manage to reduce the number of
conflicts themselves, questions of how to make do with
available limited resources, how to mobilize ever larger
numbers of peacekeeping troops and handle the ever
constant problem of critical enablers, inter alia, will
become increasingly acute.

We appreciate the organization by the Rwandan
presidency of an open debate on United Nations
partnershipswithregionalorganizationsinpeacekeeping
(S/PV.7228), which provided an opportunity to explore
the advantages and existing shortcomings as well
as ways forward in making best use of peacekeeping
synergies between the United Nations and regional
organizations. As peacekeeping evolves into ever more
complex, multifunctional and robust operations, we
appreciate the Secretary-General's initiative to conduct
a wide ranging review of United Nations peacekeeping
ahead of the fifteenth anniversary of the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809). The multiplication of conflicts and the
inevitable finiteness of available resources necessary to
tackle them reaffirms the importance of early warning
and prevention. In that respect, the mediation work
undertaken by the Department of Political Affairs
and the mediation and good offices of the Secretary-
General deserve our full support.

Right now, efforts are required on multiple fronts.
In Afghanistan, the post-election power crisis needs
to be carefully managed and resolved, and the United
Nations and the Council have a critical role to play in
supporting vote verification and helping the country
steer towards a solution that would strengthen the
political and democratic processes in the country.

In recent days, the Middle East has seen some of
the most dramatic mediation efforts. My delegation
commends the determined and tireless efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United States
Secretary of State John Kerry to find a solution to
the crisis. The rapidly growing number of civilian
casualties, many of whom are children, is heartbreaking
and a stark reminder of the need by all parties to
respect international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of civilians.

The Security Council spoke with one voice last
Sunday night by adopting a relevant presidential
statement calling for a humanitarian ceasefire
(S/PRST/2014/13). We urge the Secretary-General, the
United States Secretary of State and all other actors with
an influence an the parties to continue tirelessly their
mediation efforts aimed at establishing a sustainable
ceasefire on the basis of the Egyptian proposal and
addressing the legitimate concerns of the parties.

We welcome the Secretary-General's critical visit
to Iraq whose unity and territorial integrity are being
threatened by the spread of Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham. In our View, the rare brutality and methods of
operation of that new breed of terrorists requires some
fresh thinking on how best to employ existing counter-
terrorism toolbox at our disposal in combatting radical
extremism and terrorist threats.

My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura as United Nations mediator for
Syria and hopes that his appointment will reinvigorate
the search for a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
Implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) and of
resolution 2165 (2014), which was adopted unanimously
on 14 July, must remain high on the Council's agenda.
Although some humanitarian aid has recently entered
Syria from Turkey, significant problems and failures
to implement the resolutions remain, as discussed
earlier today. Continued failure to implement the
two resolutions must have consequences for those
responsible.

An Arria formula meeting last week with the
participation of representatives of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Syria reminded us once
again of the scale and horror of crimes committed
in that country and the imperative of putting an end
to impunity. The flexibility and informality of Arria
formula meetings is a great asset in our work and must
continue unrestricted to provide additional insights
into the issues on the Council's agenda.

After 20 meetings on Ukraine, in July the Council
managed to adopt resolution 2166 (2014), sponsored
by 13 members of the Council, on the downing of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-l7, which cost the lives
of 298 passengers from 11 countries. My delegation
stresses once again the urgency of a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
shooting down of MH-17, as stipulated by resolution
2166 (2014). The perpetrators of the downing of the
plane must be identified and brought to account.

The tampering of evidence and obstruction of the
investigation by pro-Russian armed separatists and
the degrading treatment of the remains of the Victims,
marauding and theft of personal items of the victims
speak loud and clear to the true nature of the separatists.
They who deny dignity to the dead have also perpetrated
countless abuses and crimes against the living. As the
most recent report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights testifies,
egregious human rights violations continue to take
place in territories controlled by pro-Russian militias,

including intimidations, abductions, torture and
killings. In spite of all the ample evidence, Russia has
yet to disown and condemn the illegal armed separatist
groups that bear full responsibility for the bloodshed in
eastern Ukraine. To do any less is to give those illegal
militants a carte blanche to continue their criminal
acts. Detractory finger-pointing elsewhere will not
change the reality of the facts.

To conclude, let me once again thank the Rwandan
team for its dedicated work in the presidency of the
Council during the month of July. At the same time,
I would like to wish the incoming United Kingdom
presidency the greatest of success. It can count on our
full support.

