Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to speak on behalf of the
120 member States of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM) during today's quarterly open debate
to address an issue to which we have historically
attached particular importance - the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

As this is the first time we take the floor this
month, allow us to express our best wishes to your
delegation, Sir, in steering the work of this important
organ this month. We would also like to extend our
sincere congratulations to all of the new members that
have joined the Security Council this year, in particular
Indonesia and South Africa, which, together with the
Dominican Republic, are also joining the Council's
Non-Aligned Movement caucus.

Another year has passed and the Palestinian
question remains unresolved. Let us briefly review some
important 2018 statistics. Two hundred and ninety-five
Palestinians were killed and more than 29,000 were
injured by the Israeli occupying forces, which may
translate into the highest number of casualties since
Israel's war on the Gaza Strip in 2014. At least 5,617
new settlements were built and at least 636 structures
were demolished or seized in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, which resulted in
the forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinian
civilians, including 216 children and 127 women. In
addition, the occupying Power has issued more than
13,000 demolition orders on Palestinian homes and
other properties, including 40 schools, which are still
pending. To date, approximately 6,000 Palestinians
remain in captivity under the brutal occupation and
are subjected to extremely inhumane treatment without
ever surrendering.

As we reflect on that harsh and sad reality, NAM
takes this opportunity to reaffirm once again its
permanent and unwavering support for the Palestinian
people, their inalienable rights and their just cause, in
particular given that the current situation on the ground
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, is at a critical and clearly unsustainable
point. In that regard, the member States of the Movement
again reaffirm that the current Israeli occupation
and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole are a
serious threat to international peace and security and
require urgent attention and a solution, in accordance
with international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the United
Nations and other multilateral diplomacy instruments.
We firmly believe in multilateralism and, as stipulated
in General Assembly resolution 73/127, promoted by
our Movement, we remain committed to the settlement
of disputes through peaceful mechanisms, including
through diplomacy.

The Security Council has a clear responsibility. It
must uphold its obligations under the Charter and act
accordingly to implement its own resolutions. Those
resolutions not only constitute the basis for a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the conflict, but are also
legally binding on all States Members of the United
Nations. That is why we are deeply concerned about the
fact that, for far too long, the Council has been unable
to fulfil its mandate on such an important issue, due to
the use of the veto by one of its permanent members. We
are also concerned about its failure to hold Israel, the
occupying Power, accountable for all of its violations
and disregard for the authority of the Council.

Notwithstanding everything I have mentioned,
NAM. continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016)
offers the most viable path to peace, by establishing the
essential requirements and parameters for achieving a
just settlement on the basis of the two-State solution,
based on pre-1967 borders, and while respecting
the terms of reference historically endorsed by the
international community, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including the land for peace principle, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map. That should ensure
that the Palestinian people enjoy their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination
and independence in the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We therefore call for the full
and effective implementation of the resolution. This
important organ, which is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, must therefore insist
that resolution 2334 (2016) be respected, in particular
by the occupying Power.

Similarly, the member States of the Movement
continue to call for full respect for, and the
implementation of, all other relevant resolutions,
including those related to the total cessation of all
Israeli settlement activities and those related to the
status of occupied East Jerusalem. That would create
the necessary conditions to end the occupation,
justly resolve the conflict in all its aspects and make
Palestinian-Israeli peace and security possible, for the
benefit of both peoples, the region and the international
community as a whole. It is imperative that immediate
action be taken, in accordance with international law
and United Nations resolutions, to remedy the current
situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster
an environment conducive to the quest for peace. It
is also essential to avoid the adoption of unilateral,
provocative or arbitrary measures, which serve only
to embolden Israel to continue its illegal policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

The Movement continues to be very concerned
about the situation in the Gaza Strip, particularly on the
humanitarian front, where the situation unfortunately
continues to deteriorate from day to day. We therefore
reiterate our call for the Israeli blockade to be completely
lifted, since it continues to inflict unspeakable
humanitarian, social and economic suffering on the
more than 2 million Palestinian men, women and
children in Gaza. We want to emphasize once again
that this crisis must be addressed comprehensively
and in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian and human rights law and
all the relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
context of the overall situation resulting from Israel's
continued illegitimate, hostile foreign occupation of
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, since
1967, and of all of the unequivocal calls for an end to an
occupation that has lasted for more than half a century.

Furthermore, as Israel has clearly renounced its
obligations as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention to protect Palestinian civilians, the
States members of the Movement reiterate their call to
the international community to ensure Palestinians'
protection in the Gaza Strip and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, in order to
alleviate the occupied population's serious insecurity
and prevent further losses of innocent lives. Failure to
do so could further aggravate the situation and lead to
the tragic loss of more civilian lives. In that regard, the
Movement reiterates its deep concern that Israel will
not be held accountable for all the violations it has
committed, many of which could even be considered
war crimes. The lack ofjustice only enables impunity
and destabilizes the situation on the ground, which in
turn diminishes the prospects for peace. That is why
we continue to call for taking international action,
especially by the Security Council, to put an end to the
occupying Power's systematic violations against the
occupied Palestinian civilians and make it accountable
for those violations. Israel must abide by its obligations
and responsibilities under international law.

With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, we reaffirm that any measures or actions
that the occupying Power Israel may take or have
taken - such as the illegal decision of 14 December
1981, aimed at altering the legal status, physical
character, demographic composition and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel's measures to implement its jurisdiction and
administration in this area, including attempting to
exercise sovereignty over it by calling local elections in
four Syrian localities - are null and void and have no
legal effect. Accordingly, and in line with our principled
position, we once again demand that Israel comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June 1967, as
outlined in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm the need
for Israel to withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including the areas of the Shaba'a farmlands, the
Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar
village up to the Blue Line. We also urge Israel to
cease its persistent grave violations of Lebanon's
territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance
with the relevant international resolutions, particularly
resolution 1701 (2006).

To sum up, at the beginning ofthis new year of2019,
the States members of the Movement would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate its calls to the international
community to act collectively and responsibly in
upholding international law and intensifying every
necessary effort in support of the Palestinian cause,
with the ultimate goal of putting an end to Israel's
foreign occupation of Palestine and East Jerusalem,
an injustice that has lasted for more than 51 years, and
after more than 70 years have passed since the disaster
and tragedy that struck the Palestinian people in 1948,
as a result of which they lost their homeland and were
uprooted and forcibly displaced from their homes,
becoming refugees whose suffering has lasted to the
present day.

In conclusion, NAM. reaffirms its permanent
solidarity with the Palestinian people, as well as its
unwavering support for their just cause. At the same
time, it renews its commitment to continuing to
strengthen and coordinate international efforts aimed at
promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects,
including the suffering of Palestinian refugees, on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). It is
our fervent hope that significant progress will be made
this year in the Palestinian people's historic struggle
for justice and the fulfilment of their inalienable rights
and legitimate national aspirations, including the right
to self-determination, freedom and independence in an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
