Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Mr. President, I thank you
for inviting me to brief the Council today. In March
2005, through resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
referred the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. For two
months, my Office assessed the allegations of massive
crimes committed in Darfur and the existence of
national proceedings in relation to them. Since there
were no such proceedings, I decided, as Prosecutor to
open an investigation in June 2005.

Under the Rome Statute, the policy of my Office
is to investigate and prosecute, in accordance with the
evidence collected, those most responsible for the
gravest crimes under our jurisdiction. This is what we
did in the Darfur situation.

We collected evidence impartially for two years,
relying on information provided by many actors,
including the Government of the Sudan, and on the
testimonies of more than 130 witnesses. We took those
testimonies in more than 18 countries and devoted a
great deal of effort to ensuring the protection of
witnesses.
In our first case, we investigated the massive
killings, rapes and torture of civilians in their villages
during the period 2003-2005, which led to the
displacement of four million civilians. The evidence
revealed the role of the Minister of State for the
Interior, Ahmed Haroun, as the coordinator of massive
crimes against civilians not participating in the
conflict, and the role of Janjaweed militia leader, Ali
Kushayb, in specific attacks.

In our second case, we covered the same massive
crimes against villagers and the continuing crimes
being committed against displaced persons in the
camps. The evidence showed the role played by
President Omar Al-Bashir, beginning in 2003, when he
ordered the operations against civilians in the villages,
through 2005, when he appointed Ahmed Haroun as
the Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs and
organized the process of strangulation of the displaced
communities, denying them any meaningful assistance,
preventing their return, forcing the United Nations and
others to set up the largest humanitarian operation in
the world and yet obstructing each step of their work.

On 4 March 2009, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued an
arrest warrant for five counts of crimes against
humanity, including extermination, rapes and killings,
and two counts of war crimes against President Omar
Al-Bashir. By a two to one vote, the Judges rejected
the three genocide charges at this stage. The Office has
appealed, and the Pre-Trial Chamber has yet to decide
to grant leave to appeal on this topic.

The Judges' decision on 4 March has clarified the
type of crimes committed in Darfur against the
displaced persons in the camps. While the
peacekeepers monitor fighting between parties to the
conflict and the humanitarian workers monitor the
physical plight of the civilians, the International
Criminal Court monitors individual behaviour that can
constitute crimes within our jurisdiction.

The intentional infliction of conditions of life in
the camps, where the Sudanese State apparatus
controlled by President Al-Bashir does not provide
assistance and is obstructing the provision of
assistance, and the multiple rapes of women leading to
physical or mental harm, are both crimes within the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.

The Judges have retained the charge of
extermination as a crime against humanity.
09-36092

Under paragraph 2(b) of article 7 of the Rome
Statute, extermination includes "the intentional
infliction of conditions of life, inter alia the deprivation
of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring
about the destruction of part of a population". That
provision mirrors those of article 6 of the Statute, on
genocide, which establishes that causing serious bodily
or mental harm to members of a group and deliberately
inflicting on that group conditions of life calculated to
bring about its physical destruction, in whole or in part,
can constitute genocide. The only difference between
extermination and genocide is the latter's requirement
that an intention to eliminate a specific group be
demonstrated, in this case the Fur, Massalit and
Zaghawa. Extermination has been happening since at
least 2004, and it is happening today. Extermination is
happening, with 2.5 million victims so far.
Extermination is happening before the eyes of the
international community.

We have also investigated and prosecuted attacks
against peacekeepers. The attack on Haskanita in
September 2007, which caused the deaths of 12 African
Union peacekeepers and left thousands of people
without protection, was the most serious of all the
attacks against peacekeepers in the region.

On 7 May 2009, Pre-Trial Chamber I issued a
first summons for Bahar Idriss Abu Garda, President of
the United Resistance Front, to appear in relation to the
Haskanita crimes. He appeared in court in The Hague
on 18 May 2009. Let me thank those countries that
have facilitated investigative missions of my Office
and have helped to protect victims and witnesses and to
facilitate the initial appearance of the first individual to
have agreed to appear voluntarily before the Court,
among them Gambia, Mali, the Netherlands, Nigeria
and Senegal.

Those are the cases currently being prosecuted by
the Court. The Court has investigated the crimes
committed in Darfur over the past 6 years. We have
identified the persons most responsible for the most
serious crimes committed in Darfur. That is our judicial
mandate, our contribution to stopping the crimes and
preventing future crimes.

We have identified six individuals to be
prosecuted. Three arrest warrants and one summons
have been issued. The Judges' decision on two
remaining individuals in the Haskanita case is pending.
09-36092
There is no sealed decision or other case pending at
this stage.

As I mentioned in previous briefings, the list of
51 names prepared by the United Nations International
Commission of Inquiry for Darfur is not used by my
Office.

As I have done in the past, I would like to inform
the Security Council of the next activities of my
Office. I will be precise in order to facilitate the
planning of other actors involved.

The judicial process is going ahead. The hearing
for the confirmation of the charges against Bahar Idriss
Abu Garda in the Haskanita case is scheduled for
12 October in The Hague. It will require the
appearance of very few witnesses. The rebel groups
have to facilitate the appearance of the other two
commanders. They have committed to do so. They
must now act.

The arrest warrant concerning President Al-Bashir
has been sent to the Sudanese authorities. The
Government of the Sudan has the responsibility to
arrest him. Their legal obligation stems from the
United Nations Charter and resolution 1593 (2005).

International experience, such as in the cases of
Slobodan Milosevic and Charles Taylor, as well as
national experiences, indicate to us that the
implementation of a judicial decision against a head of
State is a process that can take time - months or
years. In the end, however, they have all faced justice.

The Government of the Sudan also has the duty
to arrest Ahmed Haroun and Ali Kushayb. The
designation of Ahmed Haroun as Governor of South
Kordofan contravenes the resolutions of the Security
Council. He has to be arrested and sent to The Hague.

The arrest of persons sought by the Court is a
process. It is first and foremost the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan. By resolution 1593 (2005),
the Council established the duty of the Government of
the Sudan to cooperate with the Court. Three year later,
in June 2008, the Council confirmed its decision in the
presidential statement published as document
S/PRST/2008/2l. In July 2008, a few days after my
Office submitted to the Judges an application for an
arrest warrant against President Omer Al-Bashir, the
Council also adopted resolution 1828 (2008), which
again emphasized the need to bring to justice the
perpetrators of such crimes and urged the Government
3
of the Sudan to comply with its obligations in that
respect. Those resolutions, as well as the presidential
statement, establish a clear framework.

States parties to the Rome Statute have the
responsibility to arrest and surrender any indictee
travelling to its territory. There is no immunity under
the Rome Statute. States parties have taken a number
of initiatives in that regard. Some have publicly
reasserted their obligations, should indictees elect to
travel in their territory. States not parties to the Statute
have no such legal obligation, but resolution 1593
(2005) urges them to cooperate fully with the Court.
They can help the process of justice and deter new
crimes by consistently raising with the Sudanese
authorities their duty to respect Security Council
resolutions and the ensuing decisions of the Court.

With regard to complementarity, I can confirm
that, as of now, there are no national proceedings in the
Sudan in relation to the massive crimes investigated by
the Court. The most recent report of the Government of
the Sudan circulated to the African Union and the
United Nations on 2 February of this year indicated no
new developments in that regard. Over the past six
years, the Sudan has tried and completed only seven
cases, from the dockets of the ordinary courts, and with
no connection with the campaign of crimes coordinated
by Ahmed Haroun, perpetrated by Ali Kushayb and
others and ordered by President Omar Al-Bashir.

In the coming six months, in accordance with its
mandate, my Office will continue to monitor crimes
and galvanize efforts to arrest fugitives.

Let me be clear: I do not plan to open a new
investigation during the coming six months, but I will
continue to review new information on ongoing crimes.
The focus will be on, inter alia, first, any new decision
affecting the displaced persons, in particular the role
played by the Humanitarian Aid Commission;
secondly, the spillover of violence from Darfur into
Chad and information related to acts against civilians
promoted by the Ministry of Defence of the Sudan and
others; and thirdly, the use of child soldiers by various
parties, including some rebel movements. I have
prosecuted the crime of the recruitment of child
soldiers in the Labanga case in the situation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is a crime with a
terrible impact on victims, their communities and their
futures. It destroys generations.
Finally, it is a main objective of my Office in the
months to come to build upon its cooperation with
regional organizations as provided for in resolution
1593 (2005).

I visited Doha this past week upon the invitation
of Prime Minister Al-Thani. He is leading Arab League
and African Union efforts to mediate the conflict. I
have seen the commitment of the Qatari authorities to
ending the violence and promoting peace and the
efforts invested by the international community to
avoid further violence. The work of the African Union-
United Nations mediation for Darfur is crucial to
ensuring a comprehensive solution and security for the
Darfuris now, and it is moving forward. A year ago,
nobody would have dreamed that the peace process
would progress so far. One year ago, there was no
peace process. This past week, I saw real hope and
commitment. My role is of a purely judicial nature, but
I fully appreciate the importance of the wider political
and security process taking place in Doha aimed at
stopping the violence and preventing future crimes.

1 am also liaising with the African Union high-
level panel led by former President Thabo Mbeki,
which has been mandated by the African Union to
address in a mutually reinforcing manner the
interlinked issues of combating impunity and
promoting peace and reconciliation. As former
President Mbeki stated at the panel's inauguration in
Addis Ababa on 18 March 2009, the African Union has
taken the clear and unequivocal decision that the
continent must act not only to end war and violent
conflict in Africa, but also to ensure that where war
breaks out anyway, all belligerents must know that war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other abuses will
be punished resolutely and that a culture of impunity
will not be permitted to take root and entrench itself.

I have had the opportunity to consult with former
President Mbeki on several occasions, and we are
planning to meet with him and the African Union high-
level panel on Darfur.

I also had a productive phone conversation with
African Union Commission Chairperson Jean Ping this
week, on 3 June, and we are planning to meet in Addis
Ababa.

The Arab League has been pushing successfully
for the adoption of a criminal code in the Sudan that
includes Rome Statute crimes. The other promises,
including the investigation and prosecution of
individuals responsible for crimes, no matter what their
level or rank, made by the Government of the Sudan to
Secretary-General Amr Moussa this past July could, if
fulfilled, help turn the tide in the situation in terms of
impunity in Darfur.

Our efforts complement each other. The role of
regional organization in promoting accountability and
reconciliation at all levels for the Darfuris and in
preventing future crimes is unique. In accordance with
the Rome Statute, the International Criminal Court is a
court of last resort, complementary to the national
judiciary. We have six cases. Should regional
organizations succeed in promoting national
accountability mechanisms for the victims of other
crimes, and stop new abuses, we would not need to
intervene further.

Allow me to conclude. Resolution 1593 (2005)
was one among various decisions taken by the Council
to confront the violence in Darfur. Other resolutions of
the Council address the need for a comprehensive
political settlement in Darfur, for the protection
afforded to Darfuris by peacekeepers and for the
distribution of aid. All such aspects are key to ending
the violence and the crimes in Darfur.

The International Criminal Court is fulfilling its
judicial mandate to factually and legally describe the
crimes committed and to prosecute its cases, respecting
09-36092
the law, respecting the victims and respecting the
persons accused. The judges have issued decisions on
those most responsible for the most serious crimes in
Darfur. There will be no impunity in Darfur. Justice
proceedings are in motion.

We are at a crossroads. The coming six months
will be crucial. Most of the millions of victims of
crimes have lived in the camps for four years. Young
people are unable to move around. There is no
education. There are no jobs. If girls and women go
outside the camps, they are raped. If boys go outside,
they are killed or, in some locations, abducted to fight.
There is a generation of child soldiers in the making.
There is a generation of victims faced with two
options: they can leave the camps and die the same day
or they can remain in the camps and die the day after.

Violence will bring no victory. For the sake of the
Darfur civilians, all the parties to the conflict have to
stop resorting to violence. This is the absolute priority,
to prevent future crimes.

