Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month and to extend my gratitude to His Excellency
Ambassador Masood Khan, who presided over the
Council during the month of January. I wish also, like
my colleague from the United Kingdom, to congratulate
all those who contributed to the success of the Security
Council's visit to Yemen, and to express our gratitude
to Mr. Jamal Benomar for the efforts he has made
on behalf of the Secretary-General. I would ask our
colleague from Yemen to transmit my most heartfelt
gratitude to the people and the Government of Yemen.

To add on to what was said by my colleague,
Sir Mark Lyall Grant, I would like to summarize
our meeting with the President of the Government,
the Ministers and the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) and the national dialogue
preparatory committee.

During our meeting with the Head of Government
and the Ministers, the Security Council expressed its
satisfaction at the efforts undertaken by the National
Consensus Government, especially with respect to all its
achievements at the level of security and the provision
of basic services. The Security Council expressed its
support for the efforts undertaken by the Government
for the success of the transition period in Yemen.

The leader of the Government's statement focused
on the transition and the obstacles that the transition
is encountering, especially at the political level. He
also urged the Security Council not to hesitate to act
firmly in order to stand up to anyone who might wish
to undermine the political process aimed at launching
the national dialogue. The leader of the Government
reaffirmed that the national dialogue would cover
every issue of importance to the country and would
help to rebuild national unity on a new foundation.
The interactive dialogue between the Security Council
and the Yemeni Government considered the following
issues: the continuing delay in the national reconciliation
process and an accounting of the financial pledges
made to Yemen.

With regard to the meeting between the Security
Council, the Secretary-General ofthe Gulf Cooperation
Council and the Group of Friends of Yemen, the
Council's mission commended the GCC on the role it has
played in ensuring the success of the transition period
in Yemen, as well as of the executive mechanism set up
for that purpose. The Security Council also commended
the GCC's political and financial support for Yemen
and urged it to continue its efforts. The Secretary-
General of the GCC also expressed his satisfaction
with the Council's visit to Yemen. He considered the
messages we are sending to Yemen and to its donors
and investors to be very clear. Also addressed were the
issues of granting immunity to the outgoing President;
the management of pledges; the risk of failure should
there be further delays in adopting the constitution,
and the question of the South of the country and the
GCC's refusal to cooperate with requests concerning
the South.

The third meeting was with the preparatory
committee for the national dialogue. The Security
Council mission commended the committee's
achievements and the reports submitted for the
President's consideration. It also encouraged all
Yemenis working to implement the transition process
and who have devoted themselves to helping the
national dialogue succeed through confidence-building
measures and transparency, which will enable the
country to move on to the next phase, the referendum
on the constitution and the organization of elections,
both parliamentary and presidential.

At its meeting with the preparatory committee, the
mission heard an address by the Chair of the committee,
as well as statements by various representatives of
Yemeni society within the committee. All recognized
the importance of the Security Council's mission to
Yemen and expressed the wish that the Council continue
to support the transition phase under way in Yemen.

By way ofa conclusion, I would like to express our
satisfaction with the success ofthis mission, which has
enabled the Council to examine up close the progress
made in Yemen as well as the obstacles that must be
overcome in order to achieve security and stability
there. It is now incumbent on the Council to monitor
the situation and the implementation of the next phases
ofthe GCC initiative.

