I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his detailed briefing. Let me echo others in wishing Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar a speedy recovery. My delegation is very pleased to hear from Mr. Pedersen that preparations for convening the third round of the Constitutional Committee are on track. We know that this is only the beginning of a long and challenging political process in Syria, but this progress is key for all the Syrian parties to move forward. Many Security Council members have highlighted the current situation in the country, particularly the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and the economic fragility that further exacerbate the humanitarian situation in Syria. There are around 2,000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the country, and it is likely to spread more in densely populated areas and among vulnerable internally displaced persons and refugees. The Syrian people need the ongoing support of the international community, including the Council. They need progress, not only on the humanitarian situation but also on the political process. In the light of the above, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, all Syrian parties must continue to engage in the Constitutional Committee process. The genuine and meaningful engagement of the Syrian parties is crucial to ensuring a productive and substantive round of talks among the Committee's members. We hope that, with the support of key international stakeholders, next week's discussion in Geneva will be a constructive and successful session that eventually leads to a regular Committee agenda. It is important for all the relevant parties to maintain a calm and positive demeanour during the Constitutional Committee's meeting. Let me reaffirm our strong support for the Syrian-led and -owned political process, facilitated by the United Nations in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). Indonesia appreciates the work of the Special Envoy and his team in facilitating the whole process. Secondly, we share the Secretary-General's appeal for the waiver of sanctions that can undermine Syria's capacity to ensure access to food, vital health supplies and COVID-19 medical assistance to respond to the pandemic. This is indeed a time for solidarity, not exclusion. Thirdly, we need sustained and meaningful action on the issue of detainees and missing persons. All Syrian parties must address this issue, as it is critical for the reconciliation process and for building trust and confidence among the parties. We hope to see significant progress on this file. Before concluding, while the ceasefire agreement in north-west Syria is generally being respected, we wish to urge all key actors to maintain their commitment to the agreement and to ensuring sustained calm throughout Syria. Let me once again emphasize my delegation's commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
