Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing. Let me join
others in welcoming Ambassador Citaku and Minister
Kuburovic' to the Council.

It has been less than three months since the Council
met to discuss the situation in Kosovo. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/387) makes clear, it has been
a comparatively quiet period, one that does not warrant
the Council's attention so soon after our last meeting.

This period of calm is welcome. A de-escalation
in tension between Kosovo and Serbia, whether in this
Chamber or in the region, is something that I am sure
we would all like to see sustained. We particularly
welcome the withdrawal of the proposal to transform
the Kosovo Security Force into an army. We encourage
the Government of Kosovo to continue to engage with
communities in Kosovo and NATO partners on any
such moves.

Despite the stability of the reporting period, we
are concerned by the slow progress in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. We all know that the
future of Kosovo will be determined in Brussels and
not in this Chamber in New York. So it is vital that
both sides re-engage and live up to their commitment
to the dialogue following elections in Serbia and the
forthcoming elections in Kosovo in June.

As Kosovo prepares to go to the polls, let me say
that we look forward to free and fair elections and to a
Government that reflects the will ofthe people. Once it is
formed, there will be plenty to do, including continuing
efforts on issues such as the Association/Community of
Serb-majority municipalities. In that effort, they will
have the fullest support of the United Kingdom.

While it was not captured in the report of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), it is important to recognize in this Chamber
the progress that Kosovo has made internationally since
we last met. Diplomatic relations have been established
with Brunei and Samoa, and Kosovo opened its first
embassy in Africa, in Senegal. And in a further sign
of ever-increasing international integration, Kosovo
became the 181st member of the World Customs
Organization, a move that will bring economic benefits
for all who call Kosovo home.

This is progress that we rarely hear about in the
Council. Instead, every three months, we are transported
back nearly 20 years to a time of ethnic division and of
fluid lines on maps, but, in truth, those lines have long
since been set. These meetings do not reflect Kosovo
now but as it was. Let me reiterate, therefore, that it is
long past time for the Council to decrease the frequency
of these meetings. And just as these meetings must
adapt, so too must UNMIK, so that it better reflects the
present situation.

We recognize the important work that UNMIK
has done during many years for the benefit of Kosovo,
and welcome its activism on the women and peace and
security agenda during the reporting period. But it is
time for the Mission to take a step back. As such, we
are disappointed by the move to increase the budget of
UNMIK this year, particularly after numerous calls
at the past two meetings for a down-scaling of the
Mission and especially given that additional funds are
earmarked for projects that focus on issues on which
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo is
already engaged.

Given the pressures placed on the peacekeeping
budget and Kosovo's continued move away from
instability and insecurity, the United Kingdom believes
that it is long past time for UNMIK to undergo some
form of reconfiguration. We look forward to receiving
proposals from the Secretariat in due course.

