The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Indonesia.

Let me join others in thanking the Secretary-
General for his statement and his written report
(S/2007/643). I should also like to preface our
statement by expressing appreciation to Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
statement.

Every year, thousands of civilians fall victim to
situations of armed conflict. Their plight should be a
concern for all of us. It is our shared responsibility to
alleviate the suffering of victims wherever it occurs. A
humanitarian crisis caused by armed conflict can be
broadcast online in a matter of seconds. That can be
attributed in no small part to the role of the media in
projecting and amplifying such strong images into our
private spheres. However, it often takes more time and
further effort before needed assistance can be funnelled
in time and in line with the needs of civilians in such
precarious circumstances. Thus, as the Council, we
should offer guidance on both ways in which assistance
can be provided to victims and steps to be taken
against those who deliberately disregard human life
and to discourage such actions in the first place. In
addressing such actions, the Council would act in
accordance with the fundamental principles of the
Charter and international law.

Our efforts to stabilize any particular conflict
situation are focused on political dialogue, negotiations
and reconciliation processes. However, the plight of
victims does not always receive full attention. Most
often, civilians are the victims and the bystanders in
war. As non-combatants, they do not choose to engage
in the conflict taking place around them. While any
loss of life in a war is regrettable, formal and informal
laws of war have, throughout time, been intended to
protect civilians. We believe that those who are
innocent should be protected by the international
community and that the perpetrators of illegal acts
should be brought to justice.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/643)
made a valuable contribution by identifying various
means of assisting victims of armed conflict. It also
highlighted the plight of victims in various armed
conflict situations. Indeed, it assisted us by presenting
a well-rounded picture of the situation.

The impact of war on civilians goes far beyond
targeting them as combatants; it includes the auxiliary
effects of war, including physical displacement,
disease, hunger and the wreckage and death wrought
by the placement of anti-personnel landmines on
civilian territory. Efforts to combat those ills and to
ensure respect for basic human rights can include a
range of measures, including the timely delivery of
food and medical support, rehabilitation and advocacy
to victims.

We consider all acts against relief workers,
humanitarian aid convoys and others engaged in
providing humanitarian assistance to the population to
counter the effects of war to be deplorable. The
deliberate targeting of such individuals is a crime, and
we invoke the relevant international laws, including the
1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol, for
that purpose.

In the twenty-first century, the number of civilian
deaths in wartime has been growing, and the dynamics
are complicated by the role of non-State actors.
Civilians are deliberately targeted in many conflicts,
which runs counter to international norms on the laws
of war and human rights and draws condemnation from
the international community. Such practices must be
stopped.
Non-State actors pose additional problems,
because they are difficult to identify and apprehend.
Non-State armed groups pose special challenges for
penalty and law enforcement. In the case of non-State
actors such as terrorist groups, there should be equal
protection for civilians through penalties on individuals
through enforcement of international law, in addition to
the punishment that they receive for their activities as a
group. My delegation condemns civilian casualties
brought about by any terrorist act.

Let me reiterate that the protection of civilians is
a universal and timeless issue. Generation after
generation has envisaged effective measures to protect
civilians from the looming danger of armed conflicts.
Our current discussion is part of that long and
unbroken chain of efforts. Our effort requires
togetherness; no one can claim this issue alone. This is
an issue of humanity that binds us together, but it can
be unravelled by our own narrow political objectives.
We should avoid that trap, as well as the trap of
engaging in a "blame game". We hope that by bringing
this issue to the attention of the Council today, we will
be able to reinvigorate it and to encourage the quest for
new solutions to address it or to strengthen the existing
mechanism.

The Secretary-General's report contained an array
of recommendations aimed at furthering our common
efforts that can contribute to the overall efforts of the
United Nations system, international stakeholders and
national Governments to address this pertinent issue.
We believe that while the best protection from armed
conflict is found in its prevention, in the absence of
peace we must remain vigilant as to its impacts on the
civilian population and must do our best to minimize
human suffering and deaths.

Finally, our efforts should be focused on
maintaining the current momentum by strengthening
the United Nations system, working together with
Member States and other stakeholders in a coordinated,
coherent, comprehensive and cooperative manner.
What is required is an approach that includes
development and humanitarian dimensions,
undergirded by political will on the part of States to
ensure that civilians are protected in times of war.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

We will now hear a statement by Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. I give him the floor.

