Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking United States Secretary of State Pompeo for
gracing us with his presence in the Chamber today. We
welcome him to the Security Council.

I speak in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/PV.7488). Three months
later, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
came into effect. The agreement aims to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme remains exclusively
peaceful. Resolution 2231 (2015) terminated the
previous Security Council resolutions on the Iranian
nuclear issue and urged the full implementation of
the JCPOA. It also established specific restrictions
in relation to Iran. This year, as Security Council
Facilitator for the resolution, we have aimed to support
its implementation. We have built on the excellent
work of Italy, which we succeeded as Facilitator in the
context of our split term on the Council for the period
2017-2018. We consider three elements to be key to the
role of Facilitator and to that of the format: first, talks;
secondly, transparency; and thirdly, trade.

My first point concerns talks. Our ambition has
been to facilitate talks about the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). As Facilitator, we have
facilitated such talks through communication with all
parties, through the discussion of the Security Council
in the 2231 format and through smooth correspondence
within the format. The Security Council met on
10 December under the 2231 format. We discussed
the findings and recommendations contained in the
sixth report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) on
resolution 2231 (2015) prior to its public release. Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo already pointed to some of
his findings and recommendations in her statement.

Theformatheldanopendiscussiononballisticmissile
launches by Iran, as well as on broader developments
related to resolution 2231 (2015). During the reporting
period, several Member States sent communications to
the Security Council alleging transfers and activities
by Iran that fall under the restrictions under resolution
2231 (2015). Those communications are listed in detail
in my report (see S/2018/1106), together with the replies
received from the Permanent Mission of Iran. Iran also
sent several letters in which it laid out its concerns with
the United States withdrawal from the JCPOA and the
reimposition of all its national sanctions that had been
lifted or waived pursuant to the JCPOA.

I now turn to my second point - the facilitation of
transparency concerning the work of the 2231 format.
Our reports have given a comprehensive overview of the
work of the format this year, the continued monitoring
activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the discussion on activities related to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015). The reports have also included
key aspects of the functioning of the procurement
channel.

That brings me to my third point - the facilitation
of trade by encouraging the use of the procurement
channel. The channel reviews proposals by States
seeking to participate in or permit certain transfers of
nuclear and dual-use goods, technology or services to
Iran. Since the beginning of 2016, 42 proposals have
been submitted to the procurement channel by five
Member States from three different regional groups.
They include States that are not participants in the
JCPOA. On average, proposals were processed in
fewer than 50 calendar days. Since the withdrawal
of the United States from the JCPOA, five additional
proposals have been submitted through the Security
Council. The channel is operational and effective. We
encourage all States and the private sector to fully
utilize and support it.

In conclusion, the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed the JCPOA, marked a
fundamental shift concerning the Iranian nuclear issue.
As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution, we
have aimed to support and improve its implementation
through the facilitation of talks, transparency and trade.
In that effort, I would also like to thank the Secretariat
for its hard work in support of both myself and the
format this year. We would also like to commend the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and the
European Union. As this is my last Security Council
briefing in my capacity as Facilitator, I would like to
wish my successor, Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de
Buytswerve of Belgium, every success.

