Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, I, too,
would like to join others in condemning the terrorist
attack that took place today in Istanbul and in
conveying our deep condolences to the Governments of
Turkey and of the United Kingdom. We wish to
welcome Mr. Madeira, Minister of the Presidency for
Parliamentary and Diplomatic Affairs of Mozambique,
who is here on behalf of the African Union; Deputy
Foreign Minister Shareef of Tanzania; Mr. Walubita,
representative of the Commission of the African Union
for the Great Lakes Region; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima
Fall. We wish to thank them and the Secretary-General
for their important and comprehensive statements.

The year 1994 was a time of tragedy for the Great
Lakes region. The effects of conflict and instability,
which began in Rwanda and spread far, engulfing three
countries, are still being felt far and wide throughout
the whole continent. The year 2003 is the moment of
hope. The Great Lakes conference should become a
landmark for peace.

Conflicts in the Great Lakes region have multiple
casualties. They resulted from the aftermath of
colonization, a history of political and economic
instability, ethnic hatred and rivalry and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Every conflict in the
region has transborder linkages and effects. Indeed,
conflicts have often spilled across borders, as we have
seen in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The causes of conflicts are complex in the Great
Lakes region and so are their solutions. While it is
necessary to address a conflict at national and
subnational levels, it is not possible to also sustain
peace until it is achieved and sustained at the national
level. In the Great Lakes region, as in West Africa,
because of the transborder effects, a conflict in any
given country cannot become completely resolved
unless peace and stability is restored to the entire
region. A regional approach to conflict resolution is
therefore essential.

Pakistan fully supports the initiative to convene
an international conference next year on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region. We commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall,
as well as those of his predecessors, in launching this
process. We also welcome Tanzania's offer to hold the
conference next year.

Pakistan supports the objectives of this
conference. We join in encouraging full regional
ownership and greater international partnership in the
conference process. While supporting the conference
initiative, the Security Council must also play a more
corrective role in promoting peace and stability in the
region. Peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts already
authorized by the Council need to be augmented by
further action-oriented measures and initiatives aimed
at consolidating peace and eliminating some of the
causes of conflict in the region.

First, we would call for the further expansion of
the United Nations peacekeeping presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and as conditions
permit, the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping force in Burundi, subject to the
agreement of all parties. A greater United Nations
peacekeeping presence on the ground will enhance and
support the United Nations and African Union
initiatives for peace in the region.

Secondly, in order to make more effective the
arms embargo in the western part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council must
consider ways to track the illegal exploiters of
resources - who have tentacles throughout the region
and beyond - to their sources of funds, as well as to
the points where those funds are converted into arms.

Thirdly, both the causes of and the solutions to
the conflicts in the Great Lakes region have political
and economic aspects. The Security Council, which
deals only with peace and security matters, is ill-
equipped to address all of the issues comprehensively.
The Economic and Social Council, on the other hand,
deals with countries emerging from conflict. The
situation in Burundi is an example which is being
handled by both the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. Perhaps it would be a
more efficient use of the time and effort of both the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
to form a composite committee or committees for the
Great Lakes region to comprehensively address, and
offer, solutions to the multidimensional aspects of the
conflicts in the region.

