Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting oer. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we share
his serious concerns about the status quo in Kosovo.
We thank Special Representative Tanin and his team
for their efforts and objective briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which make it clear that there are
persistent, deep-rooted problems in the province that
require urgent resolution as well as monitoring by the
international community.

We do not share Ms. Citaku's optimistic, rosy
assessments. Incidentally, I would like to let her know
that while it is kind and even touching to hear her
concerns about the time at our disposal, she need not
worry about that. I would like to say to her that she
does not need to worry about our time - the time of the
Security Council - as we indeed do have much to say
about what is going on in the province. Unfortunately,
we have been compelled to conclude that the process of
settling the situation in Kosovo has utterly stagnated.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Kosovo under
European Union (EU) auspices has essentially ceased to
function. Despite the periodic meetings held in Brussels

by the EU in which senior officials from both sides take
part and which are intended to show that the format is
still strong, no work is being done on substantive issues
and there are no prospects of reviving the dialogue. It
is telling that the executive structures in Pristina that
previously provided technical support for the talks have
been dismantled. We took note of the idea expressed
by President Vueic' of Serbia at the trilateral meeting
in Brussels on 31 August with regard to launching a
discussion of the long-term prospects for relations
between Serbs and Albanians and ways to resolve them
on a sustainable basis. We have heard no response to
that initiative from either the Kosovo-Albanian side or
the EU mediators.

We believe that the formation of a so-called
Government in Kosovo in September is a clear
illustration of the degree to which the situation has
deteriorated and the extent of the radicalization in the
province. The choice for the majority was between
Ramush Haradinaj, who has been implicated in war
crimes, and the ultranationalist Albin Kurti, who
advocates the establishment of a greater Albania.
That only emphasizes the fact that Kosovo is not
only not a fully fledged State but that it is a source of
instability with the potential to lead to a relapse into
ethno-religious conflict in the Balkans and the collapse
of the entire regional security system.

We are compelled to note the lack of progress in
the relations between Belgrade and Pristina. The EU-
led dialogue has for many months been at a conceptual
dead end. Clearly, the parties view its essence and its
ultimate aims in different ways. That is first of all the
result of the biased mediation of Brussels, encouraging
the Kosovo Albanian leadership to take hostile steps
that are poisoning the atmosphere of the dialogue and
undermining mutual trust. The European partners are
playing into the hands of the Kosovo Albanians by
attempting to shift the blame onto the Kosovo Serbs
for the slow pace of implementation of the agreements
that have been reached. However, a key item in those
agreements is the one on establishing an association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, which
Pristina has been cynically sabotaging since April 2013.

We trust that following the conclusion of the
second round of municipal elections, scheduled for
19 November, the Kosovo Albanian authorities will
no longer have any pretext for dragging their feet in
dealing with these protracted issues. The pace of
the process of the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to the province is as slow as ever, as
is the work of clarifying the fate of missing persons. It
is clear that individuals of non-Albanian ethnicity fear
for their safety and see no possibility of resolving their
property-related issues.

The oppression of the Serbian Orthodox Church
persists. Despite the decisions of every Kosovo
authority, including judicial ones, affirming the
property rights of Visoki Deeani with respect to its
adjacent land - which, I would like to recall here,
is a UNESCO World Heritage site that is listed as
threatened - the leadership of the municipality has not
complied with them. What kind of trust can there be in
Kosovan justice after that, especially given the backlog
of court cases - approximately 350,000 - mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/9ll)?
The fact is that the project known as the Republic of
Kosovo is clearly not working.

Another area where no progress has been made
is the investigation into the war crimes committed by
the Kosovo Liberation Army. It remains unclear when
the Specialist Chambers in The Hague will begin to
function. Nor should we forget that the basis for the
establishing that court was the report of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights of
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,
Mr. Dick Marty, which accused certain present-day
Kosovo Albanian politicians of involvement in the
illegal trafficking of human organs and other extremely
grave crimes. This is a very serious issue that a lot of
people do not want to remember. All legal obstacles
to the commencement of the court's work have been
overcome, and we trust that initial charges will be
brought shortly.

Another difficult topic concerns forcing the issue
of the transformation of the Kosovo security forces into
a full-fledged armed force, in spite of the positions of
both Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs, an idea that the
authorities in Pristina have cherished for a number of
years, with attempts being made to give it a pseudo-
legal basis. In our View, the real issue is completely
different. It is crucial to understand that in and of itself,
this undertaking represents a breach of international
law, since it runs counter to resolution 1244 (1999),
which provided for the presence of a force in the
province exclusively on the basis of a Council mandate,
specifically the Kosovo Force, which is currently
largely composed of NATO member State contingents.
Moreover, such a step would be extremely reckless in
terms of security both in the region and in Europe as
a whole.

The presence in the Balkans of a new force
component in the form of the so-called Kosovo armed
forces would fly in the face of the Florence agreement,
annexed to the Dayton agreement, designed to support
regional stability with support from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. It would seem that
a military body not under the control of the country's
authorities has appeared on the territory of one of the
signatories to the Florence agreement, Serbia.

The importance of countering the proliferation
of Islamic radicalism and terrorism in Kosovo is still
extremely urgent. We are troubled by the fact that the
province is being used for the recruitment of fighters
involved in hostilities in the Middle East on the side of
the extremists and for staging terrorist attacks in other
countries. With respect to the rule of law and safety
and security in Kosovo, we would draw the Council's
attention to the guilty verdict recently handed down
by a court in Skopje against a large group of Kosovars
who participated in a terrorist raid in Kumanovo on
9 and 10 May 2015. We would note that questions about
who in Kosovo was behind the attack and why the
international presence was unable to prevent it, not to
mention that questions about eliminating such hotbeds
of tension remain unresolved.

We were dismayed by the claims from Pristina
relating to the allegedly politicized verdict of the
Macedonian court and assertions about monetary
assistance to the families of the condemned. Given the
upcoming rout of the Islamic State and the predicted
return to the Balkans of a number of a foreign terrorist
fighters to the region, including Kosovars, such an
approach to counter-terrorism issues is, at the very
least, ambiguous.

Despite the multitude of domestic issues it
faces, Kosovo portrays itself as an active player on
the national stage and is striving to join the greatest
possible number of multilateral structures. We continue
to consider that illegitimate, since from an international
legal standpoint the province's representation at that
level is through UNMIK. Moreover, the modalities
for Kosovo's participation in regional bodies, through
the so-called Kosovo asterisk formula, based on a
footnote, have been established within the framework
of the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. The European
Union, as a conscientious mediator, must ensure
compliance with these resolutions in negotiations held
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 64/298, of
September 2010.

The artificial nature of Kosovan statehood is
reflected in the Republika Srpska's recent reference to
the sovereignty of the Republic of Kosovo. This attests
to a gradual acknowledgement of the damaging nature
of decisions, often taken under external pressure, on
the acknowledgement of the independence of territorial
bodies that unilaterally secede in breach ofinternational
law. Under these conditions, we deem untimely and
counterproductive talks about a reduction of staffing
and budgetary parameters of UNMIK. The situation in
the province is such that no decision of this sort can be
taken, and, incidentally, it must be acknowledged that
in essence the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
has been virtually non-existent.

For this reason, we must reject requirements to draw
down or close the Mission. Instead we must commence
constructive work in cooperation with this important
United Nations operation. Let us recall that the Mission
has been working with minimal resources. However,
it plays a key role in Kosovo affairs and remains a
critical tool for international oversight. It deals with
issues relating to the normalization of the situation, in
line with resolution 1244 (1999), which remains fully
in force.

In the light of the aforementioned, we see no
justification for any revision of the practice of quarterly
reports to the Security Council about the situation in
Kosovo. As has been reflected in today's discussion,
this issue continues to require close international
oversight and attention.

