Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom for his briefing and
for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Allow me also to
acknowledge Afghanistan's Permanent Representative,
Zahir Tanin, for his continued important contribution.

Australia is pleased that the Security Council has
today unanimously renewed the UNAMA mandate
for a further 12 months. As Afghanistan assumes full
leadership of its affairs, the United Nations continues
to play a central role in leading international efforts to
support Afghanistan during its transformation decade,
including through good offices, donor coordination,
and human rights and humanitarian assistance.

The year 2015 marks the beginning of a new
chapter in Afghanistan's history. For the first time
since the days of the Taliban, the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) are responsible for securing
the country. The new Government of national unity, led
by President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah, has
committed itself to an ambitious programme of reform.

The 13-year-long International Security Assistance
Force mission to Afghanistan concluded at the end
of 2014 and has now been followed by the NATO-
led non-combat Resolute Support Mission, which is
training, advising and assisting the ANSF. Australia is
contributing military personnel to Resolute Support and
$100 million per year until 2017 to sustaining ANSF.

Civilian casualties remain a serious concern and
have regrettably continued to increase over the past
year. We thank UNAMA for its continued reporting on
civilian casualties in Afghanistan.

The national unity Government has achieved a great
deal in its first months, but Afghanistan's economy
and Government finances remain a serious concern.
We welcome President Ghani's ambitious vision for
reform, set out in his paper entitled "Realizing Self-
reliance". We also applaud the Afghan Government's
steps to combat corruption, especially steps to review
the fraud charges against the Kabul Bank and recent
steps to reduce leakages in Afghanistan's Customs and
Revenue Departments. We look forward to receiving
the action plan for implementing the priorities outlined
in the Afghan Government's "Realizing Self-reliance"

paper.

Electoral reform, drawing on the lessons from the
two rounds ofvoting in 2014, will help build a democracy
that Afghans can be proud of. Australia welcomed
President Ghani's commitment to electoral reform,
including the planned Electoral Reform Commission.
We urge the Afghan Government to take that forward as
a priority. We also encourage the Afghan Government
to appoint a full and inclusive Cabinet when the Afghan
Parliament sits again after the winter recess.

Afghanistan has made enormous progress in key
areas of human development since 2001. The challenge
for the Afghan Government now will be to protect the
gains of the past 14 years, particularly when it comes
to basic-service delivery, such as health and education.

Australia also looks to the Afghan Government
to continue to work to improve the place of women
and girls in Afghan society. We have welcomed the
renewed commitment by the Afghan Government to
the rights of women and girls, including steps towards
implementing the national action plan on women, peace
and security. Full implementation of the action plan and
the Elimination of Violence against Women law must
be priorities.

Achieving a political settlement with the Taliban
will set the foundation for a lasting peace for Afghanistan
and its region. The Government of national unity has
made impressive progress in strengthening regional
relationships, which is a critical first step towards
creating the preconditions for formal talks between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban. The prospects
for peace are promising. We urge Afghanistan and its
partners to continue to approach reconciliation with a
sense of purpose and pragmatism.

