Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing on the ballistic-
missile test carried out yesterday by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in violation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

For the past three months, we have been hopeful
that the tension on the Korean peninsula would be
subsiding. We were thus optimistic, as Ukraine was,
that there were reasonable grounds for a diplomatic way
out of the very dangerous stalemate we were witnessing.
This latest test, which we strongly condemn, has no
doubt undermined the hope that we had. But we are still
convinced that it is not proper to abandon this hope,
because in our View there is no other acceptable option.
The solution is political, as Under-Secretary-General
Feltman said earlier.

Many of those who spoke before me said that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea must change its
approach and behaviour. We agree. But in the meantime,
everything should be done to avoid any miscalculation,
and every effort should be made to de-escalate tensions.
It may not be easy, but we believe that all those who are
in a position to make a difference should spare no effort,
in a united fashion, to find a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution to the situation in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations Charter.

In the meantime, ensuring the full implementation
of the various Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea remains critical.
We appreciate the briefing by Ambassador Cardi
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) and
commend the able manner in which he is guiding its
work. We welcome the outreach activities he conducted
during the reporting period. In our View, such activities
significantly contribute to the full and effective
implementation of the relevant Council resolutions.
The increase in the number of national implementation
reports received following the outreach activities
undertaken by the Chair is testimony to this fact.

I wish to conclude by once again reaffirming
Ethiopia's commitment to continue to fulfil its
obligations in this regard, and we look forward to us
finding a political approach that would lay the basis
for resolving the crisis that we are facing on the
Korean peninsula.

