Mr. Walbridge (New Zealand): At the outset, I too
would like to thank Mr. Ladsous and the four Police
Commissioners for their informative and valuable
briefings this morning. New Zealand would like to
take this opportunity to acknowledge their respective
efforts and those of the personnel under their command
in working towards achieving the mandates set by
the Security Council. New Zealand looks forward to
the implementation of the recommendations and the
external review of the functions, structure and capacity
of the United Nations Police Division, especially with
regard to United Nations policing having a more field-
focused and results-oriented outlook, which should
have a direct and positive impact on the good work that
the Police Commissioners are all undertaking.

New Zealand recognizes the importance of
capacity-building and creating enduring stability and
security, and the need to recruit suitably qualified and
experienced police personnel who are able to effectively
contribute to building up the core functions of the
national police of the country where they are employed.
That includes recruiting more suitably qualified
female personnel, given the unique contribution that
women make to conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding, a point that was made by Mr. Ladsous,
Commissioner Makotose and several other Council
members around the table today. Capacity-building
should also be linked to the need to implement
sequenced and prioritized mandates that would allow
for recruitment focus to switch from protection to
development as the mission evolves.

The release last week of the Executive Summary on
the independent special investigation into the violence
that occurred in Juba between 8 and 11 July highlighted
a number of shortcomings within the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS),
and we consider it timely that the UNMISS Police
Commissioner briefed the Security Council today on
crisis management. We thank him for his insight and
update. We consider it worth highlighting that it is
not just about having plans in place, but also ensuring
that those plans are understood by all, rehearsed and
regularly reviewed so that, in the case of UNMISS, all
are working towards the goal of effectively achieving
the protection-of-civilians mandate. Having said
that, New Zealand acknowledges that protection-of-
civilians mandates, by their very nature, are complex
and require vigorous and robust application of the rules
of engagement.

We welcome the opportunity for interaction at
today's meeting, and in responding to the questions
already posed by my colleagues around the table, we
would be grateful for any further specific comments
from the Police Commissioners about how the Security
Council and the United Nations Police Division can
better help them and their personnel in achieving their
mandates on the ground.

In particular, for UNMISS Police Commissioner
Munyambo, New Zealand would be interested in
hearing what measures have been put in place to
address the issues raised in the special investigation,
particularly as they relate to the actions, or inaction, of
the formed police units and their protection-of-civilians
role. In that respect, we welcomed his comments today
concerning the importance of ensuring that all police
officers not only have the relevant skill sets but also the
right mindset to respond quickly and appropriately to
respond to a crisis situation.

