The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Botswana.

Botswana's support for the peace process in the
Middle East is far beyond doubt. We have never wavered
in this support, even when at times in the past, as is the
case at present, clouds of doubt and indecision on the part
of the negotiating partners have descended so heavily on
the process, threatening to dampen and overwhelm it. We
are realistic enough to know that no process of
negotiation can be completely bereft of pain, immune to
obstacles and absolutely impervious to the vicissitudes of
politics, occasional rancour and other conditions of human
frailty. This is particularly true when such negotiations
involve such deep-rooted and complex problems as those
that are the subject of negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian people.

Of cardinal importance to my country is that the
parties continue to have the patience and fortitude of a
Nelson Mandela and the sacrificial submission of men
and women of peace. Nothing must deflect them from the
path they have chosen. The parties' fidelity to the historic
Washington Declaration of Principles will be tested,
sometimes beyond the capacity of the parties to endure,
but there should be no let-up. In the Declaration may lie
the hope for peace and reconciliation between the people
of Israel and their Palestinian neighbours. What has been
gained so far in the peace process is not to be disparaged,
for not long ago it could have been considered almost
utterly impossible to achieve.

It is our hope, therefore, that whatever action we
take in this debate on an issue so deadly sensitive will in
no way whatsoever accentuate the complications or
difficulties presently encountered by the negotiations.
Everything we do must help the negotiations. My
delegation exhorts the parties to stay the course and try as
much as is humanly possible to remain true to their noble
mission.

For Botswana, I declare to the parties that they will
never find us wanting in our determination to continue to
cheer them up as they struggle to find peace for their
war-weary people.

 

I resume my function as President of the Council.

