Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
The Palestinian-Israeli negotiations currently under
way sharpen our collective hope that in a few months'
time a comprehensive peace will finally settle on a land
most holy to the three monotheistic faiths - a peace
founded on the basis of two States, Palestine and Israel,
existing side-by-side in peace and security. As the two
sides work their way towards that noble objective, with
the extraordinary support provided by the United States
Secretary of State, traditional spoilers will attempt,
with increasing fever and intensity, to bring ruin upon
us, in other words, to spoil that.

We urge the Israeli Government in particular to do
everything in its power to prevent the extreme parts
of the right-wing settler movement from provoking
a crisis on Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We know the Israeli
Government has the power to do so - it cannot say
it does not - and the stakes are so high. Should it
fail to take preventive measures, not only could those
groups torpedo the talks, but they could also unleash a
colossal, overwhelming global crisis on a scale hitherto
not witnessed this century.

Similarly, we demand that the Israeli Government
desist from demarcating, expropriating, confiscating,
approving, announcing and undertaking any sort of
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in East Jerusalem. Not only could those
actions ultimately undermine the talks but, obviously,
they remain illegal under international law.

As we have noted previously in the Council, the
position of the International Court of Justice on that
last point is unambiguous, as explained in paragraph
78 of its 2004 advisory opinion (see A/ES-lO/273).
Indeed, in earlier paragraphs of the opinion, in relation
to East Jerusalem the Court also recalled specifically
the position of the Security Council. The Court noted
that resolution 298 (1971) states in paragraph 75 that

"all legislative and administrative actions taken by
Israel to change the status of the City of Jerusalem,
including expropriation of land and properties,
transfer of populations and legislation aimed at the
incorporation of the occupied section, are totally
invalid and cannot change that status".

(spoke in Arabic)

Having just referred to the fundamental question
in the region, I must now turn to the bloodier and more
grave tragedy in the world, that is, the Syrian crisis. I
would like to reiterate what was stated by His Majesty
King Abdullah II in his statement before the General
Assembly recently (see A/68/PV.5), that the escalation
of violence in Syria and the use of religious and ethnic
divisions may undermine a regional renaissance and
endanger international security. In order to confront
such issues, we have to move quickly to initiate the
process of political transition in Syria, to put a stop to
violence and bloodshed, to end the refugee crisis and its
disastrous effects on the neighbouring or host States, to
eliminate chemical weapons, to try the perpetrators of
war crimes and crimes against humanity and to preserve
the territorial integrity of Syria. There is no need to
re-emphasize the grave economic crisis experienced by
Jordan, which has worsened as a result of acting as host
to huge numbers of Syrian refugees.

My delegation gave a detailed account of the
Jordanian crisis, providing statistics and numbers, in a
closed meeting of the Council to discuss the situation
on 30 April (see S/PV.6957). We submitted a request
to the Council to visit Jordan in order for members to
have first-hand experience of the real situation and
its disastrous impact on our national security and
economy. We were most hopeful that the international
positive consequences of such a visit might have helped
to alleviate the suffering andeconomic misery caused
by the crisis. Unfortunately, after the passage of 176
days, Jordan has still not received any response to that
official request, nor has it received any compensation
for the grave material losses it has sustained.

I would like to emphasize that the Jordanian people
are not in a position to bear this grave burden without
sufficient international assistance.

