South Africa is honoured to preside over today's meeting of the Security Council on security sector governance and reform, which we believe deserves the sustained attention of the Council, as it remains an integral aspect of conflict-prevention and peacebuilding efforts. We thank all the briefers for their insightful briefings, which will most certainly enrich the debate today, and all of Council members present for their participation. Key to South A frica's approach to sustaining peace is a holistic perspective on conflict prevention, post-conflict reconstruction and development, and sustaining peace. We took a conscious decision to advance the imperative of peacebuilding in post-conflict societies by convening today's debate focused on security sector governance and reform. This is an area that requires periodic reflection by the Security Council in the light of evolving security threats, including those that are asymmetric in nature, as well as measures that post-conflict countries ought to take to make progress and safeguard their hard-won gains. At the heart of security sector reform (SSR) is the expectation that a State should be able to provide security and protection efficiently and effectively to its population by developing policies, structures and security-sector institutional capacity. This is a necessity for conflict prevention and sustaining peace in post- conflict societies in the long term. South Africa recognizes that security sector governance and reform are different for every State. Our national experience with SSR proved an essential component in entrenching democracy and sustaining peace in our diverse country. Political will and buy-in from all segments of society and a strong and transformative legislative policy framework contributed to the success of South Africa's experience with SSR. It is within this context that South Africa continues to share its experiences with other States Members of the United Nations, in particular, African countries affected by and those emerging from conflict. Through our bilateral engagements, South Africa has provided policy, institutional and structural advice on reforming the sector and training security- sector personnel in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho and South Sudan, inter alia. As a troop- and police-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, South Africa has participated in the implementation of SSR mandates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Darfur region of the Sudan. South Africa, in its capacity as a Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, together with Slovakia, convenes regular engagements in coordination with various stakeholders to share experiences, lessons learned and insights in the area of sustaining peace and SSR with a view to strengthening the work of the United Nations in this area. We note, however, that it has been a while since the Security Council has considered SSR within the realm of its competence. Since the adoption of the only Security Council resolution on the issue (resolution 2151 (2014)), which was initiated by Nigeria over six years ago, South Africa recognizes that meaningful progress has been made in advancing security sector governance and reform. However, gaps and challenges in implementation remain, presenting an opportunity for the Council and States Members of the United Nations to improve in this important area for peacebuilding. Notable progress has been made in the prioritization of security sector governance and reform in various peace processes. As a result, United Nations peacekeeping missions and special political missions are increasingly being mandated to provide assistance in SSR in close cooperation with the host State. This is vital to enabling missions to discharge their mandates and hand security responsibilities over to the host State in a timely manner. We also observe that peace agreements facilitated by the United Nations and other regional organizations - such as those for the Central African Republic, Colombia, Haiti, Mali, South Sudan and the Sudan - are increasingly including provisions on security sector governance and reform. However, more remains to be done to ensure their effective and timely implementation. Consistent engagement and oversight by relevant stakeholders, including the Security Council, is required to address this lacuna. We must continue to address such challenges that persist in security sector governance and reform as the misalignment between national priorities and the support provided by bilateral and international partners and poor coordination among partners and national authorities, with the result that SSR initiatives are ineffective. It is the prerogative of each State to determine its SSR approach, strategies and policies from inception through implementation to evaluation. In this regard, international community support must be well coordinated and conform to national priorities of the host State. This will be consistent with the principles of full national ownership and leadership that must guide effective security sector governance and reform. A one-size-fits-all approach must be avoided, given the nuanced differences, needs and complexities of societies. In order to ensure that SSR is able to support long-term sustainable peace, it must be informed by and address the needs of the entire population with the active involvement of women and youth as well as civil society actors. Indeed, the full, equal and meaningful participation of women through the development of gender- responsive SSR strategies remains a vital component of any peacebuilding effort. It will contribute not only to ensuring inclusive processes but the consolidation of mutual trust between the population and security institutions. The success of any peacebuilding effort requires adequate resources. There is therefore a need to ensure predictable and sustainable funding for activities related to SSR efforts. There are opportunities that we should explore to further advance security sector governance and reform. The United Nations should strengthen its collaboration with such regional organizations as the African Union, which has an established SSR architecture reinforced primarily by its security sector reform policy, its Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development and its steering committee on SSR. We also see merit in the Security Council placing security sector reform on its agenda as one of its key priorities and paying sustained attention to such reform in order to prevent countries from relapsing into conflict. That will also allow the Security Council to take stock and keep track of developments in this area of work and, in a holistic manner, draw from lessons learned in order to improve on the action that it takes in addressing security sector governance and reform in specific country situations. Against that background, South Africa has undertaken to update resolution 2151 (2014) to make it more relevant, taking into account the evolving situation regarding the realization of the objectives of security sector governance and reform. Let me conclude by reaffirming South Africa's commitment to supporting security sector governance and reform initiatives. South Africa, as a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform with Slovakia, remains committed to achieving progress in this vital area of work, which is essential in fulfilling the Security Council's mandate of maintaining international peace and security and in realizing a prosperous and peaceful world for all.
