Belgium would like to thank the Indonesian presidency for its considerable efforts to reach a consensus on the important topic of prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters. This is an essential theme in our joint fight against terrorism. That is why Belgium voted in favour of draft resolution S/2020/852, on prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, alongside our European partners, which are members of the Security Council: the E-3 - Germany, France and the United Kingdom - and Estonia. However, Belgium believes that it is a very long and perfectible text and wishes to express its deep concerns on two major issues. First, Belgium recognizes the need to develop specific rehabilitation, reintegration programmes for men and women suspected of being linked to a terrorist organization. At the same time, Belgium is convinced that it is of utmost importance to differentiate the status of children from those of adults and to primarily treat them as victims of terrorism, who - if suspected of crimes - should go through a distinct process from adult foreign terrorist fighters. The obligation to treat children differently and protect them when they are part of a criminal justice process derives from international law, and more particularly the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, as well as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules). Belgium regrets that the draft resolution voted on today does not sufficiently reflect this aspect. Secondly, Belgium considers that the fight against terrorism can be successful only if it is part of a comprehensive, whole-of-society approach and complies with human rights and international humanitarian law, which constitute a leading principle in all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Belgium would therefore strongly encourage the involvement of and coordination among all United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities. In addition, Belgium wants to recognize the importance of the work of such entities as UNICEF and UN-Women, and more particularly the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, including in the fields of counter-terrorism and combating violent extremism. Belgium underlines the importance of the role of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in assessing the implementation of the Council's resolutions on counter-terrorism from a human rights angle in order to help the Council develop a clearer, more balanced United Nations architecture in the counter-terrorism domain.
