Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): The people and
Government of Pakistan are as concerned about the
humanitarian crisis in the Darfur region of Sudan as the
other members of the international community. All the
people suffering as a result of this crisis are part of the
Islamic ummah. Pakistan fully shares the humanitarian
objectives of the resolution just adopted.

Pakistan has welcomed the involvement of the
Secretary-General in facilitating a solution to the crisis.
The joint communique of 3 July provides the best
framework to address all aspects of the issue:
humanitarian, security and political. It clearly
delineates the commitments of the Sudanese
Government and of the United Nations. It provides for
an independent and objective mechanism to evaluate
the progress in implementation.

The cooperation of the Government of the Sudan
is critical in realizing our shared objectives of saving
lives, addressing the humanitarian crisis and stabilizing
peace in the Darfur region. Our collective endeavours
must encourage that cooperation, not complicate it. The
Secretary-General has consistently emphasized the
need for what he calls a coldly realistic approach. We
agree with his advice.

Pakistan has consistently counselled a calibrated
response. While we appreciate the improvements in the
draft, made in response to Pakistan's specific
proposals, the final text still lacks the delicate balance
that this complex situation requires. We regret that,
despite efforts, no compromise was possible. We were
therefore not able to support the resolution.

Pakistan did not believe that the threat or
imposition of sanctions against the Government of the
Sudan was advisable under this resolution. Pakistan
trusts that the Security Council will not need to take
such further measures. In this context, we look forward
to the report of the Secretary-General to be issued in 30
days, which we hope will confirm that the Government
of the Sudan and the rebel groups are complying with
their commitments and obligations. We also did not
believe that the adoption of the entire resolution under
Chapter VII was necessary.

The resolution went through several revisions. As
compared to the initial draft, it now emphasizes the
need for urgent and adequate humanitarian assistance
to the displaced people and refugees from Darfur. The
serious shortfalls which have been identified in such
humanitarian assistance must be quickly met. The
unrestricted access provided by the Government of the
Sudan should be availed of to provide such assistance.
The resolution calls for the immediate disarmament of
the Janjaweed and a halt to all attacks against the
people of the region. Not only the Government of the
Sudan, but also the rebel groups must halt their attacks.

Pakistan welcomes the emphasis on the need for a
political solution to the Darfur crisis. We hope and
expect that the Sudan Liberation Army and the Justice
and Equality Movement will adopt a realistic and
constructive position in the dialogue which is to be
undertaken under the auspices of African Union
mediation. All parties must negotiate in good faith in
that dialogue.

In that context, Pakistan welcomes the fact that,
at our insistence, the text now includes the principle of
preserving the territorial integrity of the Sudan. A
solution to the Darfur crisis must be found within the
unity and territorial integrity of the Sudan. Pakistan
also welcomes the recognition of the leading role of the
African Union in addressing the Darfur crisis and calls
for international support for that role.

The Government of the Sudan has declared that it
is fulfilling its commitments under the joint
communique concluded with the United Nations. The
need for visible action to that end - especially the
speedy disarmament of the Janjaweed - is apparent.
This has been conveyed to President Bashir by
President Musharraf in two telephonic conversations.
President Musharraf has been approached by
international leaders to assist in resolving this
humanitarian situation. He has made strenuous efforts
in the past few days and asked that some time and
space be given for solutions to be found that would
avert the need for or threat of sanctions, so that forward
movement can take place on the three central elements
of the crisis: humanitarian access, political dialogue
and security. He has been invited to visit the Sudan in
that context.

However, while we understand the intentions of
the sponsors regarding the objectives, with respect to
the means adopted and the fact that no space or time
has been given we would not like to prejudice the
position accorded to our President and country as a
neutral party trying to assist all sides in the search for
an effective solution.

