Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for
his valuable briefing. We take this opportunity to offer
him and his team our full support in undertaking their
difficult task. We hope that his efforts will be crowned
by future success in order to move forward the Syrian
political process.

We are meeting today for the first time this year
to discuss the Syrian political issue. It is an issue that,
regrettably, has seen no progress for a number of years.
The State of Kuwait has always stressed that the failure
of the Security Council to implement its resolutions
would prolong and compound conflicts and weaken
its credibility. We have seen that happen in Yemen,
Palestine and a number of other countries, as we see
today in Syria. I am referring in particular to resolution
2254 (2015), which was adopted by consensus in
December 2015. The resolution established a road map
to reach a just political settlement in Syria, facilitated
by the United Nations while led and owned by Syria.
That would contribute to restoring stability in this dear
Arab country, but unfortunately is not translated yet on
the ground.

The Special Envoy therefore has many challenges
ahead, but we are confident that he is determined
to ensure the implementation of the resolution. His
latest visit and meetings with the parties concerned
represent a good beginning, which reflects his resolve
to revitalize the political process in Syria. The Security
Council and the international community must renew

their commitment to the political process, as outlined
in resolution 2254 (2015), which established the steps of
a political transition process consisting of many stages,
including the drafting of a constitution and the holding
of free and fair elections, in accordance with the
Constitution and under the supervision of the United
Nations. Those elections would be held according to
the highest international norms of transparency and
accountability, inclusive of all Syrians, including those
living abroad. Resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) are the major
terms of reference regarding the Syrian crisis, and the
Security Council must ensure their implementation.

It has been more than a year since the Sochi
agreement was concluded regarding the establishment
of a constitutional committee. To date, the work of
such a committee has yet to begin. In that context, we
reiterate our call for the committee to be balanced,
credible and inclusive of all sectors of Syrian society
and to devise its working methods. On 15 February,
the Special Envoy expressed in Geneva his hope that
the Committee would meet as soon as possible, also
in Geneva, to begin serious discussions, which would
signal the long-awaited launch of the political process.

Furthermore, like any other political process,
confidence-building measures among the parties are
important; the most prominent of these is the release
of detainees and prisoners. We take note of the recent
release of a number of prisoners, but we need to see
more progress on this issue. We urge the parties to the
conflict to cooperate with the Special Envoy and his
Office to achieve further progress in that regard.

The Syrian crisis has seen many violations of
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Those responsible must be held
accountable. Lasting and comprehensive peace cannot
be achieved without justice or with impunity for those
who committed crimes against humanity. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.

Perhaps among the most important repercussions of

the Syrian crisis is the fate ofthe refugees and internally
displaced persons. Their hope must be restored for a
safe and normal life, reunification with their families,
and a safe, voluntary and dignified return to their
homes, in accordance with international norms and
without regard for political considerations or the narrow
interests of any party on the crisis. Measures, such as
arbitrary detentions and the expropriation of property,
are in contradiction of all efforts aimed at ensuring the
safe return for refugees. We also reject any attempt to
undertake demographic changes in Syria.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Syria. A solution can be attained
through international concerted efforts to implement
resolution 2254 (2015). The upcoming Brussels
conference will be an important opportunity to mobilize
resources in order to alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of the Syrian people and to renew the international
community's commitment to resolving the conflict
peacefully, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
so that the brotherly Syrian people can achieve their
legitimate aspirations and realize a peaceful settlement,
agreed to by all parties, while preserving the unity,
independence and sovereignty of Syria.

