Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): On the
last day of her 10-year term at the head of the World
Food Programme (WFP), I should like to express to
Catherine Bertini, with respect and admiration, the
thanks and congratulations of France. During those 10
years, she has truly transformed WFP. Through her
dynamism, personal commitment, generosity and
managerial skills, she has made that institution one of
the premier agencies in the United Nations family with
a considerable and increasing volume of resources.
That attests to the strength of her conviction and also,
unfortunately, to the needs of the most vulnerable
populations.
I am struck to see that today, WFP manages an
annual volume of nearly $2 billion, which is more than
all the funds of the other United Nations programmes,
and approaches those of the World Bank. That is a way
to measure her success as well as the needs of the
populations about which she came to talk with us.
During her 10-year term, she has given WFP a face and
a voice - a voice that has been listened to and
respected.

She wished to spend some of the last day of her
tenure with the Security Council. Some might ask why.
Hearing her list the countries where WFP carries out its
work, we understand why. That list, unfortunately,
comprises precisely those countries whose names
appear on the Council's agenda. In that respect, I
should like to commend the success of WFP
programmes in Afghanistan, in North Korea, which she
mentioned, and in the Horn of Africa, where she went
several times on missions that have left a lasting
impression in the minds of millions and millions of
people throughout the world.

She mentioned the issue of staff security. I should
like her to know that that is a matter of great
importance to the Council. It is a subject that we have
dealt with and will continue to address with
determination, in liaison with the Secretary-General.
France gives unreserved and, I might add, considerable
support to WFP programmes. It supports its two
priorities: emergency assistance, which she mentioned,
and assistance for reconstruction and, more broadly, for
development.

I should like to express our unreserved support
for the strategic outline that she mentioned earlier. I
believe she wanted WFP to strengthen its expertise
through a kind of "hunger map" as a way to define
food security strategies and better to address a concern
we share - crisis prevention. In that respect, we give
her our full support.

Finally, I should like to commend something far
too rare in our United Nations family: her ability to
work in harmony with all the other institutions of the
family, as well as with local Governments. Brava,
Ms. Bertini.

