Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to join you, Mr. President, and others in
expressing our condolences to the families of all those
killed in recent terrorist attacks. I would also like to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the Secretary-
General of Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy for
their briefings.

I often say that the Security Council needs to
hear more frequently from those working on the front
lines of the challenges we face, and it is a sign of the
sophistication of the threats that the Internet is now
one such front line. I therefore very much welcome
Mr. Crown to the Council and pay tribute to the
work he does at the Global Network Initiative and all
that it does to protect freedom of expression on the
Internet. Microsoft is a brand that we all recognize and
understand. The same could be said of our brand - the
United Nations - or the Security Council.

But, sadly, the same can also be said of Da'esh.
For the disaffected, the disillusioned, the vulnerable,
the Da'esh brand has a terrifying ability to connect and
persuade. It offers a false promise of empowerment,
identity and belonging. It claims to offer a new society,
mandated through a perverse interpretation of one of
the world's great religions. It even has its own logo. The
black flag is globally recognized, revered by the few,
feared by the many.

The engine of that brand is, without doubt, the
Internet. It has been hijacked to spread the hateful
messages of Da'esh in ways previously thought
impossible, to reach audiences previously though
inaccessible. That is true in my country as much as it is
in any of those represented around this table. Take the
case of Adnan Mahmoud, a student from Lancashire
in the North of England. Through the Internet, he was
drawn to the Da'esh brand. He searched for graphic
videos of Da'esh's brutality and shared them in an effort
to indoctrinate others. The Internet was just the start.
Spurred on by what he had seen online, he sought it out
in the real world and flew to Turkey in September 2014
to join Da'esh in Syria.

How can we respond to that horrific abuse of the
Internet? How can we show vulnerable people like
Mr. Mahmoud that there is an alternative to the Da'esh
brand? Our approach in response must involve the whole
of our societies. It is not just about Governments; it is
about harnessing the expertise of local communities,
civil society and religious leaders. Those groups
bring credibility and authenticity that can counter the
narratives of groups such as Da'esh. A whole-of-society
approach also means partnerships with technology
companies, to help us reclaim the space that Da'esh
has occupied on social media. To be clear, that does not
mean coercing or restricting tech companies; we cannot
beat Da'esh by censoring or restricting access to social
media. Instead, we must work together to amplify
voices that can persuade, inform and, ultimately,
undermine the Da'esh brand. To defeat a network, we
need a network.

The United Nations has a vital role to play in that
effort. Our Organization has a unique ability to convene
interested parties, as you have done today, Mr. President.
It has a unique ability to share emerging evidence of
what works, so that we can all learn from one another's
best practices. And it is the ability of the United
Nations to build longer-term resilience at sub-national,
national and regional levels that will ensure that there
is a long-term solution to the threat posed by violent
extremism. That is why the United Kingdom firmly
endorses the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674). We call on all
States to implement its vital recommendations, many of
which bolster the objectives outlined in the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/6) we have adopted today.

Outside the United Nations, the United Kingdom
will also play its part. As co-Chair of the Global
Coalition to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant in its efforts to tackle Da'esh propaganda, we
have invested more than $14 million in the Coalition's
communications cell in London. We are not alone. Our
partners from Bahrain, Canada, Denmark, Germany
and the Netherlands are helping to run the cell, and we
are working extremely closely with the United States
and the United Arab Emirates. Together, we are taking
the propaganda fight to Da'esh, and we know that it is
working. Da'esh's media output from Syria has dropped
considerably. For every Da'esh supporter on Twitter,
we now see at least six Twitter handles speaking out
against them. We would like everyone to join them in
tweeting about #DefeatingDaesh.

In conclusion, of course we cannot be complacent.
The challenges ahead still remain significant, but there
are some grounds for optimism. To illustrate that, Iwould
like to return to the story of Mr. Mahmoud. Thanks to
the love of his family, he never made it to Syria. His
brother used Twitter to reach Adnan just before he
crossed the border. He persuaded him to return to the
United Kingdom to take responsibility for his actions.
His brother was that vital, credible voice needed to
show Adnan that there was an alternative - and, of
course, it was the Internet that enabled him to do so. As
we continue our fight against Da'esh, I hope that we can
all keep that story firmly in our minds.

