Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I speak on behalf of
the co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in
Syria - Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.

For the past few months, we have endeavoured
to draw the attention of the Security Council to the
plight of the civilians in Idlib. We have taken an
incremental approach to this matter, first, convening
closed consultations, followed by formal meetings,
and then attempts to issue press elements and a press
statement. However, it has proven impossible to reach
agreement in this Chamber on any public statement of
the Security Council.

All the while, the violence in Idlib has continued
over the past month and has led to the displacement
of more than half a million civilians and the deaths of
more than 1,000 people. It has caused extensive damage
to medical and educational facilities, as well as other
civilian infrastructure. We remain convinced that the
Council cannot stay silent and must act.

That is why we have submitted this humanitarian
draft resolution (8/2019/756) calling for a cessation
of hostilities. We negotiated the draft resolution in a
transparent manner and with a thorough process, and
engaged extensively and in good faith with all Council
members on the text. The outcome of those negotiations
is now before the Council.

We believe that the draft resolution is balanced,
has a purely humanitarian focus and also acknowledges
that counter-terrorism measures must be taken in
accordance with international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution. The Council has a clear responsibility
to fulfil today. Many lives are at stake. We need to do
all we can to live up to our obligations.

We are well aware that there is another initiative on
the table, which was neither shared nor discussed with
the majority of Council members in advance. No round
of negotiations took place. That contravenes what is
agreed in paragraphs 80 and 81 ofnote 507 (S/2017/507),
which clearly states that the drafting of resolutions
should be carried out in an inclusive manner, enabling
the participation of all Council members, ensuring that
penholders can engage in timely consultations with
Council members, and allowing for the convening of at
least one round of informal consultations. Furthermore,
the focus of this other project is different and provides
an insufficient reflection of the complexity of the
situation we are faced with in Idlib today. On behalf of
the co-penholders, we urge all Council members to vote
in favour of our draft humanitarian resolution.

