Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing earlier today.

It has already been half a year since the Council,
on 28 February, first took up the issue of Russia's
aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.7123). The
aggression started through the military occupation
and annexation of a huge part of Ukrainian sovereign
territory, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. It then
proceeded by means of a hybrid war against Ukraine,
the sponsorship of terrorism and the supply of arms and
mercenaries to illegal armed groups in the eastern region
of our State, along with intensive artillery shelling from
Russian territory and regular violations of Ukrainian
air space by military aircraft, helicopters and drones.
That was followed by the downing of a civilian aircraft
by terrorist groups using Russian-supplied surface-to-
air missile systems, killing all 298 passengers and crew
on board. The next red line was the illegal crossing of
the Ukrainian State border by a so-called humanitarian
convoy dispatched by Russia without authorization
from the Ukrainian Government and in violation of
international agreements and procedures.

Russia has been putting its troops along the border
with Ukraine. As of now, over 45,000 military, about
160 tanks, 1,360 armoured battle vehicles, 390 artillery
systems, 150 Grad missile systems, 192 military
aircraft and 137 helicopters are deployed in the vicinity
of our border.

The situation has dramatically changed now.
Russia has launched a direct military invasion of
Ukraine with its regular armed forces. Last night, two
military convoys crossed the Ukrainian State border
and advanced towards the village of Telmanove with
seven tanks, one BMP-2 and a truck with soldiers,
and towards the town of Novoazovsk with five T-64
tanks, two BMP-2s, and two trucks with soldiers. After
shelling the positions of Ukrainian forces from Russian
territory and from the district of Sjedove, Russian
troops seized Novoazovsk.

More than 10,000 civilians have been held hostage
by the Russian invaders. Psychological pressure is
exerted against the citizens of Ukraine, and threats of
psychological violence are heard.

On 24 August, two battalion tactical groups from
the armed forces of the Russian Federation, reinforced
by tank units, crossed the State border of Ukraine near
the village of Berestovo in the Donetsk region, just
500 metres from the Ukrainian State border. It was
reported that none of the Russian military equipment
bore license plates and that some combat vehicles were
painted with two white stripes to resemble Ukrainian
combat vehicles in a counter-terrorism operation zone.
The troops wore Russian army combat uniforms without
insignia. Currently, the combat units I have mentioned
occupy several villages in the Donetsk region,
including Pobeda, Glinka, Amvrosiivka, Telmanovo,
Granitny and Sontseve, and are constructing fortified
strongholds.

On 25 August, Ukrainian armed forces detained
10 soldiers near the town of Dzerkalne from the 33lst
Regiment of the 98th Sibirsk Airborne Division of
the armed forces of the Russian Federation. All their
identities were revealed. We have serious doubts that
fully armed Russian troops could have lost their way
and penetrated 25 kilometres into Ukraine. We possess
abundant evidence, including video footage of troops
and Russian soldiers now in detention, as well as Russian
armoured vehicles and tanks with full documentation
proving that they belong to the Russian military. That
leaves absolutely no doubt about the direct Russian
invasion of Ukraine.

We consider the Russian Federation fully
responsible for the daily death toll among Ukrainian
civilians and military as well as for the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in Donbas. We demand
that the Russian Federation immediately withdraw all
its troops from Ukrainian territory to save the lives
of both Ukrainians and Russians. We demand that the
Russian Federation establish effective control over
the Ukrainian-Russian border under the control of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which would exclude illegal supplies of military
equipment, weapons and militants to Ukraine. We
demand that Russia release all Ukrainians who are
being held hostage. We have been open to all diplomatic
initiatives and have participated in every negotiation
format. The President of Ukraine has offered his peace
plan for descalation, which Russia has deliberately
undermined.

While demonstrating his full readiness for peace
negotiations with Russia during their meeting in
Minsk, President Poroshenko made it clear that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well
as the European aspirations of the Ukrainian people,
were not negotiable. In view of the open Russian
military aggression, Ukraine reserves its right to act in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which empowers every State Member of the
United Nations with the inherent right of individual
or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs
against a Member of the United Nations. We call
upon the international community to provide effective
assistance to Ukraine to resist Russian aggression.

Will the international community keep witnessing
silently as the fundamental principles of international
law are being grossly disrespected? The entire
democratic world is being challenged, and the actual
world order is being destroyed. Or will it finally speak
with one voice and act? The choice is not tactical;
the choice is fundamental. The world is challenged
by a military nuclear might that is ignoring universal
principles and craves absolute power. How many more
red lines have to be crossed before this challenge is
addressed?

We call upon the Council to fulfil its Charter
responsibility and take urgent measures to stop the
aggression against a sovereign State Member of the
United Nations.

