Mr. Touray (Gambia): The events in Rwanda in
1994 represented one of the most heinous offences against
international humanitarian law. The international
community responded very fittingly by establishing in the
same year the International Tribunal for Rwanda to
prosecute the persons responsible for those crimes. The
establishment of this Tribunal was and is still a very
necessary measure for the process of national
reconciliation and the restoration of peace in Rwanda.
In paragraph 7 of resolution 955 (1994) of
November 1994 establishing the Tribunal, the Council
expressly reserved the possibility of increasing the
number of Trial Chambers should this become necessary.

The International Tribunal for Rwanda has been
functioning very smoothly since its inception. We now
understand that 20 people are presently detained in the
Detention Facility in Arusha, 14 of whom are already
indicted and awaiting trial. In a letter from the President
of the Tribunal dated 1 August 1997, contained in
document S/1997/812 addressed to the Secretary-General,
the President of the Tribunal, Judge Kama, indicated that,
with the Tribunal's present capacity, it would take at least
88 months to try the incarcerated suspects. Under the
present arrangement, this would mean that some of the
incarcerated persons would wait longer than duly
necessary for their trials. This would be a violation of the
fundamental right of the accused to be tried without
undue delay.

 

The Government of the Gambia values the
fundamental rights of the person, particularly the rights of
the accused. We believe in the old adage and time-
honoured maxim that justice delayed is justice denied. The
earlier the accused are tried, the better. We believe that the
Rwandan people have no lesser expectations. In their
journey towards national reconciliation, it is imperative that
these trials be concluded with reasonable dispatch so that
the people of Rwanda can put their grief behind them as
they move forward.

We believe that it is now necessary to increase the
number of judges and to constitute a third Trial Chamber.
In this way, the accused can be tried without delay and the
expectations of the Rwandan people will not be
disappointed. There is some economic wisdom in this
move, as it would eventually result in financial saving.

My delegation would, for these reasons, support the
establishment of a third Trial Chamber in Rwanda, as
provided for in the draft resolution. Under the draft
resolution, the election of the judges for the third Trial
Chamber would be conducted together with the election of
the judges for the existing two Chambers. While the
mandate of the newly elected judges for the third Trial
Chamber would commence soon after their election, the
mandate of the judges elected for the existing Chambers
would commence on the expiry of the mandate of the
present holders of those offices.

This arrangement would ensure that we have only one
election and also an early establishment of the third Trial
Chamber. We believe that this is a very convenient and
reasonable arrangement.

As the present draft resolution is to ensure no delay in
the trial of the accused persons, we believe that an
improvement in the working methods of the Tribunal would
be helpful. We therefore urge the members of the Tribunal
to reconsider their working methods with a view to
enhancing them.

We believe that this draft resolution and the letter are
very timely. The Gambia is pleased to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution and will vote in its favour.

