My delegation would like to thank the Dominican Republic, President of the Security Council for the month of April 2020, for having organized this open video- teleconference of the Security Council on the very important question of youth, peace and security, as this year we are celebrating the fifth anniversary of this agenda. We would also like to acknowledge Jordan's commitment to this issue and its initiative of bringing it first to the Security Council through resolution 2250 (2015), adopted in 2015. The United Nations has long recognized the potential of young people in contributing to the development of the societies in which they live and their crucial role in forging an inclusive vision of a shared future, a sine qua non for sustainable peace. That was acknowledged in the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples, adopted in 1965, and the International Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace, observed in 1985, thereby laying the foundations for a global reflection on youth issues. A decade later, Member States adopted the World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond, which offers practical guidelines for national action and international support to improve the situation of young people around the world through 15 interlinked and mutually reinforcing youth priority areas. The objective was to strengthen the international commitment to young people by directing the international community's response to the challenges faced by youth. That international commitment was further underpinned by the adoption in 2015 by the Security Council of the landmark resolution 2250 (2015), complemented by resolution 2419 (2018), which both recognized the positive role of young people in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in advancing peaceful, just and inclusive societies. Today there are more than 1.8 billion young people in the world - 18 per cent of the global population. They are the largest generation of young people the world has ever known. Therefore, they constitute decisive agents of change and have tremendous potential for sustainable development. Leaving them behind would have an impact on the world's peace and security. As the world evolves, so do the issues that affect young people. The only effective long-term solution to overcome the challenges that young people confront is to build more inclusive, participatory and egalitarian societies and to maximize and harness the potential, commitment and resilience of young people. Establishing an ongoing dialogue with young people will enable them to strengthen their defences against hate speech, radicalization and extremism as well as criminal activities. It will also ensure their full integration into society. The Kingdom of Morocco has over the years undertaken many commitments to youth, including the following. The Constitution devotes a special place to young people, dedicating both articles 33 and 170 to their empowerment, calling on the public authorities to take all measures to generalize their participation in the socioeconomic, cultural and political development of the Kingdom. A Consultative Council of Youth and of Associative Action was also instituted by the Constitution to this effect. Young people have a quota in the membership of the Parliament of Morocco. Following a consultative process including all stakeholders, the Government launched the National Integrated Youth Strategy 2015-2030. The National Initiative for Human Development, which has launched its third phase - 2019-2023 - aims to support the well-being of the whole population, in particular the youth. The establishment in Rabat of the Union of Young African Parliamentarians is promoting exchanges and cooperation among young people from the African continent. These actions and other initiatives clearly demonstrate the particular attention placed by His Majesty King Mohammed VI on youth, whom he has always regarded as the country's true wealth, and put them at the centre of the new development model. Today Morocco's youth are stepping up to the plate with efforts to assist those most affected by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, demonstrating continued leadership and solidarity in supporting their fellow Moroccans as well as foreign nationals, distributing food packages and sanitation kits. Moreover, young Moroccan entrepreneurs and innovators have initiated various contributions to the crisis response. These include making artificial ventilation machines, automatic thermometers, automatic gates for sanitary disinfection and sterilization, protective clothing and masks, manufacturing drones used for air disinfection, virus detection and awareness-raising, and creating electronic platforms for remote learning to support the Government's efforts to promote online education. They also fight fake news about COVID-19 through their widespread use of social media. To conclude, I would like to emphasize that the key to consolidating peace and achieving social cohesion and sustainable and inclusive development is to invest in young people. This commits us to seek and promote new possibilities for the effective, structured and sustainable participation of youth in all aspects of political, economic, social and cultural life, in particular in the context of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I would like to end with a quote from Graga Machel: "Preventing the conflicts of tomorrow means changing the mindset of youth today."
