Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to the Chairs of the
three subsidiary bodies for their joint statement, as well
as for the individual briefings relating to their
mandates.

This is the second briefing of this nature to the
Council this year on the important subject of
anti-terrorism and we acknowledge that some progress
has been made, including with respect to coordinating
the work of the Security Council's various subsidiary
structures dealing with terrorism.

Notwithstanding this limited progress, South
Africa is firmly of the view that the time has come to
include all States Members of the United Nations in the
decision-making processes with regard to United
Nations anti-terror activities. The democratization of
the United Nations anti-terror agenda can be achieved
by shifting the focus from the Security Council to the
General Assembly and to the international treaty
regimes and relevant technical bodies. The recently
adopted United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is an important step in that direction.
We would like to highlight the following points
that relate to the work of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee. The practical utility of the
Consolidated List continues to be undermined by the
omission of the names of a large number of alleged
Al-Qaida and Taliban suspects who are currently
detained in numerous parts of the world, by the
continued inclusion of deceased persons on the List
and by inadequate identifiers and procedures for
conducting reviews of the List pursuant to paragraph
6 (i) of the Committee's Guidelines.

The procedures of the Committee, which do not
adequately provide for due process, are inherently
flawed and are aimed at maintaining the status quo.
The Monitoring Team has made useful
recommendations on improving Committee procedures
in its seventh report that warrant serious consideration.
We also welcome the independent study that is being
conducted on this topic.

It is encouraging that the Committee continues to
apply the exemptions under resolution 1452 (2002), as
they are aimed at alleviating unnecessary hardship for
listed individuals and their dependents. The Committee
should examine obstacles to reaching speedy decisions
on exemptions, particularly the use of holds. We look
forward to receiving a report on this matter at the next
briefing to the Council.

Turning to the 1540 Committee, it is
South Africa's firm conviction that weapons of mass
destruction do not guarantee security, but rather detract
from it. South Africa continues to believe that the
objectives of disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing processes that require continuous
and irreversible progress on both fronts.

At the outset, it is important to bear in mind that
resolution 1540 (2004) is a limited and selective
instrument that addresses only potential proliferation
by non-State actors. It cannot be cited when
considering potential horizontal proliferation by State
actors, nor does it address vertical proliferation or
disarmament.

Whilst no State is immune to the threat of
weapons of mass destruction in terrorist hands and no
State has room for complacency insofar as
implementing their 1540 obligations are concerned, the
1540 Committee ought to acknowledge the differing
proliferation risk profiles of States. There is currently
too much emphasis on the countries that pose the least

proliferation threat and on achieving universal and
standardized reporting applicable both to countries that
have nuclear weapons and nuclear, chemical and
biological capabilities, on the one hand, and to those
that do not, on the other.

South Africa welcomes the fact that the Security
Council, through resolution 1540 (2004), underscored
the centrality of the existing multilateral arrangements
dealing with the scourge of weapons of mass
destruction. These multilateral arrangements are
premised on maintaining an appropriate balance
between disarmament and non-proliferation, while
upholding the rights of all States to the peaceful use of
relevant technologies under appropriate safeguards.
Ensuring access to technologies for peaceful purposes,
as an important catalyst to development, should
therefore also remain a central consideration of the
Committee as it assists States in meeting their
non-proliferation obligations.

While it would not be appropriate for the 1540
Committee to engage in pure development activities,
South Africa believes that the "negative" objective of
preventing proliferation is intricately linked to the
"positive" objective of explaining how to pursue
proliferation-secure trade, financing and technology
transfers. Both of these aspects are relevant to the
Committee's mandate and should receive balanced
attention in the Committee's outreach, best practice
development, assistance and other activities.

South Africa further welcomes the fact that the
Committee's current outreach planning takes
cognizance of the fact that there are important
synergies between the objectives of resolution 1540
(2004) and other important developmental and security
objectives of States. It is our firm belief that efforts to
concretely address these issues would go a long way to
countering the "buy in" deficit amongst Member States
regarding the work of the Committee.

I now turn to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and would like to congratulate Ambassador
Mike Smith on his appointment as the new Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED). The recent adoption of
50 Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs) by
the CTC is a noteworthy achievement. The PIAs are
potentially useful tools insofar as they may help States
to identify gaps in implementation and assistance
needs. The PIAs are not an end in themselves, nor are
they tools for assessing compliance. Rather, they are a
means of facilitating dialogue between the CTC, CTED
and the general membership.

It is important that the forthcoming survey of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) should
provide a comprehensive assessment of anti-terror
activities around the world, including respect for
international law and human rights whilst countering
terrorism. This survey should be critical and balanced,
acknowledging the divergent threats, realities and
priorities in different parts of the world, and it should
refrain from targeting specific Member States or
regions.

CTED's mandate expires at the end of 2007, and
the General Assembly is reviewing the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. This is an opportunity for the collective
United Nations membership to give serious
consideration to the way forward. We need to ask
ourselves whether the Security Council's approach has
yielded practical results and buy-in from the wider
United Nations membership and whether subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council are the most appropriate
bodies within the United Nations system to be handling
technical assistance issues.

