Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I am honoured to
speak on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN).

The important role of reconciliation processes in
the maintenance of regional and international peace
and security can be gleaned from ASEAN's experience.
ASEAN plays an important role in post-conflict
situations. The Bali Concord II, signed in 2003,
mandated ASEAN to find innovative ways to increase
its security and establish modalities for the ASEAN
Political-Security Community, including in the area of
post-conflict peacebuilding.

Established in 2011, the ASEAN Institute for
Peace and Reconciliation was envisioned to be
ASEAN's knowledge hub and centre of excellence in
building capacity on conflict resolution and further
strengthening peace-oriented values towards harmony,
peace, security and stability in the region and beyond.
The ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation has
successfully held a number of activities, namely, its
Regional Youth Conference on Peace and Tolerance in
2018, in Jakarta, and a training series on mainstreaming
peace and reconciliation in ASEAN this year, in
Manila. We welcome the collaboration between the
ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation and the
United Nations in convening a workshop on ASEAN
perspectives in conflict management and conflict
resolution in the region, held in Jakarta, and look
forward to more active initiatives at the Institute in the
future. It also successfully launched its first research
study, entitled Lessons Learned from a Process of
ConflictResolution between the Philippine Government
and the Moro National Liberation Front, as Mediated
by Indonesia and a seminar on the outcome of the
project in September.

At the tenth ASEAN-United Nations summit,
held in Bangkok three weeks ago, ASEAN and the
United Nations reaffirmed their commitment to
cooperate through the ASEAN Institute for Peace and
Reconciliation. The United Nations and Viet Nam will
co-host the seventh ASEAN-United Nations workshop
and fifth regional dialogue on political-security
cooperation and focused collaboration in support of
the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation in
December in Hanoi.

We also welcome the establishment of the ASEAN
Women for Peace Registry last year as a groundbreaking
initiative to take stock of ASEAN women experts in the
field of peace and reconciliation, who may be called

upon at times when specific expertise is required. This
year, underscoring women's participation, we also
welcome various initiatives and actions on women's
roles in peace processes, namely, the convening of the
ASEAN Women Interfaith Dialogue, held in Jakarta on
the theme "Promoting understanding for an inclusive
and peaceful society"; the first regional symposium
on implementing the women and peace and security
agenda in ASEAN, which was held in Phnom Penh; and
a regional training on women and peace and security,
held in Jakarta.

ASEAN stands ready, in partnership with key
stakeholders and in solidarity with the community
of nations, to identify more innovative and inclusive
approaches to promote the United Nations peacebuilding
and sustaining peace agenda, including reconciliation
processes in the region.

I would now like to offer some insights in my
national capacity.

For the Philippines, reconciliation is a long-term
process that seeks innovative ways to address, integrate
and embrace the painful past and the shared future as
a means of dealing with the present. The foundation of
that approach is an environment that builds, nurtures
and embraces a culture of peace. For the Philippine
Government, components of that environment include
catch-up socioeconomic and development programmes
in conflict-affected areas, conflict-sensitivity
programmes and the continuous development of a peace
constituency that is supportive of the peace process.
Another integral component is the "people's peace
tables" initiatives for the youth, indigenous peoples,
women, sultanates and other stakeholders, which serve
as a platform for conversations on peace and conflict
issues. Finally, the Government's early recovery and
rehabilitation programmes are implemented using a
peace lens to ensure that the work delivers on physical
reconstruction and rebuilds the torn social fabric of the
community of nations.

To conclude, our experience with the signing of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law for the Autonomous Region
in Muslim Mindanao, in July last year, taught us that
the signing of a peace agreement is just the beginning
of the peace process. The process is completed when
every Filipino owns the peace and the peace dividends
of progress, security and a comfortable life are enjoyed
by all.

