Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his introduction of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/447) and
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Also, we would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kenya. Additionally, we would like to
thank the Ambassador of Somalia for his statement.

Bosnia and Herzegovina condemns in the
strongest possible terms the recent suicide attacks in
Somalia and expresses its condolences to the families
of the victims. We also once again express condolences
to the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that took place in Kampala on 11 July. Those tragic
incidents once again remind us of the fragility of the
security situation in Somalia, which remains a major
concern for us, and of its impact on the wider region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its full support
for the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Djibouti peace process as the only legitimate and
viable framework to achieve lasting peace in Somalia.
As the end of the transitional period approaches, it is
important that all relevant actors in the country show
their full commitment to the implementation of the key
transitional tasks through unity. This challenge requires
the serious dedication of Somali institutions to ensure
that the transitional period is not prolonged in order to
justify the confidence and efforts of the Somali people
and the international community.

We call upon the TFG to intensify its efforts,
especially in the areas of political reconciliation and
outreach, the constitution-making process, security,
stability and the delivery of services, and urge all
groups outside the Djibouti peace process to join it as
soon as possible. The international community has
shown its devotion to assisting the Somali people in
achieving lasting peace and stability in the country. We
express our hope that these efforts will continue, and
we reiterate our call on the international community
and partners of Somalia to provide urgent military and
financial support, as well as other necessary resources
to the TF G.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains concerned
regarding the humanitarian situation in the country.
Despite the fact that the rainy season has improved the
food security situation, a large number of people still
depend on food assistance. Unfortunately, the delivery
of this needed assistance is still obstructed in some
parts of the country.

We are deeply concerned over the recruitment
and use of children in the conflict, as well as over the
reports of cases of killed or injured children. We
therefore urge all parties to the conflict to fully comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law
in order to protect the civilian population.

Once more, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and particularly the troops
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the situation in
Somalia, despite the extremely difficult environment in
which AMISOM. troops are operating. We therefore
call upon the international community to continue its
support to AMISOM. with the aim of fully
implementing its mandate. We welcome the efforts of
the Joint Security Committee to coordinate the security
sector development initiatives. Strengthening the
processes of the Somali police force and national
security forces is vital to peace and stability in
Somalia. Therefore, we would like to emphasize that
the cooperation and assistance of the international
community to the TFG are crucial, and that every
resource should be used to generate the political and
security conditions necessary for the successful
completion of the transition by 2011.

Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM. and its efforts to provide a logistical support
package to AMISOM, as well as the hard work of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the United
Nations country team and all other humanitarian
organizations.

Finally, on the issue of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, we share the view that the piracy poses a
threat to peace and security, not just in the region but
globally. We reiterate our position that a long-term
solution will come only through fighting the root
causes of piracy by restoring stability and the rule of
law in Somalia.

