Mr. Assaf (Lebanon): I would like to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing and for his
efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking and
transnational crime. As noted in the World
Development Report 201], drugs connect some of the
wealthiest and poorest areas of the world in a web of
violence, showing that many solutions to violence
require a global perspective. Indeed, transnational
crime and drug trafficking continue to expand an
extensive shadow economy that has a global reach.

Illicit drug trafficking fuels the traffic in arms and
money laundering, generates violence and corruption
and in many cases is used to finance acts of terrorism.
Criminal groups undermine State authority and the rule
of law and put additional strains on States with porous
borders and weak institutions. Transnational organized
crime and drug trafficking thereby produce a negative
impact on peace, security and development.

At the institutional level, the fight against the
scourge of drugs requires universal adherence to the
relevant international conventions and their effective
implementation. It also demands sustained political
will and firm commitment by Member States. As noted
in the UNODC annual report, Governments and aid
agencies must invest more in development, productive
employment and increased security. Building resilient
institutions and strengthening the rule of law are also
essential, hence the need to strengthen capacity-
building mechanisms for rule of law assistance within
the United Nations.

However crucial national strategies are, the
transnational nature of the threat means that no country
can face it alone. An effective response requires a
comprehensive international approach based on shared
responsibility. Special attention should be devoted to
efficient modes of collaboration between countries of
origin, transit and destination. States need to build
capacity, share information, provide mutual legal
assistance, build consensus on cross-border issues and
carry out joint operations aimed at disrupting
trafficking routes. We share the views of Mr. Fedotov
concerning the need to strengthen international
collaboration and build regional capacity in that regard.

National, regional and international actions and
strategies to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime must be well coordinated and comprehensive so
as to ensure that the actions taken to reduce supply and
demand are mutually reinforcing.

We commend the role played by the UNODC, the
International Narcotics Control Board and other
relevant United Nations organs and agencies in the
fight against drug trafficking and transnational crime
and encourage them to strengthen their cooperation
with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations.

Finally, we believe that the establishment by the
UNODC and the Department of Political Affairs of the
United Nations system task force on transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking is a good first
step towards mainstreaming responses to drug
trafficking and organized crime into the broader United
Nations security and development agenda. We look
forward to the inclusion of these issues in conflict-
prevention strategies, conflict analyses and
peacebuilding support.

