Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by warmly welcoming Lakhdar Brahimi in our
midst. It is difficult to steal him away from the Afghan
people, who have adopted him. He has been an
honorary citizen since the Loya Jirga met and conferred
that honour on him. However, we need to hear him on a
regular basis, because each time he comes to see us we
hear the expression of a genuine strategy based on a
clear-sighted and uncompromising analysis of what is
really happening.

In spite of Lakhdar Brahimi's lucid and clear
briefing, I think we must hail a true Afghan miracle.
All the Bonn deadlines have been met. Mr. Brahimi has
just confirmed that for us. The Loya Jirga has been a
great success. It took place in a calm atmosphere and
kept its promises. Admittedly, the size of the
Government has not been reduced: five Vice-
Presidents, three national security advisors and 30
ministers. However, the ethnic make-up of the
Government has been somewhat balanced. Now, more
than 50 per cent are Pashtuns and slightly less than 30
per cent are Tajiks. Above all, for the first time in 23
years, Afghans were able to be consulted. Afghanistan
was able to come very close to a genuine democratic
experience. How much ground has been covered in just
six months!

But that does not mean that the job is done - far
from it. The country is still vulnerable to a reversal.
When we recall the fratricidal conflicts that took place
from 1992 to 1996, it was the mujahidin who destroyed
Kabul and not foreign invaders.

There are a number of disquieting signs, as
Mr. Brahimi has noted. His great concern is security.
The situation remains fragile, especially in the north.
The confrontations between the Jumbesh and Jamiat
factions prolong a climate of impunity. A woman
working for a non-governmental organization was
attacked. A United Nations staff member was
murdered. Even in Kabul, Vice-President Haji Qadir
was assassinated with impunity, in broad daylight and
in the centre of the city. That act should not go
unpunished, like the assassination in February of the
Minister for Aviation, Abdul Rahman or the attempted
assassination of Marshal Fahim in February. The
Transitional Administration must do everything
possible to identify those responsible.

How can we prevent Afghanistan from being
once again haunted by its old demons? Afghans must
benefit from the dividends of peace. The effects of the
regime change must be tangible. That presents
President Karzai with the tremendous challenge of
moving from the emergency phase - the first six
months of Government - to the reconstruction phase.
And he must do it quickly, before the positive effect of
Bonn and the Loya Jirga dissipates.

Nothing will be possible without the assistance of
the international community. It is essential that the
money continue to arrive. The Tokyo Conference
launched a mini-Marshall plan for Afghanistan, with
the promised commitment of $1.8 billion. How much
of that amount has actually been disbursed? France, for
its part, respects its commitments: 70 million euros in
2002. A large part of that has already been spent on
specific projects such as the rehabilitation of two
French Afghan secondary schools in Kabul.

But it is not enough for the money to arrive; it
must also be spent on tangible projects. At the moment
we are perhaps seeing too much institutional
cooperation and too few quick-impact projects with
tangible results, such as the building of roads and the
reconstruction of housing.
The Transitional Authority also will have to
increase its own resources, in particular customs-
related resources, at the expense of the warlords. Its
budget deficit for 2002, although it results partly from
the massive return of refugees, is not acceptable -
$257 million of a total of $460 million.

Another question demands our attention: the
combat against drugs. The Transitional Authority has
embarked on a courageous campaign to eradicate
cultivation. It must be pursued resolutely, and it will
require assistance in terms of replacement crops. But
trafficking must also be addressed, and that is why
France, in spring 2003, will be holding an international
conference on drug routes originating from
Afghanistan.

Economic assistance is essential, but will be
futile without support for security. Lakhdar Brahimi
has told us that humanitarian agencies and non-
governmental organizations have abandoned certain
projects for security reasons.

What, then, must be done? Should the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) be
deployed beyond Kabul and the surrounding area? The
question has been debated at great length this morning.
It is true that ISAF is doing a remarkable job. During
the six months of the British command, the crime rate
in Kabul dropped by 70 per cent. Turkey is determined
to pursue the outstanding efforts deployed by Britain,
and France will continue to lend its full support to
ISAF.

One could discuss interminably the merits and
drawbacks of extending ISAF's deployment to the
provinces, but this is probably an academic issue.
Indeed, no country represented in this Chamber is, as
far as we know, prepared to dispatch the thousands of
troops that would be necessary to the provinces of
Afghanistan.

So what can be done to rein in the warlords? First
of all, we must lend full support to President Karzai's
courageous efforts to secure the return of the customs
duties and to bring the principal warlords to Kabul. We
must make full use of all of the instruments available
to the international community, such as, first of all,
economic conditionality, as set out in resolution 1401
(2002). This, of course, presupposes good coordination
among donors, under the auspices of Lakhdar Brahimi.
The other instrument, of course, is the military clout of
the coalition.

Above and beyond this, the priority remains the
creation of unified, multi-ethnic security and police
forces. As Ambassador Negroponte has noted, France
is closely involved in this effort, alongside the United
States. Sixty of our trainers are now training the 2nd
battalion of the Afghan national army. In September,
the 4th battalion will have its turn.

There are many difficulties involved, however, in
particular in the area of recruitment and remuneration.
As the Ambassador of the United States has noted,
there is an urgent need for the Afghan authorities to
undertake an operational plan to establish security and
police forces. We need to get specific details from the
Government as to number of personnel, composition,
cost, timetable and set-up. Moreover, a genuine
programme for the disarmament and reintegration of
the militias is vital, as Lakhdar Brahimi has noted.

France, in cooperation with all of its partners,
will early next week be preparing a draft presidential
statement to reiterate these main messages and, above
all, to lend the Council's full support to the tremendous
task that has been undertaken with such success by
Lakhdar Brahimi and President Karzai.

