Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We are fully confident that
your well-known diplomatic experience and skills will
lead to the successful conduct of the Council's
business.

I also thank Ambassador Jean-Marc de la
Sabliere, the Permanent Representative of France, for
his successful guidance of the Council's work as its
President last month.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Alvaro
de Soto on his assumption of his new post and to thank
him for his briefing this morning.

The Security Council is meeting today to
consider Israel's settlement policy and construction of
the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which represents a threat to regional
security and to international peace and security. It also
prevents the establishment of a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.

It has been a year since the adoption of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
which established the illegality of the building of the
Israeli separation wall on Palestinian territory and
declared the settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories to be equally illegal. It has also
been a year since the General Assembly, at its tenth
emergency special session, adopted resolution ES-
10/15, which also reaffirmed the illegal character of the
construction of the wall and its contravention of
international law and international humanitarian and
human rights law. It called on Israel to stop its
violations of those laws, to cease forthwith its
construction of the wall and to dismantle the completed
sections.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to defy the
will of the international community, in grave violation
of international law and human rights. It continues to
build the wall and to occupy the Palestinian territories,
exploiting the diversion of the Security Council's
attention to the withdrawal from Gaza. The footprint of
the wall is designed to ensure the confiscation of even
more of the occupied Palestinian territories in which to
build Israeli settlements.

Israel's claim that the separation wall is a
temporary measure taken in response to security and
military requirements is misleading and unacceptable.
Its goal in constructing the wall and in building the
settlements is to take over Palestinian territories, put an
end to geographical contiguity between the Palestinian
people, and prevent the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State.

The core of the Arab-Israeli conflict is Israel's
continued occupation of Arab territories. All of Israel's
attempts to impose by force a solution to the conflict
have failed. The only way to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East is
through negotiations between the parties concerned on
the basis of internationally binding resolutions.

The Security Council must today shoulder its
responsibility to compel Israel to stop the construction
of the wall, put and end to its settlement policy and sit
at the negotiating table with the Palestinian Authority,
with the goal of beginning implementation of the road
map and the withdrawal from Gaza, as a first step
towards complete withdrawal from all occupied
Palestinian territories and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of 4
June 1967.

Withdrawal from Gaza cannot be an end in itself,
as the Israeli side claims it to be. It is but a first step
towards implementing all of the obligations of both
parties to end the conflict and establishing a just and
comprehensive peace in the region.

Because of its attempts to shirk its
responsibilities under the Quartet agreement, Israel is
fully responsible for the deterioration in the relations
between Palestinians and Israelis.

In that regard, an editorial that appeared in The
New York Times of 15 July 2005 stated the following:

"Sadly, most of the blame for the current
paralysis lies with Mr. Sharon Mr. Sharon
appears to have become so fixated on making the
withdrawal appear palatable to the Israeli right
that he has lost sight of the larger strategic
calculus of building peace. He wants to advertise
the pull-back as a unilateral Israeli measure,
undertaken for Israel's own reasons, and not as
part of any larger negotiated deal with the
Palestinians".

We hope that peace will prevail in the Middle
East, and, in accordance with the resolution adopted at
the Beirut summit, we call on the Security Council to
revitalize the peace process on the basis of
internationally binding resolutions, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab peace initiative.
