Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): As the Bulgarian delegation
is taking the floor for the first time this month, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your competent and
skilful guidance of the activities of the Security Council.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Germany on behalf of the
European Union and fully shares the views contained
therein. I shall therefore confine myself to some specific
aspects of the issue under consideration. Those are related
to the commitment and the efforts of Bulgaria as a
neighbouring country in the search for long-term solutions
to the conflicts and to the open issues in the western part
of the region.

Our policy is aimed at achieving concrete results in
strengthening the regional peace and security in South-
Eastern Europe. An example of these efforts is the
signing of the Bulgarian-Macedonian joint declaration
three days ago by the Prime Ministers of the two
countries. It settled the controversial issues and opened
new prospects for mutually beneficial bilateral
cooperation. It also made a valuable contribution to the
stability and security of the region and set an example of
how difficult problems can be overcome in a spirit of
understanding and in the interests of the countries
involved.

The peacekeeping activities of the United Nations
are at a crucial juncture. The failure of some
peacekeeping operations has tarnished the image of the
Organization and has undermined its credibility in
fulfilling one of the main purposes laid down in the
Charter: the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is therefore of utmost importance to preserve
and, where necessary, to enlarge the mandates of those
existing peacekeeping operations that have proved to be
successful. Hence, it is regrettable that the Council was
unable to adopt today a decision on the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force (UNPREDEP) for another period of six months.

Bulgaria is deeply concerned at the real possibility
of a further escalation of the conflict in Kosovo if the
current peace process fails to provide for a lasting
solution. Such a situation requires that available means
should be effectively used. One of them is UNPREDEP,
which continues to be a stabilizing factor of prevention
and deterrence.

Bulgaria strongly believes that the extension of the
mandate of UNPREDEP is in the interest of peace and
security in the area and that the present situation on the
ground makes the withdrawal of the Force very untimely
and inappropriate.

