Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting for the
second time today to take up Israeli practices in occupied
lands and blatant aggression against Lebanon. The
extensive military aggression that Israel has been waging
against Lebanon for the past five days marks a serious
escalation of tension and poses a threat to peace and
stability in the region. This aggression has targeted
population centres in many towns and villages - all the
way up to the capital, Beirut. It has caused the death of
dozens; it has wounded hundreds of innocent Lebanese
civilians; more than half a million Lebanese have been
forcibly displaced from their towns and villages.
Furthermore, infrastructure has been destroyed; vital
installations, including shelters and power stations, have
been destroyed. In this context, I must mention that the
world will never forget the frightful sight transmitted on
television stations everywhere of four children killed by
Israeli aircraft while in an ambulance on their way to
hospital.

Lebanon accepted the peace process that began at
the Madrid conference on the basis of the conference goal
of establishing a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East based on the implementation of resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and on the
principle of land for peace. Lebanon has also cooperated
with the efforts of the two co-sponsors of the peace
process towards that end. However, Lebanese efforts have
come up against Israeli intransigence, and Israel's
continuing challenge of international legitimacy through
its failure to implement resolution 425 (1978) and through
waging a new, wide-ranging act of aggression.

 

In the face of these grave developments proceeding
from the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and of the
tragic situation of the Lebanese people today, the Security
Council is duty-bound not to ignore the failure to respect
and to implement its own resolutions. That would
jeopardize its role and its duty to maintain international
peace and security.

Israel's security has been the pretext invoked by Israel
for waging all its wars of aggression, even though it must
realize that genuine security cannot be achieved through
continuing occupation. Genuine security will be achieved
through the withdrawal from all occupied territories and
through the implementation of a just and comprehensive
peace; it will not be achieved through further aggression
against the Lebanese people.

It must be remembered that occupation is not
conducive to peace and security. Force has not succeeded
in the past, and will not succeed now or in the future and
it will not achieve security for Israel.

The extremism exemplified in the aggression against
Lebanon proves that Israel is attempting to back away from
the peace process, from the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace.
The members of the Security Council, particularly its
permanent members, must therefore shoulder their
responsibilities immediately in order to put an end to Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and to avoid a further grave
deterioration of the situation in the region.

We should also like to affirm here that the aggression
against Lebanon, the continued Israeli intransigence, would
not have taken place or continued had the Security Council
been firm in adopting the measures necessary to make
Israel implement resolution 425 (1978), which
unambiguously called upon Israel to withdraw immediately
and unconditionally from all Lebanese territories. It is
unacceptable for legitimate international resolutions,
particularly those of the Security Council, to be held
hostage to Israel's aggressive instincts or expansionist
ambitions.

Syria has made the strategic choice of working
towards the achievement of a just and comprehensive
peace. We have made a serious contribution to overcoming
all the political and practical obstacles Israel has put in the
way of the peace process. Syria continues to believe that
the establishment of genuine peace in the region is
incompatible with continuing occupation and acts of
aggression. Peace can be achieved through a commitment
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions -
and if Israel erects no further obstacles to the peace
process.

We call upon the Security Council to intervene
immediately to put an end to Israeli aggression against
Lebanon and to make Israel heed the will of the
international community, to guarantee Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity.

In the face of continuing Israeli aggression against
Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic condemns the flagrant
Israeli aggression against our brother, Lebanon. We
support the demand of the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon that Israeli aggression be condemned, that Israel
be forced immediately to cease its aggression, and that
the Council remain seized of this grave situation.

