Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her seventeenth
report of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

As indicated in paragraph 2 of that resolution, the
Government of the Sudan and all the parties involved in
the situation in Darfur must cooperate to assist the Court
and its Prosecutor in their activities. On that binding
legal basis, investigations and judicial proceedings are
carried out in relation to investigations of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide, pursuant to the
scope of the Statute of the Court.

We take note of the report that provides an update
of the activities and judicial proceedings under way,
particularly those related to preparations for the trials
of Banda and Jerbo and the investigations on alleged
attacks against civilian populations in Darfur. We
welcome the investigative work carried out by the
Office of the Prosecutor pursuant to the request made
through resolution 1593 (2005). That work contributes
to putting an end to impunity in the region of Darfur.

We are concerned at the description in the report of
multiple alleged aerial attacks by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which are targeting the civilian population.
Likewise, indications that during recent periods the
tensions between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
rebel movements have been accentuated, which, taken
together with the inter-community confrontations in
disputes relating to natural resources, has contributed
to rising tensions in the already troubled region,
leading to an increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, which in the first five months of this
year alone reached the level of 300,000 people. Equally
alarming are the references to alleged incidents related
to sexual and gender-based violence, crimes and attacks
against human rights officials, humanitarian staff and
Blue Helmets. All such events deserve documented
investigations so that they do not go unpunished. All
of the alleged acts strike at the integrity of the civilian
population and thus affects the fragile peace process
based on the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

As a State party to the International Criminal
Court and consistent with our foreign policy of
adhering to international human rights instruments,
Guatemala cannot ignore the suffering caused to the
population, the serious acts committed in Darfur or the
investigations that recount actions that would result in
acts of genocide and crimes against humanity.

We reiterate our concern with regard to the
failure to execute the arrest warrants against the four
individuals identified in the report of the Prosecutor.
Although we understand the extraordinary sensitivity
that carrying out investigations and cooperating with
the ICC in this area represents for the Government of
the Sudan, the lack of cooperation by that Government
is unacceptable. We are also concerned that some States
parties to the Court are not cooperating in the execution
of requests for arrest, particularly when some of the
individuals subject to those requests have travelled to
their country.

Once again, we call upon the Government of
the Sudan and the parties involved in the judicial
investigations to cooperate effectively and responsibly
with the Court in order to guarantee accountability with
regard to crimes committed and judicial proceedings
under way.

We consider it fundamental to strengthen cooperation
between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court, including through the effective follow-
up of referrals from the Security Council. We hope that
the existing cooperation can be renewed, combining the
legal and political aspects of maintaining international
peace and security. That does not signify, of course,
any politicization of the Court or that the Council is
becoming more legalistic, but a combination of both
bodies, each acting in its respective fields of action
in order to meet their shared mandate to prevent
conflict and fight impunity. The effectiveness of
that cooperation, referred to in the Rome Statute
and reflected in resolution 1593 (2005), requires the
political will of all States.

The challenges in the current context are enormous,
particularly given the deterioration in the security
situation in Darfur, made worse by the prevailing
impunity. The international community must show
itself united when there is a lack of cooperation with
the Court. We welcome and conceptually support
the guidelines relating to non-essential contacts and
hope that they will be systematically applied, because
not only is that notion consistent with the agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court but it is also appropriate.

Finally, we reiterate to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court the support and
cooperation of Guatemala as she strives to fulfil her
mandate.
