Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. Let me start by saying that the United States is committed to forthright and transparent discussions in the Security Council. We have no interest in allowing the Council to be used for propaganda. Regardless what the representative of Russia has said, the additional briefer who was proposed, at the last minute, for this afternoon's discussion was removed from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in 2002, more than a decade before the issue of chemical weapons in Syria came before the Council. We would be happy to work with our colleagues on a sincere and deliberate basis to find appropriate briefers to most effectively inform the Security Council in future discussions on this matter. Several weeks ago, at Russia's request, the Security Council's monthly consultations on Syrian chemical weapons took place in an open format. Russia then sponsored an Arria Formula meeting on 28 September, ostensibly on implementing resolution 2118 (2013) and upholding the authority of the OPCW. As I said at the time, that meeting was nothing more than a stunt - a desperate but failed attempt by Russia to further spread disinformation, attack the professional work of the OPCW and distract from an ongoing effort by responsible nations to hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for its use of chemical weapons. We will always welcome the opportunity to discuss this matter openly and expose to the world Russia's blatant attempts to shield the Al-Assad regime from accountability for its chemical weapon attacks. The sad reality is that, despite international condemnation, the regime has continued to use chemical weapons against the Syrian people and has refused to cooperate with the OPCW. The Russian-sponsored Arria Formula meeting last week was particularly appalling. Russia's aim was simple: to sow confusion and distract from the truth. However, Russia failed in its baldly deceitful attempt to discredit the OPCW, a well-respected organization with a long history of impartiality, transparency and professionalism. The Al-Assad regime's use of chemical weapons is well documented and confirmed by the former OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism and, most recently, the OPCW's Investigation and Identification Team. The OPCW itself reports that the regime has declined to cooperate, refused to address numerous discrepancies and failed to fully disclose and eliminate its chemical weapons programme. Taken together, such reports are further evidence of Syria's non-compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and resolution 2118 (2013). They clearly illustrate the regime's utter disregard for human life and Syria's international obligations. On 9 July, the OPCW Executive Council decided that the Al-Assad regime must, within 90 days, declare facilities where the chemical weapons used in the Ltamenah attacks were developed, produced, stockpiled and stored for delivery, as well as declaring its remaining chemical weapons stockpile andproduction facilities. The 90-day timeline established by the Executive Council will expire in two days. We expect the Al-Assad regime to adhere to the timeline, and we look forward to the OPCW Director General's report on the regime's response. We also look forward to the outcomes of the October meeting of the OPCW's Executive Council and the November meeting of the CWC's Conference of the States Parties. The United States condemns in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime, which has caused tremendous suffering for the Syrian people. The use of chemical weapons presents an unacceptable security threat to all States, and the members of the Council must not stay silent. We reiterate our commitment to ensuring that those responsible face serious consequences. We call on the Al-Assad regime to come into compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention without delay.
