Mr. Al-Khasawneh (Jordan): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
express confidence that through your leadership you
will guide its deliberations successfully. In the same
vein allow me to extend my delegation's appreciation
to your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of China, for the skilful manner in
which he presided over the Council during the previous
month.

I would also like to express our profound
gratitude for the convening of this open meeting of the
Council to deliberate upon the regrettable
developments in Kosovo.

My delegation wishes to express its grave
concern over the outbreak of violence throughout
Kosovo in a manner and on a scale that is being
characterized as the most far-reaching since 1999. We
condemn all manifestations of such violence, in
particular the targeting of all places of worship. The
renewed outbreak of violence compels us to reflect on
the timeliness of the downsizing plans for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
Furthermore, Jordan, being one of the
contributors to UNMIK, expresses its concern over the
injuries sustained by the United Nations Mission
personnel in Kosovo and damages incurred to their
equipment. UNMIK is operating in Kosovo with a
mandate to preserve, sustain and assist in the
restoration of peace and security to Kosovo and the
process of institution-building therein.

We are mindful of the fact that guaranteeing
continued protection and safeguards for UNMIK and
other international personnel in Kosovo is of
paramount importance and should be observed and
respected by all parties concerned on the ground, at all
times and under all circumstances. In that context
resolution 1244 (1999), adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter, stresses that the Council is

"Determined to ensure the safety and
security of international personnel and the
implementation by all concerned of their
responsibilities under the present resolution."

Moreover, we should like to point to the fact that the
Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal
Court clearly classified all attacks directed against
United Nations and humanitarian international
personnel as war crimes in recognition of the gravity of
such acts.

My delegation wishes to call on all parties
concerned in Kosovo to desist from taking any action
that could further aggravate the situation and to take
immediate steps aimed at bringing about an immediate
end to violence and the genuine de-escalation of
tension in Kosovo. Furthermore, we wish to remind all
parties concerned of their responsibilities in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), including in particular the
obligation to ensure the safety and security of all
international personnel.

Finally, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
appreciation to Mr. Harri Holkeri, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and chief of UNMIK, and to all United Nations and
international personnel for their dedication and
relentless efforts in the performance of their mission in
Kosovo.

I would also like to extend my Government's
most profound condolences to the families of the
victims of this regrettable wave of violence.

