Mr. Kyrle (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and to
thank him for his statement. Let me equally welcome
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank him for his statement. Moreover, let me express
our deep appreciation for the work and leadership of
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for his important contribution
to a gradual improvement of the situation in Kosovo.

I would also like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2009/497) on recent developments in Kosovo. We
particularly welcome the successful completion of the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as the Mission's ongoing efforts to facilitate practical
cooperation between communities and between
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade, thereby promoting
security and stability in Kosovo.

We are very pleased with the good cooperation
between the European Union (EU) and the United
Nations on Kosovo. The EU remains committed to
playing a leading role, and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) will proceed with
the consolidation of the rule of law Kosovo-wide. We
are encouraged by the achievements of EULEX
throughout the entire country, including the successful
reintegration of Kosovo Serb police officers, police
operations and trials under the executive mandate of
EULEX, as well as the enhanced presence in the North
in the absence of full customs controls.

A lot remains to be done. We will need increased
efforts by all sides to combat organized crime as a
matter of priority. Close cooperation with EULEX by
both Serbia and Kosovo will be crucial in order for the
Mission's efforts to bear fruit. We are particularly
concerned about the recent attacks on EULEX staff and
property and call on everyone to refrain from such
irresponsible actions.

Austria fully supports the work of EULEX and
welcomes the plans to strengthen the EU presence in
the North of Kosovo through the establishment of an
EU house by the end of the year. Austria is currently
providing EULEX with 23 experts in the police and
judiciary fields. Furthermore, we will also continue to
contribute to the Kosovo Force by providing more than
600 soldiers.

We commend the progress achieved by Kosovo in
recent months. To date, 62 States have recognized
Kosovo. The country's accession to membership of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund will
be essential to its economic development and will thus
contribute to overall stability in the Western Balkans.
We do note, however, that despite relative stability in
recent months, ethnic tensions and incidents of
violence, especially in the North, continue to have
destabilizing potential.

We are encouraged to learn that at this stage, 23
Kosovo Serb political entities have already applied for
participation in the 15 November elections. However,
we are concerned about the continued existence of
parallel structures in the three Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities in the North of Kosovo and their refusal
to recognize the upcoming municipal elections, as well
as about the holding of separate municipal by-elections
in two Kosovo Serb-majority areas by Belgrade
authorities. Progress in the ongoing decentralization
process will benefit the minority populations, above all
the Kosovo Serb community.

We hope that all ethnic groups in Kosovo will
participate actively in the upcoming municipal
elections, which will be an important test for the future
of Kosovo. In his recent visit to Kosovo, Austrian
Foreign Minister Spindelegger called on the
Government of Kosovo to actively engage with the
Kosovo Serb community. We sincerely hope that the
first elections after Kosovo's independence will result
in an encouraging signal for the future of all
inhabitants of Kosovo. We would like to encourage
pragmatism and self-restraint from both Kosovo and
Serbia to make these elections a success, avoiding
increased tensions, particularly in the North.

We remain strongly committed to a peaceful,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo with full respect
for the rule of law and the protection of non-Albanian
communities and of Kosovo's cultural and religious
heritage. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo (OMIK) has
an important role to play in the realization of this goal.
We welcome its extensive civilian field presence
throughout all parts of Kosovo and commend its
important work.

We also commend the Mission for working
intensively and in coordination with other international
stakeholders to support the Central Election
Commission (CEC) in the preparations for the
15 November elections and for taking the lead in
coordinating international stakeholders' assistance to
the CEC, in accordance with OMIK's previous
experience in organizing elections and within its status-
neutral mandate.

Kosovo is a key factor in the long-term
stabilization of the Western Balkans. It is well known
that Austria has consistently supported a future for all
peoples of the Western Balkans within the European
Union. Yesterday, the European Commission published
a progress report on Kosovo highlighting that many
challenges, such as corruption and organized crime,
remain, as well as a feasibility study analysing ways to
further Kosovo's political and socio-economic
development. The Commission proposes steps in this
regard. Austria will favourably evaluate these
proposals and remains dedicated to the objective of a
peaceful, prosperous and multi-ethnic Kosovo, in
which all people irrespective of their ethnic or
religious background can live in safety and dignity.

