Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the People's Republic of
China for convening this debate, which, unfortunately,
is timely and necessary. Terrorism is not only one of
the main threats to international peace and security, but
it is also something that affects us all. It is a global
phenomenon and, therefore, it requires a united and
collective response. This debate is therefore timely,
as will be the review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to which the Secretary-
General referred.

The review this year has a very particular
importance. First of all, due to the unfortunate
prominence that terrorism has acquired on the
international agenda and the oft-mentioned changing
nature of its threat, terrorists' capability to adapt
requires of us swiftness, decisiveness and flexibility.
We therefore have to tackle negotiations on the Global
Strategy with a determination to strike at terrorism in a
way that will defeat it and with sufficiently nimble and
flexible tools, which would make it possible to respond
immediately to terrorist attacks.

A few new elements have already been considered
by the Security Council, such as the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters, which were the subject of resolution
2178 (2014), and the Madrid guidelines for its optimal
implementation. Also at issue are new sources of
financing, which we have considered in a series of
instruments that led last year to resolutions 2199 (2015)
and 2253 (2015). Another new element in 2015 was the
presidential statement on the fight against terrorism at
the national level.

Hence we are gradually closing in on terrorism. We
are not going to be able to eliminate it once and for
all, with a decisive blow. That would be difficult, but
not, however, impossible. But we can try to eliminate
it by asphyxiating it. It is vital that we not let down our
guard. In some areas, such as cybersecurity, we still
have some leeway to develop new instruments. Another
important area is that of justice, where we can bring
more pressure to bear in order to eradicate terrorism.

Spain, during its upcoming presidency of the
Council, in December of this year, intends to explore
the possibilities of increasing international judicial
cooperation. Also in December we will review
resolution 1540 (2004), which calls for preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of non-State actors with terrorist objectives.
We need hardly stress the importance of this threat,
and therefore I would like to ask all Member States
to participate to the fullest, so that we can make this
review a truly effective instrument. Various measures
have also been adopted by States at the national level,
and as a whole, we have enough individual experience
and good practices in order to become a formidable
opponent of terrorism.

1 would like to turn once again to the review of the
Global Strategy to make a few comments.

With respect to prevention, which is the first
pillar, we have at our disposal an instrument that Spain
greatly values: the Secretary-General's Plan of Action,
referred to in General Assembly resolution 70/254, of
12 February. Let us not get bogged down in Byzantine
discussions about what is or is not violent extremism.
We all know that there is an aspect of extremism that
facilitates and leads to terrorism, and it is those aspects
on which we should take action. In that context, we
deem it important that the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism be carried out in the framework
of a comprehensive approach that is also reflected in
the concept of tackling the life cycle of radicalization,
which the Global Counter-terrorism Forum has given
priority to in its work.

Within this comprehensive approach, I would
underscore, for the sake of brevity, just two specific
aspects: the need to include all social sectors, and the
need to develop effective counter-narratives. States,
in the face of violent extremism, must promote a
mechanism to include all and to conduct a dialogue with
all, including communities that are susceptible ofbeing
radicalized at the State, regional or local level. But
this will not happen by itself, and so we have to create
mechanisms and devise national plans and possibilities
for cooperation, as rightly stated in the Plan of Action.

I will give the example of two initiatives that have
been put into practice by my country. We set up a centre
for the coordination of information on radicalization,
and five months ago we launched an initiative on
stopping radicalization. To promote civic cooperation,
citizens have access to a webpage and an e-mail
address, as well as a toll-free phone line, that guarantee
confidentiality as well as total anonymity. There is
also a special icon on the AlertCops application for
smartphones. In five months, we have received 150
communications, of which 45 per cent have proved to
be worthy of police investigation.

Along those lines, I will speak about the narrative
that we must develop in the face of violent extremism.
It should not be limited to negative aspects but should
also have a positive dimension, underscoring elements
that all of the members of the international community
agree on: pluralism, coexistence, respect for differences
and an invitation to all to participate. In this respect,
the participation of victims, with their example of not
seeking revenge and their call for justice, offers us one of
the most authoritative voices against violent extremism.

That is why Spain, along with the United States, last
October brought for the first time before the Security
Council the voices of victims of terrorism. 1 should like
also to underscore the importance of the role of women
in the fight against radicalization and terrorism, as can
be seen in resolution 2242 (2015), adopted last October,
also during the Spanish presidency.

Furthermore, the implementation of the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action makes clear the need, and
this also represents an opportunity, to strengthen
the structure of international cooperation. Thus we
reiterate the idea that we should create a high-level
post of representative of the Secretary-General against
violent extremism.

With respect to the second pillar, I have already
expressed a few ideas on the need to react quickly,
decisively and nimbly. I will simply stress that we ask
the Member States during negotiations not to lose sight
of the fact that the objective of the Global Strategy is to
defeat terrorism; that is its only objective.

With respect to capacity-building, which is
the third pillar, the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre offers us ways to
strengthen those capabilities where it is most necessary.
The commitment and participation of States will help
significantly to strengthen our societies in the face of
this scourge.

I cannot but close with a reference that bears
repeating, even though it is quite obvious: the need
to respect human rights, which is the fourth pillar,
because they are an essential element ofthe DNA of our
societies, such that if we fail to protect human rights,
even indirectly or temporarily, we would be altering the
essence of our way of life and coexistence; hence we
would be handing terrorists their first victory.

I would like to conclude with a saying that the
terrorist threaten us with repeatedly: that they need to
be lucky only once, and we need to be lucky all the time.
What they overlook is that our societies and our ways
of life are robust and deeply rooted in our consciences,
and cannot be defeated. We have demonstrated this,
because one, 10 or 100 times, terrorists can be lucky,
but we can work to prevent them from even having the
option of trying to be lucky.
