The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/1019, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Chad and the Central African
Republic pursuant to paragraphs 9 (d) and 13 of
Security Council resolution 1706 (2006).

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the continuing instability along the borders
between the Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic and about the threat which this poses to
the safety of the civilian population and the
conduct of humanitarian operations.

"The Security Council takes note of the
Secretary-General's report of 22 December 2006
(S/2006/1019), which contains preliminary
recommendations on the deployment of a
multidimensional United Nations presence in
eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic. It notes the position taken by the
Central African and Chadian authorities in favour
in principle of such a presence and looks forward
to their continued engagement in preparing for it.

"The Security Council notes the Secretary-
General's intention to authorize the immediate
return of the technical assessment mission to the
region in order to complete its observations that
were curtailed on security grounds and requests
him to submit, by the middle of February 2007,
updated and finalized recommendations on the
size, structure and mandate of a United Nations
multidimensional presence.

"To accelerate preparations for an early
decision on the possible deployment of a
multidimensional United Nations presence, the
Security Council requests that the Secretary-
General deploy as soon as possible an advance
mission to Chad and the Central African
Republic, in consultation with their Governments,
as envisaged in paragraph 88 of his report."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2007/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.
07-21045

