Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I should like to express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your wise leadership of the Security
Council during this difficult period. The Chilean
delegation also wishes to thank you for the convening
of this open debate, an opportunity that enables us to
express our own views on an important process to
which we feel connected in a special way. In addition, I
wish to express our appreciation for the valuable
information given to us today by Ambassador
Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, whom we sincerely
congratulate on his constant efforts aimed at the
development of that new nation.

Since 1961, Chile has been part of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples - a
body in which we have worked hard to promote, inter
alia, the principle of self-determination of the non-self-
governing Territories included on the agenda of the
United Nations. For that reason, we fully realize the
importance of the significance for the inhabitants of
Timor-Leste of having won the right to embark on the
path of a viable and independent nation as of 20 May
2002.

For Chile, it is a source of particular pride to have
participated in the previous period, as a member of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), in a United Nations effort to
contribute to the process of that country's
independence and reconstruction. For that reason, my
Government takes special interest in and is following
closely the first steps of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste as an independent nation. We should like
to emphasize, in that regard, the efforts of the
Government headed by President Xanana Gusmao, and
we welcome Timor-Leste's admission to the United
Nations on 27 September.

As pointed out by the Secretary-General in his
most recent report (S/2002/1223), my country agrees
that, although the authorities and the people of Timor-
Leste have continued to work to strengthen the
foundations of their country during the first five
months of its independence, its new institutions will
remain fragile in the immediate future. In that regard,
we value the commitments of the international
community, especially the work being carried out by
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and the cooperation of donor countries.
We note with interest the work being carried out in the
areas of stability, democracy and justice, particularly
progress achieved with regard to finances, the judicial
system and the management of administrative and
governmental resources. However, we recognize that
there are many problems that must be resolved, and we
believe that priority should be given to overcoming the
many difficulties that persist in the judicial sector and
in the prison system.

We also attach great importance to the
establishment of the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation and the work that it has begun in
the country's 13 districts. That is a very significant
contribution with regard to human rights and an
inescapable necessity for any democratic transition.
Chile can attest to the fact that reconciliation is not
stable and does not lead to effective peace unless it is
accompanied by truth and justice with respect to human
rights.

We observe with great interest the work
undertaken in the area of external security and border
control, and we value the progress achieved.
Nevertheless, we share concern at the risk of terrorism
faced by the region, especially after the attack in Bali,
Indonesia. In that regard, we consider it highly
important that necessary measures continue to be
implemented to guarantee the security of the people of
Timor-Leste and of United Nations personnel.

We also consider it necessary to continue to work
for the return of refugees, as that is a prerequisite for
stability. We emphasize the work accomplished in that
regard by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and by President Gusmao
himself. We value the efforts and the rapprochement
observed between the Government of Indonesia and the
Government of Timor-Leste, which facilitates
fulfilment of the commitments undertaken and which
may help in meeting the timetable envisaged for
UNMISET's reduction and ultimate withdrawal.

However, we know that there are still great
challenges to be met and that the road ahead is not free
of difficulties. Therefore, it is imperative that sufficient
bilateral assistance continue to be provided in various
fundamental sectors mentioned in the report. In that
connection, it is extremely important that the donor
community maintains the firm commitment of support
that it has undertaken on behalf of Timor-Leste.

