Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today the Security Council has convened to
consider the item on the agenda entitled "The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina". This is an important question,
and we hope that our discussion and the draft resolution to
be adopted will make a contribution to the settlement of
this question. Transcending the framework of this topic,
particularly with dubious comparisons and allegories that
are difficult to understand, clearly will not further this
cause.

Despite the advances achieved in implementing the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, the rate of
progress in this process remains inadequate. This situation
cannot satisfy the international community, which has made
a large-scale political effort and expended significant
material resources.

The keys to successfully completing the settlement
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and achieving an
effective post-conflict rehabilitation of the country remain
in the hands of the Bosnian parties themselves. This is
precisely why, as was indicated recently at the meeting of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in
Luxembourg, the international community expects prompt,
concrete steps from them particularly as regards ensuring
the effectiveness of joint Government institutions.

Of concern is the volume of problems persisting in
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
constructive approaches on the part of the new
Government of the Republika Srpska need to be
consolidated. The Bosnian parties have been sent a clear
and unequivocal signal.

The current level of international support in the
political, economic and military spheres will not continue
indefinitely. At the same time, such support at this stage
continues to be extremely vital to bolster the positive
impetus of the process of a Bosnian settlement.

An extremely important area of international
assistance continues to be the work of the multinational
Stabilization Force (SFOR) and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), which
includes the International Police Task Force (IPTF).
Consensus on the need to extend their respective
mandates, which has been reached by the international
community with the consent of the Bosnian parties, is
reflected in the draft resolution under consideration today,
of which the Russian Federation is a sponsor. The
extension of the mandates provided for in this draft is
limited to a period of one year, after which the Security
Council will again review the situation, taking into
account the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

An important guarantee for the success of SFOR and
IPTF is their strict compliance in practice with the
mandates established by the Security Council for these
operations. We are convinced that SFOR cannot and must
not assume any police functions whatsoever.

The adoption of the draft resolution will make it
possible for UNMIBH and IPTF to continue their
important work in restructuring and training local police
forces, together with the useful work to help establish a
viable democratic judiciary in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

 

Ensuring the continuation of a phased and orderly
return of refugees and displaced persons is an urgent task.
On this front, it is important to have recourse to well-
known alternative decisions. The Russian Federation, as an
active party to international efforts to promote a Bosnian
settlement, will continue to make a constructive, practical
contribution to resolving outstanding problems in this area
and to make Bosnia and Herzegovina a unified, democratic
and multi-ethnic State.

