Mr. Begec (Turkey): We too thank Special
Representative Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing and
His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, for his statement.

We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/783) and his report
(S/2017/696) on the strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

We commend the role played by UNAMA in
standing with the Afghan people and in coordinating
the efforts of international stakeholders. We will
continue to support UNAMA's activities and efforts in
that regard.

The achievements of the past 15 years in
Afghanistan need to be consolidated. Therefore, the
continued support of the international community
during the transformation decade is crucial. The
international community reiterated its support to
Afghanistan in the NATO Warsaw Summit and in the
Brussels Conference last year. It is vital to live up to the
commitments made towards Afghanistan.

The deteriorating security situation and the
presence of Da'esh in the country continue to be a source
of concern. We applaud the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces for their determined stance against
terrorism. We acknowledge the sacrifices they have
made. Turkey will continue to support the Government
of Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism and in
its efforts to bring peace, security and stability to
the country.

We attach importance to the functioning of the
National Unity Government. Unity among every
segment of the Afghan society is the key to the success
of our endeavours to achieve peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan. Further fragmentation of the
Afghan society would be detrimental both to the efforts
of the Afghan Government and the interests of the
international community.

We are pleased to see that the United States new
strategy for Afghanistan clearly demonstrates that
Afghanistan will not be alone in its fight against
terrorism. We are also pleased to note that the new
strategy includes prospects for a political settlement,
which might include Taliban elements.

Increased cooperation among the countries of the
region is imperative for Afghanistan's success. We
firmly believe that such cooperation can be secured only
through dialogue and stronger engagement. In fact, it is
the region itself that has the greatest role, interest and
responsibility in establishing and sustaining a secure,
prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan.

Turkey will maintain its contributions to the
security and development of Afghanistan, as well
as its support to the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace efforts. Our support to the Afghan Government's
security and development efforts will continue,
including through multilateral platforms, such as the
Heart of Asia - Istanbul Process.

