Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): Unlike you,
Mr. President, I was not born in Africa, but I spent many
years of my life there, and like you I am very aware of the
woes and misfortunes that continent suffers.

I would like to endorse what was said earlier on behalf
of the European Union by the representative of Finland. I
have also been listening keenly to what my African
colleagues have said here. I would like simply to respond
on three points.

First, as regards AIDS, I heard Ambassador
Holbrooke's comments this morning and would like to fully
endorse them. AIDS kills more people than war, and AIDS
kills as war does. That is, it is a disease that kills people in
the prime of life, people capable of being productive and
creative. The survivors are children and the elderly, who
are thus condemned to live in ever-worsening poverty. So
I believe that our countries must do more to mitigate the
effects of this epidemic.

Unfortunately, AIDS is not the only disease. There is
malaria, which remains a tragic scourge in Africa, and other
diseases, such as sleeping sickness, which continues to
cause major devastation, particularly because it often strikes
practically impenetrable parts of the continent.

Secondly, there are the expectations of African
countries. I heard a variety of comments made here about
this. Some speakers have talked of procrastination, others
about double standards. It is true that if we decide to wait
until the conditions are ideal for intervening in Africa - I
am afraid that such ideal conditions will never see the light
of day. If we wait for conditions to be perfect before we
undertake a perfect operation, we will never do anything.

We are told that the United Nations is no longer
entitled to make mistakes. I believe that, unfortunately, all
human endeavours are subject to error from time to time,
and we must assume a certain amount of risk.

Thus, I am brought to my third point: the Africans
themselves. During the debate chaired by the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands a few months ago, I said -
and I believe it is worth repeating here - that the Africans
must help us help them. I have in mind in particular a
country with which we have very close ties, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the Lusaka process. We would
like to see the African parties to that conflict more directly
involved in the implementation of the commitments they
made in Lusaka. On the contrary, however, we are hearing
a lot of rumours of war and of military reinforcements, a
lot of threats coming from the various fronts of that
complex and devastating war.

I appeal to my African friends. They must help us
help them. There must be a change in attitude; a
commitment to peace must take hold. Too many regions
of Africa and too many people in Africa believe that the
only way to improve their lot is to take up arms. I think
this is a mistake. I think we must offer other prospects
based on both N orth-South and South-South partnership.

