Mr. Annabi: As members of the Council will
recall, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, last briefed
the Council on 30 October. I am pleased to have this
opportunity to provide an update on the main
developments since that date.

On 2 December, the main participants in the Bonn
Conference reconvened there to review the progress
made so far and to reaffirm their commitment to the
peace process in Afghanistan. Mr. Brahimi, who
attended the meeting, has asked me to express his
gratitude to the Government of Germany for organizing
that anniversary conference. The participants rightly
took note of the many achievements of the past year.

Looking ahead, however, they identified a
number of specific challenges. These include the
importance of building a national army and national
police that are effective and ethnically balanced; the
need to intensify efforts to combat the production and
trafficking of drugs; the need to develop a culture of
respect for human rights and the national mechanisms
to monitor and investigate violations; the need to
continue efforts to create a legal and institutional
framework conducive to national development; the
need for the international community to strengthen
Afghan ownership of the reconstruction and
development process and to endorse the use of the
budget as a central tool of policy-making; the need for
the Afghan Government and the international
community to consult to establish clear benchmarks
and time lines to ensure the full implementation of the
Bonn Agreement; and the importance of the
preparation of a new constitution and the preparation
for free and fair elections, scheduled to be held by June
2004.

Finally, I am pleased to inform the Council that,
as discussed at the Bonn meeting, Afghanistan and its
neighbouring States have agreed to sign, on 22
December in Kabul, an agreement on good-neighbourly
relations, mutual cooperation and non-interference in
their respective internal affairs. This is, of course, a
very welcome signal of commitment on the part of the
States concerned to ensuring that relations between
Afghanistan and its neighbours will contribute to
regional stability and development.

As this summary indicates, many challenges
remain, but with the continued commitment of the
international community progress towards these goals
is achievable. One clear example of this has been the
recent significant decisions taken on the creation of a
new national Afghan army. In accordance with the
agreements reached by the various factions
participating in the national Defence Commission last
month, President Karzai signed a decree on 1
December establishing an Afghan national army of
70,000 of all ranks that is foreseen to be unified, under
civilian control and staffed on the principles of merit
and ethnic balance. The main elements of that decree
are included in a fact sheet which, I believe, was
distributed to members of the Council yesterday and
we, of course, have the full text of the decree available
to those members of the Council who may not have
seen it.

Having said that, the realization of an effective
national army requires unity among all international
actors. It is essential that the international community
provide both political and financial support to the
reform of the security sector, which is vital to the peace
process. For this purpose, a letter will shortly be
forwarded by the Special Representative to prospective
donor countries seeking contributions to the United
Nations-administered Trust Fund.

In the absence of an effective national force, the
lack of security across the country remains a major
concern. In Kabul, during the reporting period there
was an increase in the number of armed robberies, car
thefts and murders. At the end of November, six
rockets were fired into the city; fortunately, there were
no casualties, but these events have unsettled the city's
population.

In the North, a formal commitment signed by
General Dostum and General Atta to refrain from
violence has so far resulted in a reduction in the
number of incidents of factional fighting. The West,
however, has again seen heavy fighting between forces
belonging to the Governor of Herat, Ismael Khan and a
local Pashtun leader, Amanullah Khan. Many casualties
were reported on both sides. A delegation from the
Government managed to negotiate a ceasefire on 3
December, but the situation is still very fragile.
Fighting has broken out between the two sides several
times this year and the bitter rivalry between Ismael
Khan and Amanullah Khan does not bode well for
long-term peace in that area.

In Kandahar, tribal rivalries, which have been
simmering since the fall of the Taliban last year, came
to a head when forces belonging to Governor Gul
Agha, from the Barakzay tribe, sought to disarm police
under the command of General Akram, from the
Alokozai tribe. Three people were killed and several
others injured. The dispute over responsibility for
security and law and order in the city remains
unresolved.

In the Southern province of Uruzgan, several
prominent Taliban leaders were recently arrested by the
local intelligence agency and accused of seeking to
revitalize the Taliban movement. The matter is being
investigated by the local authorities. United Nations
premises were damaged for the fourth time this year
when two grenades were thrown into the compound of
the office of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Gardez. Fortunately, no one
was injured. However, international staff and some
national staff who do not live in the area had to be
temporarily withdrawn to Kabul. This office, located in
a critical Pashtun area, has now reopened following the
end of Ramadan.

During the reporting period, President Karzai
issued a decree to dismiss 20 civil servants, including
in the provincial Governments, for corruption or abuse
of office. While this important signal of the central
Government's intent to reinforce its authority and
inculcate good practices throughout the civil service
was warmly received by the public, its full
implementation has proved difficult. Corruption
remains a significant problem, which will require not
only time and dedicated leadership before it can be
solved, but also economic progress and an
improvement in living standards.

A key part of the Government's strategy to assert
its authority depends on its ability to raise domestic
revenue. The President's decree on corruption also
addressed the need for public income to be transferred
from the provinces to the national treasury and for
customs houses to be reformed. Until now, the central
Government has had limited success in gaining control
over these important resources.

The commander of the coalition forces in
Afghanistan recently briefed UNAMA on plans to
deploy teams - referred to as joint regional teams -
outside Kabul. The teams would comprise 50 to 70
officers and would work with central and local
Government and international actors to assist in
various aspects of the reconstruction and recovery
process. Mr. Brahimi has indicated that UNAMA
would certainly cooperate and coordinate with the
teams. It is UNAMA's understanding that the function
of the teams will be adjusted in the light of experience
on the ground. UNAMA will, of course, report further
on its cooperation with the teams as their role in the
reconstruction and recovery process is refined.

With respect to the implementation of the Bonn
Agreement, members of the Council may recall that the
first Judicial Commission was dissolved by President
Karzai amid concerns that its membership was not
sufficiently independent. A new Judicial Commission
was formed on 2 November 2002, comprising nine
members, one of whom is a woman. To broaden its
representation, the President recently added two
members: a second woman and a man from an ethnic
minority. Since its inauguration, on 28 November, the
new Commission has embarked on its substantive
work, and it is now preparing to participate in a
pledging conference on the justice sector, which is
being organized by the Italian Government in Rome, on
19 and 20 December.

The nine-member Constitutional Drafting
Commission was formally inaugurated by the former
King, Mohammad Zaher Shah, on 3 November. The
members of the Commission, chaired by Vice-President
Shahrani, are mostly legal scholars and jurists from a
variety of ethnic and regional backgrounds and include
two women. The Commission has established three
subcommittees, for writing, researching and drafting
the constitution.

In preparing the new constitution, the
Commission will be guided by the 1964 Constitution,
by Islamic principles and by international standards, as
well as by Afghan legal traditions. The Commission
considers the involvement of Afghan society to be
crucial for the quality and the acceptance of the draft
constitution as well as for furthering national
reconciliation. The United Nations is supporting the
work of the Commission by assisting in the
establishment of its secretariat.

As members of the Council are aware, the Bonn
Agreement calls for elections to be held by June 2004.
There are a number of structural issues to solve in
order for that complex process to be successfully
completed in time. In particular, there are no formal
electoral institutions, and there is no law regulating the
activities of political parties. UNAMA is therefore
exploring, with the Government, the prospect of
establishing an electoral commission to define the
basic rules and procedures of the electoral process.
UNAMA, in close coordination with the Electoral
Assistance Division of the United Nations, has met
with various interlocutors to ascertain their views on
various possible approaches to conducting the elections
and to stress the need to start the necessary
preparations soon.

If it is established, the Afghan electoral body is
expected to undertake consultations with political
organizations regarding the decisions to be taken on
electoral registration, the electoral calendar and the
organization of electoral teams throughout the country.
If the elections are to be held by June 2004, the Afghan
electoral body will need to be established by early next
yean

The Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission has been steadily developing its methods
and practices in a joint project - involving UNAMA,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights - that is being implemented in order to
support the Commission in its work. The Commission
held two workshops in November, with the first on
human rights and the media and the second on human
rights in constitutions. Modes of cooperation between
the Independent Human Rights Commission and
UNAMA on human rights investigations are also being
further elaborated. The Commission is currently
receiving capacity-building assistance from UNAMA
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights in the field of the processing of petitions and
complaints.

UNAMA and the Independent Human Rights
Commission have jointly looked into the recent
demonstrations by students at Kabul University. Those
demonstrations, as members will recall, led to clashes
with the police in which two students were killed and
at least 15 were wounded. Poor living conditions at the
university were the apparent source of discontent,
though it was also alleged that that discontent had been
manipulated and exacerbated by political groups.
Investigations are still under way, but a preliminary
analysis points towards excessive use of force by the
Afghan police. Following the incident, President
Karzai immediately established a commission of
inquiry.

The Council is also aware of another human
rights issue that UNAMA is following: that of the mass
graves at Dasht-i-Layli. UNAMA has been
investigating reports of alleged serious abuses -
including harassment, arbitrary detention, torture and
extrajudicial execution - against Afghans who are
believed to be in possession of information relating to
the circumstances surrounding the Dasht-i-Leily grave
site. Recently, in cooperation with the Independent
Human Rights Commission, a UNAMA team met with
General Dostum, visited the intelligence detention
centre in Shiberghan and obtained the release of two
inmates who were being held without charge,
apparently because they were witnesses to the events
that had taken place at Dasht-i-Leily. A forensic
specialist arrived recently to assess technical, financial
and security requirements for a full-scale forensic
investigation.

The main patterns of reported human rights
abuses continue to be intimidation and violence by
regional and local commanders against civilians,
intimidation and violence against women and
persecution of minority groups. UNAMA has verified a
number of serious human rights violations. In the
north, as I just mentioned, UNAMA has been
investigating the alleged intimidation of witnesses and
is interceding with the authorities to ensure respect for
human rights. UNAMA also recently looked into the
situation of discrimination against the Gujurs, an ethnic
minority of about 100,000 people who live in the three
north-eastern provinces of Takhar, Baghlan and
Badakshan and who have been persecuted by local
commanders. To help to deal with the problem,
UNAMA assisted in the establishment of a local
commission, with Government, military and local
participation, to address those violations and to take
corrective action on complaints.

In Wardak province, UNAMA teams have
investigated the recent rocket attacks on four schools
for girls that took place near Kabul in late October.
Prior to the attacks, teachers had reported that some of
their female students had been threatened on their way
to school by unknown armed men. Leaflets had been
circulated condemning education for girls. Preliminary
elements of UNAMA's inquiry point to the possibility
that local officials may have been involved in those
events.

As indicated by Mr. Brahimi in his last briefing to
the Council, UNAMA's relief, recovery and
reconstruction pillar has been focusing on the issue of
winter preparedness. The Ministry of Rural
Rehabilitation and Development has established a
winter task force, bringing together the Government,
United Nations agencies, bilateral agencies and non-
governmental organizations. The goal of the task force
is to ensure that the provision of assistance to some 2.2
million highly vulnerable Afghans is effectively
coordinated. This vulnerable population, mainly living
in the north and the west, and in the central highlands,
has been receiving emergency food aid and assistance
for shelter during the difficult winter months. Some
44,000 metric tons of food, accounting for about 95 per
cent of winter needs, have been pre-positioned
throughout the country. The remaining 5 per cent will
be distributed to the regions before the end of
December. Emergency repairs are also ongoing to keep
the Salang tunnel open during the winter season. This
is critical in ensuring that the northern and southern
parts of Afghanistan remain linked by road and that
assistance can be delivered. Donors have made
generous contributions to agencies to ensure funding
for most of the needs.

While these preparations are ongoing, we
recognize the need for continuous monitoring of the
scope of winter requirements. The recent death of 10
children at an internally displaced persons camp at
Spin Boldak due to a sudden severe drop in
temperature tragically illustrates the need for constant
vigilance. In that particular case, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Afghan Government are sending additional
blankets, clothing, stoves and fuel to the camps at Spin
Boldak. More broadly, the United Nations is reviewing
its winter preparations in response to reports from a
number of provinces that the onset of winter is
generating greater than expected demand for winter
support.

As was reported in October, the Government's
National Development Budget constitutes an important
framework for the prioritization of international
assistance to Afghanistan. Building on this, the
Government and the United Nations family have
agreed on joint programme reviews to determine
performance indicators and goals to be achieved in
order to meet national priorities. An inter-ministerial
commission, including the Ministries of Finance,
Planning and Reconstruction, as well as relevant line
ministries and UNAMA, has reviewed progress
achieved in 2002 by United Nations agencies and the
strategic priorities for 2003. These meetings were a
good example of how the United Nations and the
Government can develop innovative ways to ensure
that their efforts are mutually supportive.

A similar review process has led to the
completion of the 2003 United Nations Transitional
Assistance Programme for Afghanistan for the period
January 2003 to March 2004. The progress reflects an
agreed view of the Afghan Government and the United
Nations assistance agencies on the latter's role in
responding to national priorities over the next 15
months. The programme goes beyond humanitarian
priorities to address underlying causes of the crisis -
poverty, debt, environmental degradation and
insecurity - as well as urgent recovery and
reconstruction priorities. A key objective of the
programme is to strengthen the Transitional
Administration's capacity to direct the recovery effort
at the national and provincial levels. The 2003
programme seeks $815 million, covering the period
January 2003 to March 2004, of which $67.5 million is
for refugee programmes in Pakistan, Iran and Central
Asia. It will be officially launched at the Afghanistan
Support Group meeting scheduled to be held in Oslo on
17 and 18 December 2002.

The Government of Afghanistan has continued to
implement its crucial currency exchange operation.
Although the pace of exchange has been quite high, an
estimated 50 per cent of old bank notes remain in
circulation. In some provinces, the supply of new
afghanis could not be replenished due to logistical
difficulties. In other areas, money traders reportedly
hoarded the new currency or refused to accept
denominations of the old currency. The Government
has extended the deadline for exchange until 2 January
2003 to allow the public sufficient time to convert their
old afghanis.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the
progress that I have reported today is encouraging. It
continues to demonstrate the robustness of the Bonn
process. At the same time, what has been achieved -
and more important, what remains to be achieved-
depends on continued improvements in the security
situation. The extension of the authority of the central
Government, the ability to deliver humanitarian and
reconstruction assistance and the protection of human
rights are contingent upon a secure environment
throughout the country. One year after the Bonn
Agreement, the Afghan people and the international
community have much to be proud of. But as the
Secretary-General and Mr. Brahimi have consistently
stated, we have not reached a point where the
international community can afford to lapse into a state
of complacency.

