Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary General for South Sudan, Mr. David
Shearer. As this is the first time he is briefing the
Council, I wish to convey to him my delegation's wishes
for his success and its full support as he acquits himself
of task he has taken up. I also wish to thank him for
his briefing, which gives us a complete overview of the
latest developments in South Sudan, and of which we
have carefully taken note.

Likewise, I wish to thank our colleague, Mr. Gorgui
Ciss, for his briefing on the work carried out over the
past five months by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan,
which is chaired by Ambassador Seck of Senegal.

Uruguay expresses its deep concern and alarm at
the political, security, humanitarian and economic crisis
taking place in South Sudan. We reiterate once again
that the conflict cannot be resolved through military
means. In that connection, we urge all political and
military actors in South Sudan to immediately cease
hostilities throughout the country. We also recall that
the Government has the primary responsibility and the
duty to protect its population and to ensure that those
who commit crimes and abuses are held accountable.

It is vital that progress be made toward reaching
a political solution to the conflict, through genuine,
transparent and inclusive dialogue, the main objective
of which should be the full implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan of August 2015. As the
Secretary-General has stated on various occasions,
if national dialogue is to be feasible, armed activities
must cease throughout South Sudan, an impartial entity
must steer the dialogue, and there must be a process
that includes all interested national parties.

On 23 March, the Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/4, whereby the parties to the
conflict were encouraged to adopt five measures,
ranging from immediate accession to a permanent
ceasefire and a peaceful resolution of the crisis, to the
immediate elimination of obstacles to the operations of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and humanitarian staff. In that statement, the Council
expressed its intention to review progress in terms of
enforcement of the measures no later than 3 April.

One month after the adoption of that statement,
it grieves us to note that progress has been very
limited - practically nil. The parties to the conflict
continue to carry out military operations and to
commit violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law on a massive scale, and all of this in a
climate of total impunity. We have not forgotten that, as
a direct consequence of the conflict, the humanitarian
situation has reached a critical level, with famine
emerging in several areas of the country. Meanwhile,
time continues to go by and the suffering of millions
of civilians, who have nothing to do with the conflict,
continues to increase. How long will we continue
to wait?

This month, the Council held an interesting open
debate (S/PV.7926) that linked human rights, peace
and security. Today, South Sudan is an example of
what should not happen in a country. After what was
seen in South Sudan during the Security Council visit
six months ago and the episodes of Violence 2016 in
Malakal, Wau and Juba, it is very difficult to remain
calm and indifferent. The miserable living conditions
of internally displaced persons and the vulnerability
of all civilians in general should be more than enough
reason to deploy the regional protection force. Such a
deployment cannot be held up any longer.

In connection with the aforesaid, I wish to recognize
the complex work being carried out by UNMISS and
humanitarian partners to avoid the occurrence of more
atrocities and to provide assistance to those most in
need, in an extremely dangerous environment. In
that regard, it is unacceptable that the Mission and
humanitarian partners should constantly be confronted
with numerous obstacles, including restrictions to
access, the obstruction of patrols and humanitarian
operations, and the denial and delay of admission of
United Nations personnel into the country. All of
that hampers the ability of the Mission to carry out
the fundamental tasks of its mandate. We urge the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with the
implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), including the
deployment of the regional protection force, and to put
an end to any restrictions on the Mission.

In conclusion, I wish to recognize the important
ongoing efforts being undertaken by the Secretary-
General and his team in the Secretariat to advance
the implementation of the recommendations of the
independent special investigation with regard to the
actions taken by UNMISS in response to the violence
that occurred in Juba last July. Uruguay is of the view
that the implementation of the recommendations will
help UNMISS in particular, but also peacekeeping
operations as a whole, to improve effectiveness in
protecting civilians, to improve the formulation
of contingency plans, and to achieve improved
accountability for deployed personnel. All of that
points to what we seek to do: improve the effectiveness
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.

