Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I apologize for taking the
floor again, but I find it extremely necessary to respond
the representative of Israel's barrage of lies presented to
the Council regarding the Palestinian people and their
leadership. I will not debase myself by responding to
that barrage oflies. Suffice it to say that it is difficult to
see those who have their forces and their settlers, some
of whose leaders have their hands tainted with the blood
of thousands of Palestinian victims, come and lecture
us about morality and assuming the high ground.

In that regard, I also challenge the representative
of Israel, who, in a sweeping manner, just said that the
documentation that we send to members of the Security
Council is nothing but lies. I challenge him to offer a
single piece of evidence that the documentation that
we regularly send to the Council in order to document
the crimes of Israel, the occupying Power, against our
people in the occupied territory, is not true. Let him
offer a single piece of evidence. He just said that the
contents of our letters are lies, but he does not cite a
single piece of evidence to that effect.

With regard to Jerusalem, I think that Israeli
action speaks for itself. He cannot assume that the
people in this Chamber and the entire international
community are just a bunch of fools. It is a known fact
that millions of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza
are not allowed to come and practice their religious
activities in holy Jerusalem, whether they are Muslims
or Christians. Those are facts. Any Palestinian, for
example from Ramallah, who tries to go to Jerusalem to
pray on Friday at these holy places will not be allowed
to practice his or her religion at those sites if he or she
does not have a permit.

The speech that the Israeli representative gave is
most surprising. It is not a speech that is congruent with
the atmosphere of peace or that advances the contours
of peace. It is the statement of someone who is really
looking for excuses to create problems and to run
away from the prerequisites of peace in terms of good
behaviour congruent with international law.

The universal position of the entire international
community and the statements that have been given
by everyone here today - and we are thankful to
them - and of many others who have come from
outside the Council send a loud message to the Israeli
leadership that it must wake up from the dream in
which it is indulging itself and refusing to acknowledge
what is really happening. It must heed the international
community and act according to the requirement of
peace, and not try to blame others. It is a message from
all participants here, which we appreciate, that the
leaders of Israel need to wake up and to act according
to the prerequisites of peace.

I believe that it is time for all ofus to put an end to the
unlimited impunity enjoyed by Israel and to apply the
law to that country as it was applied to those who acted
as they did until the Council acted decisively. When the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, act decisively, they will not allow someone
to come and lecture all ofus as the Israeli representative
just has. We are confident that the Council's patience is
running out, and we are very close to the point where
either they act in good faith, negotiate with us in good
faith, act in accordance with international law and stop
all the crimes and violations of international law being
committed against our people, or - I am sure - the
Council will take action against them in a decisive
manner in order to allow peace to take root.

