Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to extend to you, Sir, and through you
the brotherly Republic of Uganda, our sincere
congratulations on your presidency of the Security
Council this month. We pay tribute to your leadership
and your efforts to crown the Council's various
deliberations with success.

I also wish to congratulate the delegation of
brotherly Turkey on its able and successful presidency
of the work of the Security Council last month.

This open debate of the Security Council
provides Member States with the opportunity to
address the very important issue of the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. It is an
opportunity to recall the historical responsibility of the
United Nations vis-a-vis the Palestinian question and
for Member States to give momentum to efforts aimed
at moving the peace process forward and
reinvigorating the recent endeavours of many
influential actors to resolve differences in the region.

Under the leadership of President Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali, Tunisia attaches great importance to the
question of Palestine.

His Excellency the President has consistently
affirmed our unswerving position on the Palestinian
question and has always stressed that, as in the past, we
shall always stand alongside the brotherly Palestinian
people in its just struggle to retrieve its legitimate
national rights and establish an independent State of its
own on its national soil. We also support the strategic
choice of peace and have always contributed to every
effort intended to find a just, comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian question in
conformity with resolutions of international legitimacy
and the terms of reference of the peace process,
including the Arab Peace Initiative.

In that connection, we welcome the positive
position set out by the new United States
Administration regarding the peace process and the
vision of two States living side by side in peace. We
call again on the international community and on the
Quartet to intensify their efforts and resume
negotiations on the basis of resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, which, with
international support, has now become one of the
principal terms of reference for peace.

There is international consensus that peace must
inevitably be brought about through negotiations. This
requires coordinated efforts by the entire international
community to overcome the obstacles in the way of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace. We have been
encouraged by some hopeful indications that the
Middle East impasse will soon come to an end, but we
are duty-bound to draw attention to the ongoing
dangerous Israeli practices towards the brotherly
Palestinian people. Those practices deprive the
Palestinian people of the legitimate rights they are
guaranteed by all relevant international instruments
and resolutions. The continuing settlement policy and
the imposition of a blockade on the Palestinian people
hinder efforts towards a settlement and towards peace.
They harden the obstacles preventing the resumption of
negotiations, which must be built on trust and on the
commitment of all parties to honour their commitments
under existing agreements and the principal terms of
reference.

In discussing the situation in the Middle East we
cannot fail to recall the need for Israel to withdraw
from all occupied Syrian and Lebanese territories, in
order to attain the goal of a comprehensive settlement
of the Middle East crisis in all its aspects in a manner
that will bring security and stability to all the peoples
of the region.

Today's debate should provide an opportunity for
us to work in a more holistic and effective manner to
address everything that endangers peace in the Middle
East, in particular in the wake of Israel's oppressive
aggression against Gaza, which caused vast loss of life
and the destruction of vital Palestinian infrastructure
and institutions. It also provides an opportunity for
Member States to contribute to peace efforts, work to
achieve a settlement and put an end to the pain of a
people that has been suffering for more than six
decades and has been deprived of its fundamental
rights.

We look forward to the day when the legitimate
national aspirations of the Palestinian people and the
hopes of the international community will give rise to
tangible efforts to pave the way to peace, independence
and sovereignty for the Palestinian people. This will
eliminate tension in the region and lead to a new era of
security, stability and advancement.

