Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports (see S/2014/546, S/2014/556, S/2014/827 and S/2014/829) and comprehensive briefings on the
work of the Tribunals and strategies for concluding
their work. I also thank the President and the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their reports (S/2014/826, annex I and 11). Finally, I want to congratulate Ambassador Barros
Melet and the Chilean team for their work at the head of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

The ICTY and ICTR were established by the
Security Council to prosecute the most serious crimes.
Guided by the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, the Tribunals uphold respect for the
rule of law, build capacity at the national level and
contribute to the process ofjustice and reconciliation,
which are essential for peace.

The ICTY has played a key role in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting stability and long-
term reconciliation in the Western Balkans, but its
contribution goes beyond that. The ICTY jurisprudence
has contributed to the development of international
criminal law in areas such as individual criminal
responsibility and crimes of sexual violence. The
Tribunal has given a voice to victims, especially women
and children.

We are aware of the heavy workload of the Tribunal
and the considerable progress it has made. However, we
encourage the ICTY to take all necessary measures
to keep the delays to a minimum. Let there be no
misunderstanding: if we want the Tribunal conclude
its work as quickly as possible, nothing should limit
its capacity to render justice in an independent and
impartial manner. In this spirit, we support the mandate
extensions requested for the judges and prosecutors of
the two Tribunals. It is necessary to ensure continuity
in the interest of justice and to ensure the Tribunal's
effectiveness.

We note with satisfaction that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia continue to cooperate
fully with the ICTY. The cooperation of States is indeed
essential for the Tribunal to be able to conclude its
mandate. The effectiveness of prosecutions undertaken
at the national level for war crimes continues to be a
key element of the legacy of the ICTY. We share the
concern of Prosecutor Brammertz with regard to
the slowness of war crimes prosecutions by national
institutions, and we welcome the measures taken by the
Office of the Prosecutor to strengthen the capacities
of those institutions. I am thinking in particular of the
training project for national prosecutors carried out
jointly with the European Union, and the efforts of the
Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe with regard to
training.

The International Tribunals have played a historic
role in the fight against impunity. The Security Council
recognized that in resolution 2150 (2014), adopted
unanimously on 16 April.

This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda and the
establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. On this occasion, it is good to recall that
there is no lasting peace without justice. We commend
the ICTR for its work aimed at bringing those most
responsible for the Rwandan genocide to account.
The ICTR'S work has been crucial in contributing to
bringing justice to the victims of the genocide. Nine
accused are still at large. Like other Council members,
we call on States, particularly those in which the
accused are suspected to be residing, to redouble their
efforts to arrest the fugitives so they can stand trial.

The issue of the resettlement of the eight people
acquitted and the three people released after serving
their sentences, who are still residing in Arusha, must
also remain a priority.

While the two Tribunals move towards the conclusion
of their work, we are well aware of the difficulty they
have in retaining qualified and experienced personnel.
The international community must ensure that the
ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism have adequate
human resources to carry out the mandate vested in
them by the Council.

Since this is the last time that we participate as a
non-permanent member of the Council in this biannual
debate, we want to take this opportunity to pay sincere
tribute to the work of the Tribunals and their overall
contribution to the promotion and realization of justice.
The implementation of the principle of accountability
is a key element in maintaining international peace and
security. Justice and accountability must continue to
occupy a central place in the Council's work.

