The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Force Commanders for
their comprehensive briefings, giving us the missions'
perspective on issues that are relevant to the Security
Council's considerations of the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. This year's Heads of
Military Components Conference is very timely.

The subject of peacekeeping has been broadly
discussed over the past few months. The entire
international community has been alarmed by the
current state of the security of mission personnel and
consequently of the people they aim to protect. We
have not only seen dynamic changes in the security
environment but, more importantly, a significant
increase in threats and direct attacks on peacekeepers.
We should take every opportunity to condemn such
actions in the strongest possible terms. Needless to
say, the security of peacekeepers is of paramount
importance for all stakeholders involved in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, but we must not
forget that it is currently a decisive factor in missions'
effective implementation of their mandates.

One of the topics we are considering today is the
mandates themselves. The importance of re-evaluating
missions' composition and mandates based on the
realities on the ground has already been discussed in
the Council. I would like to specifically focus on the
situations on the ground, their relation to mandates
and their direct impact on missions. I would like to
ask several questions regarding the missions, but I
think this should also be an opportunity for the Force
Commanders to convey what they have to say to the
members of the Council. I will therefore proceed with
my questions.

From the perspective of the Force Commanders,
do the current mandates enable the missions and
Force Commanders to work actively and, if necessary,
proactively in order to fulfil their tasks? If the answer
is yes, I would appreciate it if they could prioritize
and name the key challenges, limitations or gaps still
hampering their missions' effectiveness. If the answer
is no, I would encourage them to highlight the areas
that the Council should focus on to ensure support
for Force Commanders and troops on the ground in
implementing their mandates and bringing us closer to
the missions' desired end stage.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to convey my most sincere appreciation to all the Force
Commanders present in the Chamber today, and to the
men and women they serve with around the clock, for
their dedication and commitment to international peace
and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to draw the attention of the Force
Commanders to the questions directed to them.
Council members would appreciate comments from the
Force Commanders on the realities of their respective
field missions.

I now give the floor to Mr. LaCroix to respond to
the questions and comments.

