Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I echo the statement
made by the representative of Belgium. Today is a sad,
sorry and truly dreadful day for the people of Syria.
It is a day that I hope the Council will never repeat. I
would like to say once again to the Minister of Kuwait
how much we appreciate the effort that his delegation
put into this effort, and I am sorry that he should have
to be here to see the outcome.

The United Kingdom cast two votes today. We voted
for the first draft resolution (S/2019/961) because United
Nations cross-border assistance remains critical to the
4 million people who depend on it for the life-saving
aid that is as critical today as it has been every year
since 2014, when the resolution was first allowed to be
adopted, as it has been each year until now.

The Russian Federation and China gave no credible
explanation for their vetoes or for the cynical attempt
to score political points by presenting a second draft
resolution (S/20l9/962) that halved the number of
crossings and halved the length of time. There is no
justification for that. Indeed, the Secretary-General
has said that we are seeing further deterioration of an
already extremely difficult humanitarian situation for
people throughout Syria, where over 11 million people
remain in need of assistance. No one therefore can
pretend that things are improving on the ground.

I listened very carefully to what the Russian
representative said, and I heard him say that his
delegation was motivated "exclusively by the
humanitarian aspects". Even by known standards,
that statement is breathtaking in its hypocrisy. The
veto of the first draft resolution and the presentation
of the second are not acts that address humanitarian
concerns. They do not meet the formal written request
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) to the Council. They do not help the
millions of ordinary citizens in Syria whose lives are
now in jeopardy, and they certainly do not help the
United Nations or the cause of multilateralism. Now
the responsibility lies with the Syrian and Russian
authorities. It is they who will now be responsible for
the people whose lives hang in the balance. I hope that
the Russian taxpayers are feeling generous.

The United Kingdom voted against the Russian text
because we will not negotiate with a gun held to our
heads over a cynical offer that would save fewer lives
than we know is needed and that the United Nations has
very clearly set out as necessary. But it is important even
at this juncture to look ahead, given how many lives
remain at stake. The United Kingdom therefore hopes
that the Council can pass through this sorry episode and
return to discussions ready to identify a productive and
effective way through that meets OCHA's needs before
10 January 2020, when the current mandate expires.

I have previously said in this Chamber that Russia
should not play dice with people's lives. Four million
lives are at stake, and we need to keep that critical fact
before us as we try and sort out this dreadful mess.

