The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation is grateful to Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall for his briefing on the biannual report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1065) on the sociopolitical
and security situation in Central Africa and the Lake
Chad basin and on the activities carried out by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), within the framework of his mandate.

I would like to inform Special Representative Fall
that in Cote d'Ivoire, as in his country, the outstanding
efforts he is undertaking in a subregion that is close
to the hearts of all Africans, but which unfortunately
finds itself today confronting tremendous problems
stemming from human inconsistency but also because
of the unpleasant surprises that nature sometimes keeps
in reserve for human existence, are greatly appreciated.
I am thinking in particular of the rapid drying up of
Lake Chad, which was once a source of life and which
is now becoming a source of problems that, in turn, has
brought about vast humanitarian needs. That is why
I would like to welcome the presence among us this
morning of Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and express my
gratitude for her comprehensive briefing and for all
that she has done to draw our careful attention to the
humanitarian issues in the subregion.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the recent progress
made in a number of Central African countries,
including the holding of elections under more or less
peaceful conditions. However, my delegation remains
concerned at the persistence of such multifaceted
political and security challenges as armed conflict,
terrorism, trafficking in natural resources, poaching,
transnational organized crime and maritime piracy, all
of which have disastrous humanitarian consequences,
as I mentioned before.

In the Central African Republic, the absence of
State authority across significant parts of its national
territory, the contradictory attitudes of leaders of armed
groups vis-a-vis their commitment to a comprehensive
peace agreement in the Central African Republic,
the resurgence of ethnic and religious violence, such
as the deadly events of 15 November in Alindao, in
the north-east of the country, as well as the repeated
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, all remain sources of concern. Given
that situation, Cote d'Ivoire commends and further
encourages the efforts of the President of the Central
African Republic, Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera,
and his Government in giving priority to constructive
dialogue and consultation with all national and regional
actors, including armed groups and civil society, with a
view to achieving inclusive and indispensable national
reconciliation towards realizing a lasting peace.

In that regard, the implementation of the road map
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, to which my country
extends its full support, could be the key to apeaceful and
lasting end to the crisis in the Central African Republic.
In this context, the decision of the United Nations and
the African Union to jointly appoint a Special Envoy
to generate fresh momentum in the implementation of
this initiative is of paramount importance. Moreover,
the commitment of countries of the region - and
neighbouring States in particular - including through
joint commissions, remains fully relevant to the
efficient management of this crisis, especially in light
of the challenge of transnational crime.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, progress made in the implementation of the
political agreement of 31 December 2016, known as the
New Year's Eve agreement, and the smooth conduct of
preparations for the general elections on 23 December
2018 - which are so important for the stability of the
country and the subregion - are welcome developments.
In order to maintain this positive momentum, my
delegation calls on all Congolese political actors to
work to create an environment conducive to the conduct
of free, transparent, credible and peaceful elections.
Furthermore, the vast challenges posed to security,
humanitarian and health - particularly in the eastern
part of the country, which is marked by the persistence
of the Ebola virus - require the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community to intensify and better coordinate efforts in
order to cope with this epidemic.

In this regard, resolution 2439 (2018), adopted
by the Council on 30 October, which concerns Ebola
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
action of all relevant stakeholders - including the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and bilateral
and multilateral partners - is necessary in the fight
against the epidemic in order to create an environment
conducive to the return of lasting peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Turning to the situation in Burundi, C6te d'Ivoire
commends the efforts of the East African Community
facilitator and the mediator of the Inter-Burundi
Dialogue with a view to ensuring its inclusiveness
while addressing the crisis plaguing this country.
However, we fear that the absence of the Government
of Burundi and certain political actors at the fifth
session of the inter-Burundian talks, held from 24 to
29 October in Arusha, will contribute to relaunching
the stalemate in the political process. Therefore, my
delegation encourages the international community,
the African Union and the Community of East African
States to continue in their efforts for peace and stability
in Burundi towards the holding of peaceful elections
in 2020.

The security situation in the Lake Chad basin is
also a source of concern to my delegation in view of
the continuing threat posed by Boko Haram, whose
criminal and terrorist activities have disastrous
consequences for civilian populations, particularly
children, women and girls in Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. In the fight against this scourge, we welcome the
implementation of a regional strategy, endorsed by the
African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
on 30 August, for stabilization, recovery and resilience
in the areas of the Lake Chad basin affected by Boko
Haram's activities. We call on international partners
to honour their pledges of assistance, as announced on
3 and 4 September in Berlin at a high-level conference
on the Lake Chad region.

Furthermore, the actions of the Lord's
Resistance Army - despite its waning operational
capacities - continue to threaten the safety of civilians,
particularly in the Central African Republic and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council to
maintain the Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army, pending the
development of a strategy for the gradual withdrawal
of the Initiative, would keep that armed group under
pressure and weaken it considerably further.

The difficulties identified demonstrate the need
for a participatory and inclusive regional cooperation
strategy for all components ofthe populations concerned
in order to provide an appropriate response to the
challenges facing the region. In this regard, my country
supports the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) for the advancement
of peace and security, and welcomes the approval of
a regional action plan to promote the participation of
women in human rights and crisis resolution activities
in the region, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and
in accordance with the recommendations of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa.

The partnership among regional, subregional and
intergovernmental organizations, in the framework of
shared experiences and mutual support to address the
challenges to the fight against instability, is proving
to be of immense importance. The ECCAS-Economic
Community of West African States joint summit on
peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism, held on 30 July, exemplifies
such cooperation. We call on the international
community to support the implementation of this
summit's conclusions.

We stress the importance of collaboration between
ECCAS and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community in the context of integration and
regional cooperation, particularly on issues pertaining
to peace and security, as well as the good cooperation
between UNOCA and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, aimed at harmonizing
the United Nations approach to peace and security in
Africa in their respective subregions.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1065)
provides useful information on the good offices,
preventive diplomacy and mediation activities of
UNOCA, which has made progress in recent months
in the area of peace, security and stability in Central
Africa. They placed a particular focus on the prevention
and mitigation of crises, support for the implementation
of inclusive political reforms and the promotion of
dialogue, thereby contributing to the peaceful outcome
of elections, particularly in Sao Tome and Principe.

Likewise, the coordinating role played by UNOCA
among the various United Nations agencies in the
region is a key component of the synergy of United
Nations actions in Central Africa. This is attested to
by the first workshop attended by representatives of
United Nations political components in the region, held
on 5 and 6 November in Libreville under the auspices
of the Regional Office, in response to presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/l7, of 10 August.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoirc reaffirms its support for
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and to the Special Representative of the Secretary»
General, whose mission of good offices and preventive
diplomacy remains of utmost importance in the quest
for peace, stability and socioeconomic development in

the States of Central African. Cote d'lvoire therefore
extends its full support to the renewal of the UNOCA
mandate until 31 August 2021.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
