Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I too
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for his very detailed and comprehensive briefing. I
wish also to thank the representative of Palestine and
Ambassador Gillerman for their useful contributions to
our debate. On behalf of Belgium, a friend of Israel, I
wish Ambassador Gillerman all the best in his future
endeavours.

Two years ago, the most serious crisis that had
affected the region in a long time threatened to bury
once and for all the hope of the peoples of the Middle
East that they might live in common peace
and security. By contrast, the developments of recent
weeks - at the international level, regionally and on
the ground - give the affected populations hope of
lasting stability. That hope is fragile to be sure, but it is
real. The events of recent weeks are also a source of
encouragement for all concerned to continue and
redouble our efforts.

It is from that dual perspective that I wish to
address the Council today. Meeting in Paris along with
the 27 members of the European Union and all other
Mediterranean countries, President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert publicly confirmed their shared
commitment to Annapolis. In-depth negotiations are to
lead by the end of 2008 to a peace agreement leading
to the establishment in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip of an independent and viable Palestinian State. It
seems inevitable that there will be difficulties before
such an agreement is concluded, but Belgium and its
European partners extend their support to the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders for the political courage they
have shown in pursuing this process.
But negotiations alone will not be enough. As the
European Union and its Quartet partners recalled on
24 June, it is urgent that tangible progress support the
ongoing process of bilateral negotiations. The daily
realities indeed threaten the credibility of the entire
political process.

In that context, there are a number of priority
issues. Several projects, in Jenin and in Bethlehem,
have proven that there is potential for cooperation
between the Israelis and the Palestinians in making a
difference in the security and economic spheres.

Those examples show the path to follow. But, if
we are to avoid a crisis of confidence, which would
threaten this cooperation, those projects must be linked
to respect for the commitments set out in the Road
Map. In that connection, we encourage the efforts of
Prime Minister Fayyad to strengthen his Government's
capacities to ensure the rule of law. We reiterate our
appeal to the Israeli Government to facilitate those
efforts, in particular by avoiding new military
operations in the areas now under the control of the
Palestinian Authority and by ensuring a tangible
improvement in freedom of movement in the West
Bank. Finally, we call on the Israeli Government to
immediately put an end to all settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem. Indeed, such activity is
not only illegal, but totally contradicts the spirit of the
ongoing negotiating process.

In Gaza, thanks to the Egyptian mediation, the
populations in the Gaza Strip and in southern Israel
have been enjoying a period of relative calm for
several weeks. However, several incidents remind us of
its fragility and of the urgent need for a halt to the
violence, beginning with the firing of rockets. Thus, if
it is to last, this period of calm must not be an end in
itself; rather, it must become a step towards
normalization not only of the security situation in the
Gaza Strip, but also of the humanitarian, economic and
political situation there, and must lead to the release of
Corporal Shalit.

Moreover, we encourage the efforts of President
Abbas with a view to a political reconciliation among
the Palestinians. We appeal to the parties concerned to
do their utmost to permit the reopening of the crossing
points under Palestinian Authority control, while
reaffirming the European Union's readiness to resume
its monitoring mission in Rafah.

In addition to facilitating the negotiations
between the Israelis and the Palestinians, the summit of
the Union for the Mediterranean enabled the Syrian
and Israeli leaders to confirm the continuation of their
indirect negotiations, which were re-launched under
the aegis of Turkey. Belgium welcomes this resumption
of a dialogue that is taking place within the framework
of the Madrid Agreements and that thus can only
benefit all the efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace
in the Middle East.

In the context of the hopes and challenges that
have arisen out of recent regional developments, I

08-4326]
should like to conclude with a few words on Lebanon.
After a prolonged political and institutional stalemate,
and after the fears aroused by the resort to arms by
some Lebanese against other Lebanese, the Doha
agreement has offered the prospect of lasting
stabilization of the country and of its rejection of
violence. The election of President Sleiman and the
formation of a unity Government are important steps.
They should encourage the Lebanese leaders to invest
in comprehensive implementation of the Doha
agreement, while agreeing on the electoral law and
resuming the national dialogue, so as to guarantee the
unity, independence, sovereignty and stability of
Lebanon, as hoped for by the Lebanese. It is in that
context that we appeal to Presidents Sleiman and
Al-Assad to swiftly implement their joint statements
aimed at normalizing the bilateral relations between
their countries.

With the objectives of stability and peace, which
are at the heart of resolution 1701 (2006), in mind,
Belgium associates itself with the statement of the
Secretary-General in hoping that the humanitarian
gestures of 16 July will make a positive contribution to
regional stability, while we convey our condolences to
the affected families.

