Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): For
several very long days, the 15 members of the Security
Council have worked in a particularly constructive
spirit on the most difficult issue on its agenda: the
conflict in the Middle East. They have done so by
maintaining a positive and constant contact with the
parties concerned.
All of the members of our Council share two
convictions. Because today there is no mediation,
because peace negotiations are at a standstill and
because the cycle of violence is increasingly spiralling
out of control, the United Nations must act. It is doing
so through the actions of its Secretary-General, who is
currently taking part in the Amman summit. However,
Mr. Kofi Annan cannot act under optimal conditions
unless he receives a very clear mandate from the
Council.

Our second conviction is that the Security
Council cannot, on an issue as difficult as this one,
make its voice heard and assist the Secretary-General
in influencing the course of events unless it is united. It
is in this spirit that the four European members of the
Council worked with all of their partners. The result is
here tonight, in the shape of a draft resolution which
we are submitting officially. This draft is substantial
and balanced. If it were to be adopted, it would give
Kofi Annan and the parties to the conflict a clear
perspective of the path to be followed in order to put an
end to the violence and to end all of the measures that
are keeping the Palestinian people under unbearable
constraints, with a view to the resumption of the peace
negotiations.

Despite almost unanimous support, our draft
resolution does not yet have all the backing necessary
for effective action on the part of the Council. That is
why we decided not to submit it to a vote, and to
continue to try to muster the support that we are
lacking this evening. With respect to the text presented
by our partners from the non-aligned countries, the
four European members decided to abstain, despite the
great merits of the draft. We abstained primarily
because of the alternative approach that we chose
together. This evening's vote does not in any way
change France's policy in the Middle East - its
commitment to all those who are suffering today and
who want to build their nation and their State in peace.

In conclusion, I would like once again to pay
tribute to all of our partners and to the representatives
of the parties to the conflict, as well as to those of the
Arab countries. Over the past few days, we have done a
remarkable job together. Let us continue together, so
that the United Nations can play its full role in the
service of ajust peace.

