Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today's unanimous adoption of resolution
2295 (2016) and thanks the French delegation in
particular for the continuing leadership it has shown on
Mali, in close consultation with the African members
of the Council.

We support a mandate for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) that enables troops to take robust
action to defend themselves and protect civilians in a
security environment characterized by asymmetric
threats. The losses taken by MINUSMA over the past
year have already been graphically referred to by others.
We agree that troops should be enabled to undertake
proactive defence by taking action to address threats to
civilians and United Nations personnel in their area of
operation.

We pay tribute to the high number of peacekeepers
who have risked their lives and in all too many cases
lost their lives in Mali. We continue to be concerned
at the lack of key capabilities of the Mission to enable
it to effectively carry out its mandate. We support the
intent to send a clear message about how we expect the
mandate to be carried out. We wish to reiterate New
Zealand's view that this mandate clarifies MINUSMA's
mandate and does not broaden the Mission's
authorizations specifically by granting any ability to
engage pre-emptively in counter-terrorism activities.

In our View, the mandate was not really the
problem that needed addressing in this case. The
powers of MINUSMA are clearly stated in paragraph
17: the words "all necessary means" should mean
what they say. Adding complicated language around
complex operational issues, such as force posture, risks
exacerbating the problem of less clear mandates and
may raise unhelpful implications for other mandates.
As noted in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (S/2015/446), United Nations
missions currently have significant shortcomings that
make them poorly suited to such roils. Mandating such
tasks to any mission would require a much greater
degree of consideration and discussion in the Council.

We welcome the inclusive approach taken in
the lead-up to the adoption of the resolution, and we
particularly welcome the engagement with troop-
contributing countries and the opportunity to discuss
the situation in Mali with the Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister in the informal interactive dialogue
with the Council on 16 June.

