Mr. Brencick (United States of America): My
delegation thanks Special Coordinator Alvaro de Soto
for his informative briefing and wishes him every
success in his challenging new mission.

The United States reiterates its serious concerns
regarding the challenges faced by the international
community and by the parties in bringing about a more
peaceful, prosperous and democratic Middle East.

With respect to the Israeli-Palestinian situation, it
has been three years since President Bush put forward
his vision of two democratic States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
Since then, a strong international consensus has
developed behind that vision and behind the road map
for peace designed to achieve that vision. Both parties
have clear obligations under that roadmap. Progress on
the road map and moving towards that vision of two
States living in peace and security cannot be achieved
by rhetoric and blame. Right now, the focus of our
efforts, as well as those of the international community,
should be on working towards the successful
implementation of the Gaza disengagement plan.

United States Security Coordinator William Ward
has been on the ground since 9 March to assist in
reforming the security services and to coordinate
international assistance in the area. The Quartet's
Special Envoy, James Wolfensohn, has identified six
short-term and three longer-term challenges to
economic recovery and is working closely with the
parties on those issues. Overall, progress has been
made, but much work needs to be done to ensure that
this complex operation is a success.

Disengagement holds the potential to reinvigorate
the road map and to realize genuine progress towards
peace. We believe that the road map and existing
mechanisms, including the Quartet, are the best
avenues for moving the parties forward. Everyone here
supports the road map, and the Council has specifically
endorsed it.

A central challenge to be addressed between now
and mid-August remains improving the security
situation and creating conditions that will be conducive
to the success of the disengagement plan. President
Abbas has taken some concrete steps towards security
reform, which we encourage. He has made clear that he
will hold his security chiefs accountable for their
performance in halting attacks on Israelis. However,
overall Palestinian performance in confronting
terrorism has been far from satisfactory, and this must
remain an area of concern for us.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, we urge the
new Lebanese Government to move towards full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), including
militia disarmament. Our position on Hizbullah has not
changed. It is a designated foreign terrorist
organization and cannot play a role as a legitimate
political actor until it renounces violence and disarms.
The recent violent events initiated by Hizbullah along
the Blue Line on 29 June and 12 July underscore the
danger that this militia poses to international peace and
security.

We are also deeply concerned about Syria's
closure of its border with Lebanon. Although we
welcome legitimate efforts to interdict illicit trade and
the movement of terrorists and their assets, the severity
of that effort clearly illustrates an ulterior motive on
the part of the Syrians. This is clearly an attempt by the
Syrian Government to strangle the economy of
Lebanon by impeding trade across their border, which
is Lebanon's gateway to the rest of the Arab world and
a means of continuing to interfere in Lebanese affairs.

The situation underscores the need for the two
Governments to establish normal and sovereign
relations between themselves in order to resolve
problems such as this. At the same time, this is an issue
that is affecting Lebanon's trade with other Arab
nations, and we would expect that they would also
make their views known to the Lebanese and Syrian
Governments.

This is yet another example of Syria interfering in
Lebanon. The Syrian Government is signalling, not
only to the Lebanese but to the rest of the world, that it
is still trying to call the shots there.

