Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset, allow
me to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Costa
Rica for his participation in this Council meeting
today. We also wish to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the Council.

Allow me to express the appreciation of my
delegation to the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his
statement before this Chamber and in particular for the
important work that he is doing.

South Africa is a member of the ICC and we
remain committed to supporting its work. As we have
stated before in this Chamber, we see the Court as
central to ending impunity for international crimes and
to establishing conditions under which justice and the
rule of law can be maintained. The ICC, through its
ability to deter the further commission of international
crimes, serves as an advocate of adherence to the rule
of law, and thus we expect cooperation with its work.

We are acutely aware of the challenges facing the
Prosecutor, arising primarily from the fact that the ICC
does not have its own police force or army to execute
its warrants of arrest and is therefore entirely
dependent on the cooperation of States in that regard. It
would seem to us that there is a responsibility
incumbent upon the Security Council to demand the
cooperation of States, particularly in instances in which
the Council has referred cases to the Court.

In resolution 1593 (2005), the Council called
upon the Government of the Sudan and all other parties
in Darfur to cooperate fully with and provide necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor. In that
regard, we note with regret that there has not been any
progress with regard to the ICC-issued arrest warrants.
We therefore urge the Government of the Sudan and
other parties involved in Darfur to cooperate fully with
the ICC. There can be no sustainable peace without
justice in Darfur, and it is vital to bring to justice those
accused of bearing the primary responsibility for the
crimes committed.

We also note with disappointment that, since the
Prosecutor's previous report to the Council, the
situation in Darfur has not improved and civilians
continue to be targeted. South Africa continues to
support a comprehensive approach towards the
resolution of the conflict in Darfur, including the
political, security, humanitarian and judicial processes.
Only progress on all those fronts will secure
sustainable peace for the people of Darfur as they are
subjected to persecution, abuses and violations of
fundamental human rights.

It is for that reason that we support a declaration
from the Security Council on this issue.

