Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I would like to extend my
delegation's sincere appreciation to Argentina for taking
the initiative in organizing this open meeting of the
Council on the important question of the protection of
United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel. We are particularly pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over today's meeting.

 

We also wish to extend our deep appreciation to the
Deputy Secretary-General for her opening remarks, which
have set the tone for this meeting and voiced the urgent
need for action. We are equally appreciative of the
invaluable and impassioned contribution by the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme. We look forward
to the statement from the representative of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, many of whose personnel also
operate in vulnerable environments.

Most of the conflicts that now come before the
Council are internal armed conflicts. In many of them there
have been frequent and flagrant violations of international
law and international humanitarian law, in which civilians
have increasingly become deliberate targets of combatants.
In many, if not all, of these conflicts, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian personnel has become more
difficult because of the very often blurred dividing line
between combatants and noncombatants, and between
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel. There has been
a disturbing increase in the number and scale of direct and
calculated attacks against United Nations personnel,
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in the
field. Malaysia condemns in the strongest terms the attacks
on these personnel, who carry out their selfless missions
under what are very often difficult circumstances and at
great risk to themselves on behalf of the international
community.

The two open debates held in the Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict - debates that
culminated in resolution 1265 (1999) on this subject last
year - have been important steps in highlighting the issue
and the need for political will and action in the search for
solutions to complement humanitarian efforts in complex
conflict situations. The General Assembly, in adopting
resolution 54/192 without a vote, clearly demonstrated its
deep concern for the security and safety of humanitarian
personnel and for the protection of United Nations
personnel. In doing so it called on all Governments and
parties in countries where these personnel are operating to
take all possible measures to ensure that the lives and well-
being of humanitarian personnel are respected and
protected.

There are a number of legal instruments under which
the security and safety of officials of the United Nations
system are guaranteed. These include Articles 100 and 105
of the Charter, the Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations, the Convention on the
Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies, the
United Nations Development Programme Standard Basic
Assistance Agreements, and the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
Nevertheless, the security and safety of staff are still in
peril in many areas of United Nations operations.

A major concern is that the response by the host
Governments to various incidents affecting these
personnel has often been tardy and inadequate. The
Organization must insist that concerned Governments
conduct thorough investigations into all incidents affecting
the security of the Organization's personnel. My
delegation considers it vital that those who incite and
perpetrate acts against humanitarian personnel be held
accountable both by Governments and by the international
community. In this regard, we welcome the timely entry
into force of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel.

In recognizing that the security and safety of these
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions are of paramount
importance, especially in highly volatile and extremely
dangerous conflict areas, this Council has an obligation to
ensure that United Nations personnel, associated personnel
and humanitarian personnel are able to carry out their
missions in responding to the needs of civilians, who
should have unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance.
While proper training about the real situation and risks on
the ground would better equip humanitarian personnel to
handle risky situations in their mission areas, this does
not absolve the combatants of their own obligations and
responsibilities vis-a-vis humanitarian workers, who
perform noble tasks in the name of humanity.

My delegation suggested on several occasions that
it would be appropriate to pay tribute to the courage and
sacrifices of these humanitarian workers in the same way
that the Organization honours its peacekeepers. This
would provide fitting recognition of humanitarian workers'
selfless contributions and commitment to their vastly
important humanitarian work, which, for the most part, is
taken for granted.

It is an undeniable fact that the widespread
availability and use of small arms, light weapons and
anti-personnel landmines have had an adverse impact on
the scope and level of the violence that affects not only
civilian populations but also United Nations and
associated personnel and humanitarian personnel in
conflict zones. Most of the death or injury inflicted upon
these personnel is due to gunshot wounds and the effects
of indiscriminate shelling and landmines.

 

We must redouble our efforts to curb illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and also
vigorously support the global efforts towards the effective
implementation of the Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel
landmines. The effects of anti-personnel landmines are
particularly pernicious because they kill or maim not only
combatants, but, more often, innocent civilians - mostly
children and women - and military personnel years after
the conflict has ended. My delegation therefore supports the
imposition of arms embargoes in situations where civilians
and protected persons are deliberately targeted by the
parties to the conflict.

Given the nature and scope of the matter, there is
general recognition of the need for a comprehensive and
integrated approach to handling humanitarian crises,
bringing together political, humanitarian development and
human rights actors within an agreed framework of action.
Today's debate is testimony to this approach. Malaysia
strongly supports efforts to strengthen the relevant United
Nations organs. The Organization would also greatly benefit
from closer cooperation and coordination beyond the United
Nations system, to include regional organizations, bilateral
actors, Governments and non-State actors, as well as civil
society, including internationally recognized non-
governmental organizations and the private sector.

My delegation acknowledges and appreciates the fact
that the United Nations has taken a number of important
and effective steps to enhance the security and safety of
United Nations system personnel, in spite of severely
limited resources. This has just been highlighted by the
Deputy Secretary-General. Nevertheless, such efforts need
to be intensified. We look forward to the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General which is expected to be
issued by May of this year. We trust that this report will
contain recommendations that would contribute substantially
to enhancing, indeed ensuring, the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel, and humanitarian
personnel. We earnestly hope that these recommendations
will receive the strong and unqualified support of the
Council and the international community not only
politically but also, and more importantly, in terms of the
necessary resources.

In conclusion, my delegation gives its unqualified
support to the presidential statement that will be adopted by
the Council at the end of this meeting.

