Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this quarterly
debate. I would like to congratulate Nigeria on its able
leadership of the Council. I thank Mr. Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing.
Bahrain continues to reiterate its position with
respect to the Palestinian question, which is based on
the need to implement the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, respect the terms
of reference and work to find a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question. Such
work can be successful only with the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
decisions of the Quartet. We continue to demand that
the illegal blockade of Gaza be lifted.

We welcome the Palestinian national reconciliation
agreement, signed in Gaza on Wednesday, 23 April,
between Fatah and Hamas. We express our hope that
the agreement will end the internal divisions and help
the Palestinian people to attain their full rights, like any
other people in the world. Most important among these
is the right to achieve a lasting solution to the situation
based on international legitimacy, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, and
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also fully support
the aspirations of the Palestinian people in all their
efforts to achieve ajust and lasting peace in the region.
We commend the historic achievement of and wisdom
shown by the Palestinian leadership in ending years of
intra-Palestinian division. We support the step taken
by President Abbas in signing the accession documents
to 15 international instruments and treaties. That is a
step in the right direction and a legitimate right of the
brotherly people of Palestine.

A peaceful settlement of the situation in the
Middle East will be achieved only through an end to
the occupation of Arab lands, including Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions; the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital;
and the achievement of a just and lasting peace that
guarantees the right of return to the Palestinians in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). In addition, we assert the need to implement the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council and to respect without condition the
principles of international legitimacy, particularly with
regard to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which
prohibits any demographic change in territories under
occupation.

The most important issue remains the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people. We are in dire need
of reaching a just, lasting and comprehensive solution
that would guarantee the basic and legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people like all other peoples. In that
regard, it is important for all parties to honour their
commitments to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people, terminate the blockade of Gaza and halt the
construction of settlements.

To conclude, King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa of
Bahrain has affirmed that the Kingdom will continue
to adhere to the principles of peace, freedom, justice,
self-determination and coexistence, is committed to
the implementation of the resolutions of international
legitimacy, fervently champions the spirit of
moderation, and supports the Palestinian people in
attaining the fulfilment of their alienable rights.

