Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by conveying my gratitude to the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
presentation and to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the ambassador of Israel for their
statements. I also wish to voice my full support for the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.

It is for the States of the region and the
international community to see to it that the current
transition period in the region allows the laying of the
foundations of peace in the Middle East. As the
President of our Republic underscored, peace is
possible even if it does require painful concessions and
genuine political courage.

I wish to address three main points.
Turning to the situation in Gaza, consolidation of
the ceasefire, which requires full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009), remains a priority. Resolution
1860 (2009) laid out the main parameters for a durable
ceasefire, including the re-opening of checkpoints and
the setting up of mechanisms to ensure that the
smuggling of arms is stopped. In that regard, we
support the Egyptian efforts and call on all parties to
move quickly towards an agreement.

France and the European Union are resolved to
shoulder all their responsibilities in supporting the full
implementation of the resolution. The European Union
has declared its readiness to relaunch the EU Border
Assistance Mission - EUBAM. Rafah - as soon as
conditions allow and has studied the possibility of
extending its assistance to other crossing points if
security there is guaranteed.

The issue of opening crossing points is decisive
to improving the humanitarian situation and to
permitting the reconstruction of Gaza to be carried out.
In that respect, we welcome the convening of the
Sharm el-Sheik conference and the pledges that were
announced. It was important that the meeting
concerned both Gaza and the entire Palestinian
economy. That effort is part of the follow-up to the
Paris conference and reminds us that the Palestinian
Authority should ensure the administration and
ownership of any reconstruction efforts.

There is no military solution to the crisis in Gaza.
We have condemned many times, and continue to
condemn, the firing of rockets against Israel. We have
also condemned Israeli land operations carried out in
Gaza and the bombardment by the Israeli army of
Palestinian hospitals and premises of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. France recalls that
international humanitarian law must be respected
everywhere, in all circumstances and by all parties to
the conflict. In that context, we supported the decision
of the Secretary-General to set up a board of inquiry,
and we expect that its conclusions will be presented to
the Security Council.

In parallel to efforts mentioned, France continues
to support the immediate, unconditional liberation of
Gilad Shalit. We support Egyptian mediation efforts
and continue to follow discussions under way with
great attention.
My second point concerns the stages that must be
got through rapidly in order to put the peace process on
the right track.

I wish to underscore here, first, the importance of
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. Palestinians must be
able to speak with a single voice. There will be no

peace agreement with only one part of the Palestinian
people and no viable Palestinian State without Gaza.
Although discussions with a view to inter-Palestinian
reconciliation are facing many difficulties, we continue
to back the efforts of the Egyptian mediation. We hope
that an important step can be taken, in particular in
view of the Arab summit in Doha aimed at
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. The States of the
region, of course, have an important role to play here.
When the time is right, we will be ready to work with a
Government of national unity that will abide by the
fundamental principles of the peace process and will
accept to resume negotiations with Israel in order to
achieve the two-State solution.

We continue to fully support the Arab Peace
Initiative, which should be an essential base for a
comprehensive and lasting settlement in the Middle
East.

Our expectations are equally high with regard to
the new Israeli authorities. Despite repeated unanimous
appeals by the international community, settlement
activities continue. A wave of destruction of
Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem has compounded
that. As the President of our Republic recalled, the
settlements policy, by rendering the prospects for a
Palestinian State more difficult, does not contribute to
Israeli security, but on the contrary, increases the
dangers. In order not to compromise the peace process,
Israel must act in a strong manner now, without delay.
The settlements policy must be completely frozen, in
conformity with all commitments undertaken since the
Road Map was adopted.

Furthermore, we support a resumption, as quickly
as possible, of talks between Syria and Israel, whose
success is necessary for stabilization of the region.

The elements I have just referred to will
determine, in this crucial moment for the Middle East,
the progress towards the necessary resumption of
negotiations with a view to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State, secure, independent and democratic,
and living in peace side by side with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. Peace must be based on
the principle of land for peace, Security Council
resolutions, and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
international community and the Council have an
important role to play here. While we are convinced
that peace will be negotiated between Israelis and
Palestinians first, France is determined to take or
support any useful initiative.

Allow me to conclude by saying a few words on
the situation in Lebanon. First, France welcomes the
appointment on 24 March 2009 of a Syrian ambassador
to Beirut, in conformity with the commitment
undertaken by the Syrian and Lebanese heads of State.
On the heels of the establishment of diplomatic
relations, the opening of embassies and the
appointment of the Lebanese ambassador to the Syrian
Arab Republic, this is an historic step in the
normalization of relations between those two countries.

The French authorities also reiterated, on the
occasion of the State visit of President Sleiman to
Paris, their support for Lebanon and their commitment
to the implementation of the Doha agreement, which
has enabled the Lebanese people to resume the path of
dialogue and national reconciliation. My country hopes
that the legislative elections to be held on 7 June 2009
will be carried out in a climate of stability and respect
for democratic norms and will facilitate the
consolidation of the unity and independence of
Lebanon to which we all aspire.

My country also welcomed the establishment, on
1 March 2009, of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
aimed at putting an end to impunity and ensuring that
justice prevails in Lebanon. We have also recalled the
importance of States continuing to cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor, as requested in Security
Council resolution 1852 (2008).

France remains fully committed to the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1701 (2006). In this regard, we
attach special importance to the strengthening of
tripartite cooperation in the field under the aegis of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; the
disarmament of militias within the framework of
national dialogue; the strict implementation of the arms
embargo; and the settlement of the issue of Ghajar. At
some point, progress will have to be achieved on the
Shaba'a farms issue. We welcome the work carried out
by the Secretary-General to that end, and we invite all
parties to commit themselves to a genuine diplomatic
process.

