The Secretary-General: I am pleased to welcome
Her Excellency Foreign Minister Khar back to the
United Nations. I thank Pakistan for convening this
important debate. As this is my first time to address
the Council this year, I would like to warmly welcome
all the members of the Security Council and to affirm
that I count on their leadership. At the same time, I
would like to warmly welcome the new members of the
Council - the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda.

In the light of recent terrorist attacks in Pakistan, I
want to repeat my heartfelt condolences to the Victims
and to reiterate the United Nations strong support for,
and solidarity with, the Government's efforts to combat
terrorism and defend the country's institutions and
freedoms.

Meeting as the New Year begins, we are challenged
to look back on what we have accomplished in
countering terrorism and to look ahead regarding how
to overcome this deadly threat.

The past year saw solid progress. In June, the General
Assembly recommitted to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Through a consensus
resolution (General Assembly resolution 66/282), the
Assembly strengthened our resolve to support victims
of terrorism everywhere. It reaffirmed our commitment
to a comprehensive approach to terrorism, grounded in
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

No counter-terrorism policy can be effective
without addressing conditions that are conducive to the
spread of terrorism. That is the first pillar of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Today, I
would like to highlight three aspects of that pillar.

The first aspect is the critical links between
development and security. Nothing can ever justify
terrorism. No grievance, no goal, no cause can excuse
terrorist acts. At the same time, we must remove the
conditions that feed the problem. Terrorism festers
where conflicts are endemic and where human rights,
human dignity and human life are not protected and
impunity prevails.
Second is the importance of dialogue and
understanding. We have to drown out shrill appeals
to intolerance and extremism with sound calls for
compassion and moderation.

Third is the increasing use of information
technology to spread hatred. Terrorists and extremists
are exploiting social media networks to radicalize
people. This is yet another arena where we have to
replace the terrorist narrative with messages of peace,
development and human welfare. Progress in all
these areas will demand the steady efforts of States,
individually and collectively.

I welcome three upcoming international
conferences. In April, a new project on human rights
training for counter-terrorism law enforcement officials
will hold its first conference in Amman. The Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) working
group on human rights while countering terrorism is
organizing that event. In two weeks, Governments will
gather in Bogota for the International Conference on
National and Regional Counter-Terrorism Strategies,
organized by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre of the CTITF. This summer, the CTITF and
the Government of Switzerland will host a conference
of counter-terrorism focal points aimed at addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.

Attention to the conditions that are conducive to
terrorism does not in any way diminish the importance
of other counter-terrorism priorities. The financing
of terrorism remains a key threat, and States requires
capacity-building in response. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee's special meeting on the subject in
November 2012, chaired by Ambassador Puri of India,
was an important step.

In our efforts to eliminate terrorism, I urge
humanitarian, security and political actors to engage
in an open and sustained policy dialogue to ensure
that efforts to prevent acts of terrorism do not ever
impede the timely and principled delivery of assistance
of a strictly humanitarian nature to civilians. This is
all the more important as we cope with increasing
humanitarian emergencies around the world. This year,
we face challenges in Mali and the broader Sahel region,
where terrorism feeds off of extreme destitution and
undermines development through violence, intolerance
and human rights abuses. I welcome the Security
Council's resolve to tackle the challenges in that region
head on. I especially appreciate the Council's sensitive
approach to underlying factors that have led to this dire
security situation.
There were far too many victims of terrorism over
the past year, but none was more compelling in her
struggle than Malala Yousafzai, the young Pakistani
teen who was shot, along with her schoolmates, by
extremists. The Government and people of Pakistan
were joined by others around the world in rallying
behind Malala and offering their best wishes for her
recovery. I was deeply moved by her brave efforts
to champion the fundamental right to education - a
value enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, as well as in the teachings of Islam.

I am proud to count myself among her supporters
and well-wishers. Malala and her schoolmates have
shown tremendous courage. Their grace and integrity
challenge the world to respond to the terrorist threat
with the comprehensive and broad-based approach that
is essential to success.

I count on all members of the Council - and all
members of the international community - to unite in
advancing this important work.

