The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to acknowledge the presence at the Council table of
Senator Joseph R. Biden, in his capacity as deputy
representative of the United States on the Security
Council. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2000/1137)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Prica
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), took a seat at the
Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, document
8/2000/1137.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I give him the floor.


