President Chiluba: First of all I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September. I also
wish to express Zambia's appreciation for the support that
your country, through the European Union, has rendered to
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to address
the Security Council this afternoon, for I come as the
bearer of a message of hope and peace from the people
of the Great Lakes region in general and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in particular. This is a region that
in recent times has been ravaged by wars in which
thousands of people have died and hundreds of thousands
of others have been made homeless and forced to flee to
neighbouring countries. Among the worst hit recently is
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has been at
war since August 1998. I am, however, pleased to report
that after a full year of mediation by Governments of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC), the
combatants in the Congo have chosen the way of peace
to resolve their differences. As a result, guns are falling
silent. The carnage is coming to an end. There is now
hope for peace in the Congo.

When the rebellion started in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 2 August 1998, heads of State
of the region and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) immediately undertook efforts aimed at finding a
speedy and peaceful settlement to the conflict. Among
these efforts were the first Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe,
summit of 7 and 8 August 1998; the Pretoria, South
Africa, Southern African Development Community
summit of 23 August 1998; the Durban, South Africa,
regional leaders' consultations of 3 September 1998; and
the second Victoria Falls summit of 7 and 8 September
1998.

The heads of State realized that the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had both an internal
and an external dimension to it. Its resolution would,
therefore, have to take into account both dimensions as a
matter of necessity. To this end, the regional heads of
State agreed upon the following five basic principles as
the basis of the solution to the conflict: an immediate
cessation of hostilities; respect for the sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; the need to address
the security concerns of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and those of the neighbouring countries; and the
need to broaden the political space in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and facilitate an internal political
dialogue which would take into account the interests of
all Congolese people.

 

At the second Victoria Falls summit, I was mandated
to chair the regional mediation effort and was assisted in
this regard by the OAU, SADC and the United Nations. It
was recognized at the Summit that there was a need to
engage the Congolese rebel movement in the mediation
process if it was to succeed. To this effect, a proximity
mechanism was established comprising Zambia as
Chairman and the OAU Secretary-General. Also at the
meeting, the Heads of State charged their Ministers of
Defence and military experts to meet in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, at the headquarters of the OAU, to work out a
draft ceasefire agreement and modalities for implementing
the agreement and to suggest a mechanism for monitoring
the implementation of the ceasefire. The meeting in Addis
Ababa took place from 10 to 12 September 1998.

A number of meetings to negotiate and finalize the
draft documents were subsequently held in Lusaka, chaired
by Zambia and comprising officials and Ministers of
Foreign Affairs and Defence of States parties to the
conflict, namely, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Angola, Namibia, Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe, as well
as the OAU, SADC and, of course, the United Nations. The
Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD), which was the only
non-State party at the time, was consulted through the
proximity mechanism, which had been enlarged at this
stage to include Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania.
As Chairman of the mediation process, I undertook
numerous consultations in Zambia and outside, with leaders
of the region, in an effort to harmonize the different
positions of the parties. The consultations took cognizance
of the two dimensions to the conflict: the internal aspect of
the rebellion and the external aspect addressing security
concerns, particularly those of Rwanda and Uganda.

In order to ensure that both dimensions of the conflict
were addressed, the regional ministerial meeting which was
held in Lusaka on 15 and 16 January 1999 established two
working groups of experts. The first, comprising the
belligerents, the United Nations, the OAU and SADC and
chaired by Zambia, considered the three documents drafted
in Addis Ababa. The second working group, also chaired by
Zambia, addressed the issue of the security concerns of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of neighbouring
countries.

The documents were subjected to considerable scrutiny
and consultations in order to obtain the necessary
concessions and eventual agreement. Let me at this stage
acknowledge the magnanimity of President Laurent-Desire
Kabila, the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose support contributed in no small measure to
facilitating the peace process.

From March 1999 on, the Congolese rebels were
directly involved in the negotiations. On 7 July 1999,
after an intensive two weeks of meetings of officials and
representatives of the two Congolese rebel groups, the
Movement for the Liberation of Congo (MLC) and the
RCD, the regional Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
Defence finally adopted agreed texts of the Ceasefire
Agreement; the modalities for the implementation of the
Agreement; and the calendar for implementation. The
Agreement and the modalities also incorporated methods
for addressing the security concerns of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring countries.

On 10 July 1999, six Heads of State of States parties
to the conflict appended their signatures to the Agreement
at a signing ceremony held in Lusaka. Unfortunately, due
to differences within the RCD over who should represent
it, the movement did not append its signature on that
occasion. The differences over representation came in the
aftermath of a reported split of the RCD into two factions
in May 1999. The MLC also elected not to sign the
Agreement then.

I was entrusted by regional Heads of State to
undertake further consultations with the two groups in
order to reach an understanding that would enable them
to sign the Agreement. These consultations, which I
carried out with the assistance of other regional leaders,
yielded positive results when, on 1 August 1999,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba, leader of the MLC, signed the
Agreement on behalf of his group. With regard to the
RCD, a unique formula was found involving the signing
of the Agreement by 50 founding members of the
movement.

The signing of the Agreement by the RCD, which
took place in Lusaka on 31 August 1999, effectively
meant, and means, that the mandate entrusted to Zambia
in September 1998 had come to an end and been fulfilled.
The Agreement came into full force 24 hours after the
last signatures, and so far, the Political Committee and the
Joint Military Commission established by the Agreement
have already commenced their work. To this effect, the
Political Committee and the Joint Military Commission
met in Lusaka on 2 and 3 September 1999. The meetings
were attended by representatives of all the belligerents to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
except the MLC, whose representatives had been unable
to travel to Lusaka due to logistical constraints. Initially

 

the meeting had difficulties relating to representation of the
two factions of the RCD, on the Political Committee and
the Joint Military Commission. I am pleased to inform the
Council that the meetings found a formula which allowed
the participation of both factions.

At these meetings of the Political Committee and the
Joint Military Commission, the appointment of General
Rachid Lallali, an Algerian national, as Chairman of the
Joint Military Commission, was endorsed. The
representative of the OAU also briefed the meeting on the
activities of the OAU regarding the organization's support
to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Other issues considered included the budget of the
Joint Military Commission; the structures; and the
programme of work.

Furthermore, the meetings accorded Zambia permanent
observer status in both the Political Committee and the
Joint Military Commission. My country's association with
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is therefore continuing.

The holding of meetings by the Political Committee
and the Joint Military Commission soon after the last
signatures were obtained from the RCD is a clear indication
that the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has begun in earnest. I
am pleased to report that the parties to the Ceasefire
Agreement have so far complied with the Agreement,
which can be said to be generally holding.

I am confident that, with the support of the
international community, the implementation process will
proceed smoothly. The fact that the Ceasefire Agreement
was signed as a result of extensive consultations between
the conflicting parties themselves should serve as a
guarantee to security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This, in my opinion, means that no one, including
the United Nations, could have any security concerns or
fears in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend the United
Nations for its participation at all the stages of the
mediation process and for the supportive role it gave from
the time the mediation process started. We welcome further
the quick reaction by the United Nations in sending a team
of military liaison personnel to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and some neighbouring countries. This action
confirms the firm commitment of the United Nations to
ensuring that peace obtains in that country. It is our sincere
hope that other phases with regard to deployment of United
Nations personnel, including the sending of a technical
survey team to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will also be undertaken soon.

While we acknowledge the need for Africa to take
responsibility for its own problems, we also recognize
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies with the United
Nations Security Council. It is with this in mind that I
wish to appeal to this body to send a peacekeeping force
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo with an
appropriate mandate and size to tackle the complex and
unique problems in that country.

The ceasefire agreement prescribes tasks to be
tackled by the United Nations peacekeeping force that
include disarmament of Congolese non-statutory forces,
as well as foreign militias who will require relocation,
reorientation and reintegration into their respective
societies. It is, therefore, clear that the tasks of the
peacekeeping operation go beyond Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter.

With the foregoing, it is obvious that cost should not
be placed above everything else when determining the
mandate and size of the peacekeeping force. I have,
however, noted with disappointment that whenever the
international community is dealing with issues pertaining
to Africa cost is always the determining factor and almost
an obstacle to the effective involvement of the United
Nations. In other regions of the world where conflicts
have occurred no expense has been spared in the pursuit
of peace. This body needs to do the same now for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and for Africa.

Now that the implementation of the agreement has
started in earnest, I wish to appeal to the United Nations
to make generous contributions towards meeting the
humanitarian needs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Hundreds of thousands of Congolese people today
are living as refugees in temporary and inadequate
shelters in neighbouring countries. Within the Democratic
Republic of the Congo itself many more people have been
displaced. They have been subjected to unbearable
suffering and indignity. The international community
should ensure that the suffering of our Congolese brothers
and sisters living as refugees is reduced by making
available adequate resources to enable them to return and
resettle in their own country.

In summary, I wish to request the Security Council
to, among other things: first, authorize and support the

 

deployment of a peacekeeping force in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with an appropriate mandate and
size, based on the assessed needs on the ground; secondly,
quickly dispatch the technical survey team to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in addition to the team
of military liaison personnel which has already been sent to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and some
neighbouring countries; thirdly, make available adequate
resources for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
peacekeeping mission; fourthly, extend necessary and
adequate support to facilitate the process of internal
Congolese dialogue; fifthly, help in the mobilization of
humanitarian assistance to Congolese refugees and
internally displaced persons and facilitate their return and
resettlement; and, finally, assist with resources for the
economic reconstruction and development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There is, regrettably, a perception that the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, is usually
a bit slow and reluctant to support peace efforts in Africa.
The body is seen to be more forthcoming when dealing
with peace efforts in other regions, even though Africa
forms the largest component of the membership of the
United Nations. I therefore hope that the Security Council
will act with due proportion and understanding in dealing
with the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

