Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by expressing our condolences to the
Russian delegation over the loss of Russian lives in the
recent tragic events in Syria.

I would also like to express my thanks and
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Lowcock for
their efforts, as well as their briefings today.

The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the
agreement between Russia and Turkey to create
a demilitarized buffer zone in the governorate of
Idlib in Syria. The Sochi agreement is the result of
intensive, responsible diplomacy over the past few
weeks in Ankara and Damascus, followed by the
Iran-Russia-Turkey summit in Tehran. The agreement
is based on the Astana process principled approach
and spirit in creating de-escalation zones in order to
reduce the possibility of civilian casualties, while
fighting terrorism.

Stopping violence and bloodshed, while
eliminating terrorism in the area, is one the most basic
and principled positions in Iran's foreign policy. As
President Rouhani stressed during the Tehran summit,
combating terrorism requires a comprehensive approach
by taking into account all aspects of that unpleasant
phenomenon. From that perspective, the fight against
terrorism in Idlib is an integral part of the mission of
restoring peace and stability to Syria, but that fight
must not harm civilians.

The Russian-Turkish agreement is a step in the right
direction. It is in line with the determination expressed
by the Presidents of Iran, Russia and Turkey in Tehran
to continue cooperating with a view to eliminating
all terrorists, while taking into consideration the
humanitarian aspects. As during the Tehran summit,
the three leaders expressed their strong commitment to
Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity. That will enable Syria to restore its control
over other parts of its territory. Like any other State,
that is its inherent right.
The international community should welcome
that agreement and positively contribute to its
implementation. We hope that the agreement - within
the framework of the positive and successful Astana
process and in continuation of the recent Tehran
summit and diplomatic efforts by Iran - will quickly
help end disasters for the Syrian people and cleanse the
country of violent elements, while taking into account
humanitarian concerns.

Once again, we stress the need for the return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons. That will
undoubtedly contribute to the ceasefire and national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process; it
is also critical in advancing a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned political process. The right to determine the
future of Syria belongs exclusively to Syrians.

To that end, cooperation towards establishing and
launching the work of the constitutional committee
is critical. While Syria is passing through a critical
stage in defeating terrorists and regaining its unity and
territorial integrity, the international community should
stand firm in breathing new life into the country. As the
Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria in defeating
terrorists, it will play a constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.

In conclusion, with regard to the allegations of the
United States representative, I must stress that they
reflect onlly endeavours to cover up the failure of
United States polices in Syria.

The meeting rose at 12.40p.m.
