Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing the
Secretary-General's quarterly report (S/2012/275) on
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and to thank them for their
briefings.

In February, at a debate on the same item (see S/PV.6713), Togo welcomed the negotiations that had
begun between the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo.
These negotiations had promoted a thaw in diplomatic
relations between the two parties after a particularly
tense time in northern Kosovo in late 2011, marked by
acts of violence between the Kosovar and Serbian
communities.

Unfortunately, we note that, as the report
indicates, many acts of violence have undermined this
thaw, including arrests on both sides of Serbian and
Kosovar officials, attacks on individuals, and
especially the organization in February of a referendum
and local elections by the Serbian municipalities in
northern Kosovo in the face of the opposition of the
Kosovar authorities and the international community.

Despite these tensions, we note that negotiations
have continued under the auspices of the European
Union, leading to the conclusion of an agreement on
Kosovo's regional representation and cooperation,
which will allow Kosovo to take part in regional and
international meetings. However, we regret the fact
that divergent interpretations over the footnote of this
agreement has not made it possible for representatives
of the Pristina and Belgrade authorities to take part in

the same regional meetings. In that regard, we
welcome the readiness of UNMIK to support both
parties in implementing the agreement. We also
welcome the signing, in the course of the ninth
dialogue session in February, of technical protocol
between both parties, providing an operational
dimension to the agreement on integrated management
of crossing points reached on 2 December 2011.

The report indicates that concrete progress has
been achieved in the areas of the economy and the fight
against corruption, but it also reveals many obstacles
on the path to reconstruction, such as crime and
recurring threats to religious and cultural heritage sites.
We encourage the Kosovar authorities to take the
necessary measures to protect these heritage sites from
theft and vandalism.

Like other States, Togo remains concerned by the
allegations of human organ trafficking, and we await
the conclusion of the investigations. In that respect, we
can only commend the willingness expressed by the
Albanian authorities at the highest level to fully
cooperate with Mr. John Clint Williamson, lead
prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
who has been tasked with investigating accusations of
organ trafficking,.

My country believes that the positive signs and
progress we have seen could suddenly be called into
question if we cannot find a definitive settlement to the
question of the status of Kosovo. The ongoing inter-
ethnic incidents and violence, the frequency of which
has increased as a result of the electoral process under
way in Serbia and the rejection of peaceful
coexistence, reveal a lack of consensus among the
Serbian and Kosovar authorities regarding the final
status of Kosovo. Togo urges all the parties concerned
to refrain from these actions, which can only
exacerbate tensions among the different communities
and undermine the prospects for reconciliation between
them. We invite the parties to continue dialogue, which
is the only path to a peaceful and lasting resolution of
their differences

In that respect, the constructive approach of the
Serbian and Kosovar authorities was evidenced by the
restraint and spirit of compromise they demonstrated in
allowing the first round of the Serbian general
elections to be held in a calm and peaceful atmosphere
on 6 May in northern Kosovo, with the cooperation of
the OSCE. That is a sign of their desire to find
solutions to their differences through dialogue.

My country reiterates its warm gratitude to
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, EULEX, OSCE and all
partner organizations that, in a difficult context,
continue to promote the smooth operation of the
Kosovar institutions, to establish security and the rule
of law, and above all to bring together the different
communities in Kosovo and to strive for a definitive
settlement of its status.

Lastly, my country once again invites the leaders
of Serbia and Kosovo, as well as the Serbian leaders in
northern Kosovo, to continue their dialogue and to
continue to cooperate with all of their partners with a
view to resolving outstanding issues.

