Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
warmly welcome you, Sir, to the Council chair and
offer you my compliments for starting your presidency
with this important meeting.

I congratulate President Joseph Kabila on his
assumption of the presidency of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and offer my delegation's warm
thanks to him for his extraordinary initiative in coming
to New York so early in his presidency and seeking this
meeting with the Council. I also renew the United
Kingdom Government's and people's sincere
condolences on the loss of his father.

The United Kingdom values highly the
opportunity to have this discussion today. We must
make the most of it to confirm our commitment at last
to moving the peace process forward. The principles
are all set out and were signed up to more than 18
months ago in the Lusaka Agreement. The Kampala
and Harare disengagement plans have followed. We
now need to see the solid, steady implementation of the
peace process which has been missing for the past year
or so. This means a strong focus on the Lusaka
Agreement and we welcome President Kabila's clear
reaffirmation of its importance today.

I think there are three key areas to address in the
run-up to our meeting with the Political Committee on
21 and 22 February. On the military side, we welcome
the general restraint shown by all the parties in recent
days. This needs to be sustained and built upon. It is
essential for the parties to be in contact and to get back
to work on disengagement and withdrawal plans,
mapping out achievable, concrete steps and setting a
realistic timetable. They then need to take forward
those plans. In this light, it is welcome news that
President Kabila met yesterday in Washington with
President Kagame and we would be most grateful if the
President or his Foreign Minister could give us a
summary account of that meeting or an assessment of
its import. There can be no progress towards a political
solution without direct communication between the
opposing parties to the conflict.

This Council insists on a political solution to the
conflict. A military solution is clearly unachievable,
but the political track can only truly come alive if
credible progress is made in creating a political
framework that will give a voice to all Congolese
people. If we all put the rights and wishes of the
ordinary, peace-loving people of the Congo first, we
will reach a solution to this conflict surprisingly
quickly.

We wish therefore to see the early establishment
of an open, inclusive dialogue, as set out in the Lusaka
Agreement, that will allow the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to map out a new
future for their country and suffer no longer the
presence of foreign troops on their soil. We encourage
the Congolese authorities to reengage with the
facilitation appointed by the Organization of African
Unity in taking this forward. I make a particular appeal
to President Kabila to take the lead in this. He has the
most important role to play, not just in moving forward
dialogue among the Congolese people, but much more
generally in creating an atmosphere that will allow
truly open and representative dialogue to flourish.

In this respect, the United Kingdom very much
welcomes the pledge in President Kabila's inaugural
statement to restore normal democratic life in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with full respect
for human rights and justice, and to hold nationwide
elections. We call on all the Lusaka parties fully to
respect human rights and humanitarian standards. It
also might be useful to explore the scope for a multi-
donor mission to assess the humanitarian situation
across the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
would give us a much better understanding of the scale
of the problem and the level and kind of assistance
needed.
Then, there is the question of the United Nations
role. I come to this thirdly because the way in which
we can move forward depends first on the progress
made by the parties. In December last year, we rolled
over the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for a further six months. We need to use this
period to move forward. The United Nations has been
in limbo for far too long, and the Secretary-General
made it clear to us this afternoon that he wishes this to
change.

But MONUC, so ably led by Ambassador
Morjane and keen to carry forward its purpose, can
deploy and carry out its role only in parallel with
implementation by the parties to the peace process. The
parties must give MONUC their full, practical
cooperation. As host Government, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has a
particularly important role in this respect. Free access
and security must be provided for MONUC, as well as
for humanitarian agencies. We very much welcome the
early positive indications from President Kabila in that
respect. At the request of the Council, the Secretary-
General will this month be reviewing the situation on
the ground and the MONUC concept of operations. We
want to move forward, but we can do so only when the
Secretary-General is satisfied that the conditions are
right and will allow us to play a useful role. This
depends on forward movement by the parties and on
clear evidence of support and protection from the
Government and armed forces of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

We now have a programme and a clear
opportunity for making real progress in implementation
of the peace process, leading up to the Council's
meeting on 21 and 22 February. Let us make the most
of it. The United Kingdom will contribute forcefully to
that objective. Let us hope that we will soon be
applauding President Kabila for making the crucial
difference in ensuring the success ofthat programme.

