Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda): At the very outset,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
express our appreciation to your predecessor.

The statement of the President of the Security
Council of 24 January 1996 reflects the major concerns
and views of my delegation, given the tragic fact that,
despite the sustained efforts of the international
community to search for a way forward to an overall
situations of peace and security in Somalia, that goal still
eludes us.

Uganda supports the territorial integrity of Somalia
and has participated in several attempts to find a peaceful
settlement of the conflict, although internal, through the
medium of negotiations. It is regrettable, therefore, that
the situation in Somalia since the withdrawal of the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II) is
still so unpredictable that it is characterized by conflict,
instability and lawlessness.

The Uganda Government does not recognize any
faction purporting to be a Government in Somalia, and

 

we in Uganda are supportive of all efforts, both
international and regional, to promote national
reconciliation in Somalia, including those under the
auspices of the Organization of African Unity, through the
statement of 19 December 1995 of the Central Organ of the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution.

My delegation continues to be appalled by the rampant
gangsterism prevailing in Somalia in the form of
kidnappings and wanton killings of personnel of
international humanitarian agencies. We are equally
concerned about the consequences of the closure of the
Mogadishu air and sea ports, especially the effect that this
has had on the flow of humanitarian assistance and
emergency aid, particularly immunization and other
measures to control the spread of epidemic diseases.

Uganda is also concerned about the activities of some
foreign private entities that are abetting the alleged flow of
arms to Somalia. In this matter, my delegation is supportive
of the continued total arms embargo on Somali territory in
accordance with Security Council resolution 733 (1992).

We would like to add our voice to those of previous
speakers who have commended the work of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia in Nairobi and urge its
strengthening and eventual deployment in Mogadishu when
conditions permit. The Somali leaders, meanwhile, must
give up a little of their pride and rise to the occasion,
allowing the international community to reach out to them
and help them out of this intractable problem.

Finally, my delegation looks forward to the day when
a united and peaceful Somali State will resume its rightful
place among the ranks of nations.

