Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I would like to thank
thank the Security Council for the attention is accords
the question of Kosovo and Metohija via a regular
exchange of views on the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Security Council meeting convened every three
months. The message that we send from here to all
sides involved is exceptionally important. The force of
that message is understood by all political actors and,
even more important, by all communities in Kosovo
and Metohija.

Notwithstanding the many challenges, UNMIK's
role in the process of coordinating the activities of all
segments of the international presence, as well as in
stabilizing the situation in the province, is irreplaceable.
UNMIK's engagement is of paramount importance for
the Republic of Serbia; the Serbian population trusts
UNMIK the most, whereas, for its part, UNMIK is the
guarantor of the status neutrality of the international
presence in the province as provided for by resolution
1244 (1999). Very important also is the contribution
of other international organizations whose missions,
such as the European Union Rule of Law Mission, the
Kosovo Force and the Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), carried
out under the auspices of the United Nations, are
constituent parts of the international civil and security
presences in Kosovo and Metohija.

Serbia commends UNMIK's consistency and
commitment to the realization of the priorities mandated
by its mission. In view of its task of promoting security,
stability and respect for human rights, I would like to
emphasize that UNMIK's engagement, in its present
scope and with undiminished budget capacities, is
essential for the creation of conditions conducive to
reaching a durable and sustainable solution for the
question of Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time,
it sends a message to Kosovo and Metohija Serbs and
other non-Albanians who see in UNMIK a guarantor
of their survival that they are not forgotten. In that
sense, it is also important that we maintain the present
Security Council reporting dynamic on the work of
UNMIK. I expect UNMIK to continue to carry out its
mandate in a status-neutral way in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), especially in areas relevant to
the survival and normal and dignified life of the Serbs
and the members of other non-Albanian communities
in Kosovo and Metohija.

Turning to the report (S/2016/99) before us, I would
like to reiterate that, in order to present a broader
picture of the situation in which the Serbian and other
non-Albanian populations live in the province today, the
periodic reports must reflect the life ofthe communities
south of the Ibar River as well. Disregard for human

rights and the problems encountered by minority
communities all over Kosovo and Metohija make their
feelings ofisolation, neglect and hopelessness ever more
intense. I therefore propose that the next report include
a thorough review of the situation of the members of the
communities south of the Ibar River.

As I have done on previous occasions, I would like
to point to the importance that Serbia attaches to the
quest for solutions for internally displaced persons
from Kosovo and Metohija. The strategy of my country
in that regard is to fully support the persons displaced
from Kosovo and Metohija, whether they opt for a
sustainable return or for integration in the place of
displacement. Yet whatever support that Serbia may
provide to potential returnees will be insufficient, short
of adequate engagement by the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government in Pristina and their acceptance, or
at least toleration, by local communities, coupled with
the active participation of the international community.

The answer to the question of why an ever-smaller
number of people opt to return home to Kosovo
and Metohija is complex: they become frustrated
by administrative, security, institutional and legal
barriers and decide to integrate locally not as an
act of a conscious, personal choice, but rather as a
consequence ofa lack of genuine possibilities to return.
The OSCE Mission in Kosovo report of last November
is very indicative in that regard: out of 479 incidents
in Kosovo and Metohija, 310 were directed at Kosovo
and Metohija Serbs, 22 per cent of them returnees.
According to data from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, only 12,145
displaced Serbs and other non-Albanians returned,
while just 4,000 of them realized sustainable returns.
The quarterly reports of the Secretary-General are also
indicative of the worrisome trend of declining returns,
wherefore much more attention should be devoted to
this problem, as well as to measures to overcome it. The
worrisome statistical data should provide motivation
and lead to intensive work to remove the obstacles that
prevent and make it more difficult for the internally
displaced persons to achieve sustainable returns in
larger numbers in which, under resolution 1244 (1999),
UNMIK also should play an exceptionally important
role. Promises alone are not enough; effective measures
and concrete results are needed.

I have already lost count of how many times I have
drawn the attention of the members of the Council, which
represents the most important body of the international

community, that, year after year, we keep repeating the
data that over 220,000 Serbs were expelled from their
ancestral homes in Kosovo and Metohija and that only
1.9 per cent of them realized sustainable return. Does
that mean that the international community has given
up on the return of 220,000 Serbs? Will it legitimize the
ethnic cleansing of Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija?
How many more years must go by before the Serbs are
able to return? Sixteen or seventeen years have already
passed. Or is no one planning on their return at all? Or
are they fair game indeed?

Piecemeal data on attacks on the life and property of
Serbs and other non-Albanians create a somewhat fuzzy
picture of a civilizationally unacceptable phenomenon:
the persecution of people only because they do not
belong to a majority community. Unfortunately, there
are many examples. Last October, a group of Albanian
youths beat four Serbian boys younger than 15 years
old in the village of Donje Kusce near anilane. Two
of them sustained serious injuries: one was stabbed
with a knife, the other was hit with a metal bar. At the
beginning of December, a number of Serbian houses
were shot at in repeated gun bursts, a car was set on fire
and the memorial to the victims of the NATO bombing
and the monument to children killed at the Bistrica
River in 2003, whose killers were never found, were
vandalized at Gorazdevac, municipality of Klina.

The presentation of the response of institutions,
including police investigation, prosecution and the
sentencing of perpetrators, would be welcome indeed.
The Council will agree that the statistics on the
processing of crimes and the providing of compensation
for criminal offences, including murders committed
against Serbs, would make for illuminating reading. Let
me remind the Council that the number of killers of over
1,000 Serbs since 1999, tried and given legally valid
sentences to date continues to be zero. These things,
however, are the litmus test for the achievements of a
society in the area of democracy and the rule of law.
One question is very pertinent in this regard, namely,
whether the murder of Serbs is a criminal offence or
whether that, too, can go unpunished? How, then, can
the Serbs believe in the rule oflaw ifup until now no one
has been prosecuted and sentenced for those murders?

In the light of what I have said here, I call again on
the United Nations and representatives of the Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and Metohija to
help overcome the problems that make the return
of internally displaced persons to their homes more
difficult. We should keep in mind that, beyond the lack
of security, the absence of effective mechanisms for
the restitution of usurped property is one of the most
important factors that prevents or limits returns. The
April 2015 report of the Secretary-General states that

"[u]nresolved property rights remained a
key impeding factor to progress in voluntary
returns and intercommunity relations in Kosovo."
(S/2015/303, para. 34)

To that end, we would draw attention to the
institutional measures taken by Pristina, such as the
draft law on the Kosovo agency for property comparison
and verification, which contravenes the 2011 technical
agreement on customs stamps and cadastre. The draft
law's adoption would make it possible to legalize the
unlawful seizure property and would cause irreparable
damage to the Serbian community in Kosovo and
Metohija. The realization and protection of property
rights are one of democratic society's most important
achievements and represent the vital interests of a
community, as also stated in the October 2014 report
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe entitled An Assessment of the Voluntary
Returns Process in Kosovo. It is therefore of paramount
importance to draft a new law using a process in which
representatives of displaced persons and the Serbian
Orthodox Church would also participate.

The fragility of the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija in various sectors is noted also in the European
Commission 2015 report on Kosovo. The report notes,
inter alia, that Kosovo's judicial system is in its early
stages of development and is still prone to political
interference. The attitude of the Pristina authorities
and judiciary towards Mr. Oliver Ivanovie - the leader
of the Serbian Civic Initiative "Serbia, Democracy and
Justice", about which I have spoken in the Security
Council on a number of occasions - led to a verdict
that can be characterized only as political, proving
the existence of political interference in a convincing
manner. The verdict, without foundation in justice or in
law, is a far cry from contributing to the stabilization
process in the province and to the building of trust in the
institutions and the rule of law in Kosovo and Metohija.

The absence of the rule of law, the existence
of divergent interests between the Government and
opposition political structures, as well as the lack
of genuine will to fulfil the conditions put before
the Government in Kosovo and Metohija by the
international community, will be a destabilizing factor
for some time to come. A negative climate for Serbs is
being created because of alleged concessions made by
the Pristina side during the Brussels dialogue. There is
therefore a danger that violence could spill over from
Pristina into Serbian enclaves in the other parts of
Kosovo and Metohija.

Kosovo and Metohija's level of religious
extremism is the highest in the region. Radical Islamist
structures, supported by a large number of Islamic
clerics - Imams - from the official Islamic community
of Kosovo and Metohija, as well as international and
local Islamist organizations, is proof ofa serious threat
of terrorism, particularly given their associations and
links with foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and Iraq
who have left the region at the highest rates of any
Muslim population in the Balkans.

Political radicalization and the worsening of the
security situation due to the escalation of political and
religious extremism threaten all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija, and returnees in ethnically mixed
communities are generally the most threatened. That
calls for additional measures to improve the security of
Serbs and members of non-majority communities who
are, as stated in the report I mentioned, regular targets
and victims of ethnically motivated attacks.

The presence of terrorist elements and the activities
of radicalized extremists, including returnees from
conflict-ridden areas in the Middle East, give rise to
particular concern. The report itself speaks of arrests
and indictments of a number of Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians suspected of being connected with terrorist
organizations, while in the reporting period graffiti
making explicit reference to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has defaced Serbian houses, the walls of
Serbian Orthodox churches and road signs. Four armed
Islamists were arrested in January at the portal of the
Visoki Decani Monastery, ajewel of Serbian, European
and world spiritual and cultural heritage, which is on
UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger.

The Republic of Serbia is fully committed to
the dialogue being conducted between Belgrade and
Pristina and facilitated by the European Union and
to the implementation of agreements reached. In the
circumstances in which the Serbian people of Kosovo
and Metohija live, they see in the covenants entered into
by the European Union under the Brussels agreement
the guarantee of their survival and development. The
community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo
is intended to articulate the interests of the Serbian
population and provide an institutional mechanism
for collectively realizing and protecting their basic
rights and contribute to a continued and more rapid
normalization of relations.

In all reports of the Secretary-General, it has been
asserted that a speedy establishment of the community
of Serb majority municipalities is crucial for the
implementation of the Brussels agreement. Yet so far
the community has not been established. Instead of
positive steps in that direction, a new element has been
introduced contrary to the Brussels agreement, namely,
the inclusion of the so-called Supreme Court of Kosovo
in the process of review and de facto revision of the
agreement. If the Supreme Court of Kosovo is tacitly
accepted to be an institution empowered to alter a
political agreement facilitated by the European Union
reached at the highest level, the purpose of dialogue and
the guarantee that every agreement will be implemented
in the form in which it has been reached are thrown
very much into question. It sends a negative message
to the Serbian community, as well as to the European
Union as a facilitator and to the United Nations.

I would reiterate that my country's commitment to
contributing to the stabilization of the situation in the
region and to the agreement I signed with Mr. Hashim
Thaci, which clearly defines the obligations of both
sides, the main reason for the signing of the Brussels
agreement was, in the absence of substantive progress
in the realization of basic human rights for Serbs and
members of other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo
and Metohija, to establish a separate mechanism that
will make it possible for those communities to lead a
normal life. In that sense, the idea of establishing the
community of Serb majority municipalities draws
intrinsically on the spirit of resolution 1244 (1999) as a
mechanism, the primary function of which is to protect
human rights, ensure the safe and sustainable return of
all refugees and displaced persons and permit them to
live a normal twenty-first century life.

In conclusion, I would like to point out once again
that the Republic of Serbia's national priority is to
achieve a political solution for the question of Kosovo
and Metohija. In order to reach such a solution, it is also
necessary to achieve reconciliation. Serbia is therefore
strongly committed to dialogue with the representatives
of Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, within
which very important agreements have been reached.
My country's commitment to the process reflects its
firm determination to make an active contribution to
stability in the Western Balkans and the settlement
of all outstanding issues by political and diplomatic
means. It is exactly with that goal in mind, and despite
the many challenges, that we have been constructive
in the dialogue and ready to compromise, which has
not often been easy. Our approach has made it possible
for mutually acceptable solutions to be reached on
many complex issues, from legislation to energy and
telecommunications, in the interest, above all, of
reconciliation and a shared future.

We expect the European Union to continue to
facilitate our dialogue with Pristina. For its part, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia will undoubtedly
continue to be actively engaged in implementing the
Brussels agreement in the interest of the peace, stability
and economic prosperity of the region.

