Mr. Brencick (United States of America): My
delegation would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mwakawago
for his final briefing to the Council and to express deep
appreciation for his dedicated service. We also salute
Force Commander Major-General Akram, Police
Commissioner Benzu and all the civilian and military
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), past and present, for their
successful mission.
Finally, looking ahead, we congratulate Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Victor
da Silva Angelo on his well-deserved appointment as
the new Executive Representative for the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL).

The successful end of any peacekeeping
operation, especially one that, just a few years ago, was
the largest peacekeeping operation in the world, is truly
a momentous occasion. My Government is pleased to
join others today in congratulating UNAMSIL on the
completion of its long and exceedingly difficult
mission. Despite the problems, the Sierra Leone of
today is, thanks to UNAMSIL, an altogether different
and far more hopeful place than it was during the war-
torn decade of the 1990s. We salute all those who have
participated in and supported UNAMSIL over the past
six years for the many accomplishments that have
taken place in that country since the Lome Peace
Agreement.

While the time for peacekeeping is over, the time
for peacebuilding is at hand. It is highly appropriate
today, as the Peacebuilding Commission has been
created by the General Assembly and by this body, for
us to have this discussion. With the establishment of
UNIOSIL and with donations from many quarters
around the world, the international community has
underscored that it is, and will remain, part of this
rebuilding process.

Myriad challenges remain, of course. These
include the consolidation of democratic institutions,
improvement of human rights practices and a
transformation of the economy. Better governance,
greater transparency and more inclusive policies by the
Government will be especially critical for building on
the current peace in Sierra Leone.

We look forward to working with the United
Nations and with Sierra Leone to help it help itself
during this important phase. We also agree with the
Secretary-General, who has drawn attention to the
wealth of lessons for future peacekeeping operations
provided by UNAMSIL's experience. We welcome the
focus on closer cooperation among regional
peacekeeping operations, among other fresh
approaches to peacekeeping. Innovation will be part of
UNAMSIL's proud legacy, and in this regard we note
the essential security support and other assistance
provided by UNAMSIL to the Special Court in Sierra
Leone. We are very pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) will be continuing to
provide the security the Court needs as it winds up its
work.

Finally, we commend Special Representative
Mwakawago and the entire United Nations team for
UNAMSIL's very well-planned, well-balanced and
well-executed drawdown and completion strategy. We
thank them all for a job well done.

