Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Danish presidency, under your leadership, Madam,
for convening this timely public meeting to deal with
the situation in Timor-Leste, which has become
increasingly distressing since the last meeting of the
Security Council on this item.

I wish to extend thanks to Ambassador Jose Luis
Guterres of Timor-Leste, whose statement before this
Council underlined the sense of urgency that should
guide the coming actions of the United Nations in that
country. Through you, Madam, I would convey to him
and to all Timorese the heartfelt condolences of Brazil
for the lives lost in recent events.

I wish also to express my appreciation for the
briefing given by Special Envoy Ian Martin on his
mission to Timor-Leste and his insightful update of the
situation.

Ever since this Council held a public meeting on
Timor-Leste last May, the serious deterioration of
conditions on the ground have confirmed the gloomier
assessments of the country. In fact, institutions have
proven fragile and violent political disagreement has
emerged.

Brazil joins previous speakers in welcoming the
prompt response of Portugal, New Zealand, Australia
and Malaysia to the request for assistance formulated
by the Government of Timor-Leste. Having said that, I
would state that we remain deeply distraught by reports

S/l'V.5457

 

of recurring acts of banditry and other forms of
violence. At this juncture, it seems essential for the
Timorese to strive to make the foundations of political
and legal institutions strong enough to allow different
groups to express their opinions and to advance their
claims without resorting to violence. In doing so, they
will be acting in accordance with their courageous and
relentless efforts to become independent and build a
better country for themselves.
Last May, I closed my statement by emphasizing
that piecemeal solutions are neither positive nor viable,
and I added that

"[i]n our view, the Security Council must at this
time deliver a strong, unequivocal message of
support for Timor-Leste" (S/PV.5432, p. 30).

That is becoming increasingly true. The United Nations
and its Member States must act in a manner that
reassures Timor-Leste of their commitment and assist
that country with the necessary means to overcome the
present situation.

A stronger United Nations presence should be
carefully planned and implemented in order to help
restore stability and allow the political forces in the
country to solve their differences in a peaceful manner.
The Council should continue to work closely with the
Government. It should also discuss with the four
countries ways and means of strengthening cooperation
on the ground. In due course, all security contributions
should be placed under the United Nations umbrella,
with proper mechanisms of command and control and
accountability.

As a member of the core group and a sister
Portuguese-speaking country, we look forward to
hearing concrete proposals on the best format for the
United Nations presence. At this point, a full-fledged
peacekeeping operation, with a major police
component and a broad nation-building capacity,
appears to be an appropriate response, in line with the
request made by the Timorese President, Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament in their letter dated
11 June.

At this point, the Council should give priority to
restoring security. The 2007 elections should serve as a
time reference for positive domestic and international
action. A proactive United Nations engagement is also
needed in addressing underlying elements of the
present crisis. Beyond security, other relevant areas

certainly include helping to strengthen the rule of law,
assisting in humanitarian relief, extending cooperation
for development, addressing issues related to human
rights, promoting institution-building through
institutional support, and capacity-building within the
context of preparations for the coming elections in
2007. Within such a framework, we would welcome
the creation of mechanisms that could bring to justice
the perpetrators of the unlawful acts that have claimed
innocent lives in May and June.

The United Nations Office in Timor-Leste has
played its role in Timor-Leste. A technical rollover
resolution should serve only to prepare for a new stage
in international efforts. The Council should not delay
too long the decision to reassess the United Nations
presence.

I should like to reiterate the commitment of
Brazil to Timor-Leste. We will persist in our efforts,
both bilateral and multilateral, to help the people and
the Government of Timor-Leste to find peace, stability
and development, as stressed yesterday by President
Lula da Silva in a letter to President Xanana Gusmao.
At this time, I would emphasize that this Council, this
Organization and its Member States should not only
send a strong message of support for Timor-Leste, but
also take the requisite measures to make it real.

