Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to express my sincere thanks to the majority of
Member States of the United Nations, whose
honourable voices have expressed their views and
those of their people and their Governments with
regard to the need of putting an end to this aggressive
war as a violation of international law, moral values
and the Charter of the United Nations.

As I listened to a number of voices of those who
are misled or who have misled others, which declared
that they have joined the camp of war and aggression,
in opposition to the United Nations and its Charter, I
am fully aware that they have spoken not because their
people wanted them to do so, but because of reasons
that are well known to everyone. The warnings that the
United States has made to many other Member States
have reached us and everyone else present here. I
believe that the United States used a carrot-and-stick
policy in order to intimidate or entice smaller States to
make them do its bidding. I understand that some other
States whose military bases are now being occupied by
hundreds of thousands of American soldiers have also
been coerced and have no other choice but to obey the
orders of the United States.

What I have just said is a general comment; I
have two other comments to make.

My first comment concerns statements on the
humanitarian aspect, to which we have all listened. I
believe that I cannot disregard the inhuman effects of
the aggression against Iraq. We all know what is going
on there in terms of killing and destruction of the
infrastructure, the economy and the agricultural
system, as well as deprivation of basic provisions,
particularly medicine. We cannot disregard this issue,
but it has been represented from two points of View: a
purely humanitarian perspective - and I congratulate
all States that have begun to think seriously about it,
because it is a very serious issue, and all of humanity
will bear responsibility for it if they do not move
quickly to provide assistance to Iraq - and from
another perspective, represented by the United States
and the United Kingdom, which from the very
beginning wanted to put this issue before the world in
order to mislead it, distract it and alter its views
concerning the main issue, which is that of war and
aggression.

The United States wanted to legitimize its
aggressive, criminal military action against Iraq after it
had lost its legitimacy, owing to its inability to
persuade a majority of Security Council members to
adopt its criminal draft resolution. Therefore, it has
tried to use another way to achieve its objectives, and I
think it is a British plan, because the British are well
known for their trickery. As I listened today to the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom, the stance of both countries seemed to be
that they are shedding tears over Iraq and that what
really interests them is Iraq's future. I do not know how
they accept this - they kill someone, shed crocodile
tears over him and then attend his funeral.

What is said today reminds me of what General
Maude said in 1917, and I referred to it in a previous
statement. British General Maude came to Iraq in 1917.
He faced the people of Baghdad and said, "I come to
you as a liberator, not a conqueror." Britain then stayed
in Iraq from 1917 until 1958. Today, the new
colonialists come and tell us they have come as
liberators, not as conquerors, and will need some time
to withdraw. If the Security Council does not pay
attention to the term "some time", we will know the
reality of the American-British neo-colonialism in Iraq.

The United States concluded contracts to rebuild
the infrastructure of Iraq in 1997. Six years ago they
had commercial industrial contracts with companies
that some members of the American Administration
supervise; in fact, you can find these contracts on the
Internet. Some of them are to rebuild the oil industry
infrastructure, which is the basic reason for the war,
some are for rebuilding the infrastructure of the ports,
and others for rebuilding the infrastructure of Iraqi
industry.

I apologize to all those States that participated
with the United States in this vision and in the
aggression, such as Spain, Bulgaria and many other
small States, because they will get nothing from the
cake, if Iraq falls. This "cake" was pre-planned by the
United States and the United Kingdom even before Iraq
entered Kuwait in 1991. The contracts are safeguarded
and the companies have been preparing themselves for
many years, but officially these contracts were
concluded in 1997. Today the carrot is provided to
those many States which, regrettably, are contravening
the values and principles of the United Nations in
following the caravan of war and aggression.

The last point I would like to make is that Iraq
has not crossed the Atlantic to attack America and in
fact has no connection with whatever occurred in the
United States in September 2001. Despite the fact that
we have no weapons of mass destruction, the United
States armed forces have crossed the Atlantic Ocean by
the hundreds of thousands - and they are preparing
hundreds of thousands of other soldiers, because their
forces have been defeated - in order to finish off Iraq
and to control the region.

The warning I would like to make to the members
of the Security Council is that the United States and the
United Kingdom were hoodwinked when they were
told that the Iraqi people will receive them with
flowers and embraces and adulations, that the children
and their mothers will come and rejoice at the coming
of the United States forces. What happened is that the
Iraqi army, until now, has not confronted the United
States forces. The Iraqi people - the women, students,
peasants - are facing the American and British forces
in Iraq today. Therefore, when the United States found

itself facing fierce resistance by the Iraqi people, who
are keen on their independence, security and
sovereignty, and since they realized that the Arab
people and Muslim people and people all over the
world support Iraq and call upon it to resist, the United
States has started to destroy the Iraqi people.

Yesterday the United States destroyed 200 houses
in one suburb of Nasiriyah, and they have continued to
destroy residential areas in A'zamiyah and Yarmook, in
Baghdad and many poor suburbs in Basra. We do not
know what the future holds for us. The United States
will destroy the Iraqi people because the Iraqis hate it
and because the Iraqi people will resist and will pay the
price in blood in order to get the United States out of
Iraq.

The Iraqi people will defend the principles of the
United Nations and the principles of peace and
security. Therefore I call upon the Security Council to
take notice that the United States and Great Britain and
Australia are about to start a real war of extermination
that will kill and destroy everything. Then, regret will
be of no use. If the humanitarian issue is very
important then halting the war is more important, as it
is the cause of this deteriorating humanitarian situation.

I call upon all of you to move towards taking a
resolution to halt the war, to halt the aggression, to rid
the Iraqi people of what they are facing.

Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to tell the
entire international community that Iraq is committed
to the Geneva Conventions and the provisions of
international humanitarian law. They will see no harm
from Iraq except self-defence - defence of its people,
its dignity, sovereignty and independence.
