Mr. Qureshi (Pakistan): I wish Viet Nam, a
friendly developing country of Asia, great success in
its presidency of the Council this month. Let me also
congratulate Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad and the
United States delegation on their successful presidency
of the Council in June.

The new democratic Government of Pakistan has
inherited imposing political, economic and security
challenges. We are addressing those challenges
democratically and effectively. None among those
challenges is as critical as the threat posed by terrorism
and extremist violence - a threat we face in common
with our neighbour, Afghanistan

I have condemned the terrorist attack against the
Indian embassy in Kabul. We deeply regret the loss of
life and damage caused by that unacceptable suicide
bombing. Any attack on civilians or diplomatic
missions is highly reprehensible. As members of the
Council know, a day earlier a suicide bomber in
Islamabad killed 12 policemen and civilians and
wounded scores of people. Again, a day later, there was
a series of terrorist bombings in Karachi. We welcome
the condemnation of those terrorist attacks by the
Security Council.

I am therefore grateful for this opportunity to
address the Security Council on the situation in
Afghanistan. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing this
afternoon and to assure him of our cooperation.
Pakistan supports the central coordinating role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
accordance with its mandate, which is specific and
limited to Afghanistan. Bilateral relations between
Pakistan and Afghanistan will continue to be conducted
between the democratically elected Governments of the
two countries.

May I also thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his briefing on the humanitarian aspects of
the situation in Afghanistan.

Since the Bonn Agreement, considerable progress
has been made in Afghanistan. We need to consolidate
those gains and effectively address the outstanding
challenges, in particular the intensifying threat posed
by terrorist Violence and militant insurgency. The
continuing insecurity and violence in several parts of
Afghanistan can be attributed to a complex interplay of
several factors - the Taliban, Al-Qaida, lingering
warlordism, factional rivalries and criminal activity
including, but not limited to, the drug trade.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan are in
Pakistan's vital interest. The bonds of geography,
history, faith and culture inextricably link the destinies
of our two nations. We face a common threat of
extremism and terrorism. Peace and stability are
essential to enabling Pakistan and Afghanistan to serve
as the hub and corridor for trade and economic
cooperation between the dynamic regions of South
Asia, Central Asia, China and the Gulf.

Apart from the Afghan people, the people of
Pakistan have suffered the most from the decades of

conflict in Afghanistan. We have hosted over 3 million
refugees; we have been afflicted with drugs and arms;
and our frontier regions, which were previously
peaceful, have been inflamed by the three decades of
war and instability in Afghanistan, especially after
2001, when many Al-Qaida and Taliban elements
crossed the border into Pakistan.

Pakistan's contribution to the fight against
terrorism and extremism is well known. Much of the
success against Al-Qaida and Taliban has been
achieved with our support and cooperation. We have
lost more soldiers than any other country in the effort.
Yet, we remain determined to defeat and eliminate
terrorism and its root causes. An end to conflict in
Afghanistan will help to restore normalcy on our side
of the border; conversely, we recognize that our efforts
to stabilize, pacify and promote development in our
frontier region will also have a positive impact on the
situation across the border.

Pakistan has taken several measures to prevent
cross-border infiltration by terrorists and insurgents.
Those measures have curbed such cross-border
movement, but the security environment on our side
deteriorated sharply as a result of our role in the
counter-terrorism campaign. In 2007, Al-Qaida and
some Taliban-linked groups turned on Pakistan and its
security forces. Last year, there were a larger number
of suicide bombings in Pakistan than there were in
Afghanistan, resulting in 2,000 civilian casualties.
Pakistan lost Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto - a leader of
great stature and vision - to terrorist attack. This
terrorist onslaught continues. The recent suicidal attack
in Islamabad suggests that terrorists' threat to Pakistan
is far from over. Naturally, this has led to growing
popular concern, and to questioning by some of the
excessive reliance on the military option. However,
there is also popular disenchantment in Pakistan,
including in our frontier region, with the terrorists and
extremists, as evident from the success of mainstream
political parties in the region in our elections of
18 February.

The new democratic Government in Pakistan
cannot but be sensitive to the sentiments of our people.
The new holistic strategy we have evolved seeks to
restore peace in our frontier regions, halt and reverse
extremism and eliminate terrorism and violence
through political dialogue and socio-economic
measures, but retaining the option to use force
whenever required. We remain committed to

cooperation with Afghanistan and the coalition forces
to stabilize Afghanistan. Political reconciliation and
economic reconstruction and development are our
priority options to win over the people, the tribes and
the moderates and to isolate the terrorists and violent
extremists. In the context of these pacification efforts,
it is important to note that the problems and threats in
each area and region of our frontier - as well as
across the border - differ from region to region.
Pacification will therefore require painstaking efforts,
region by region, to win the trust and support of local
people and their leaders. We are negotiating with tribal
leaders and others with influence in those regions -
not with the terrorists or with those who do not eschew
violence.

Reconciliation and reconstruction are the only
sustainable solution to insurgent violence and
instability. We plan massive investment for the
reconstruction of the area and its incorporation into the
domestic political mainstream of the country. We
welcome the commitment by the United States to the
creation of reconstruction and opportunity zones in the
region and its pledge to provide $750 million over
three years to support those zones.

While we seek peace through dialogue and
development, challenges to the authority of the
Government, acts of terrorism and cross-border attacks
in Afghanistan, will not be tolerated. Where such
challenges and violations occur, the Government will
take forceful action to eliminate them. We are currently
doing so in the Khyber Agency against certain violent
and criminal extremist militias. The Chief of Army
Staff has been given the authority to decide on the
application of such military action when required.
Pakistan will not allow its territory to be used against
other countries. However, no foreign troops will be
allowed to operate inside Pakistan.

We can ensure greater success in containing,
terrorism and insurgency on both sides of the border
through more effective cooperation and matching
military measures. This is a joint responsibility.
Pakistan will continue active cooperation within the
Tripartite Commission. We are prepared to consider
suggestions to enhance the effectiveness of such
cooperation. At the same time, we feel that our partners
too could contribute to enhancing operational
cooperation by undertaking the following measures:
expansion of military deployments and check posts on
the Afghan side of the border to match Pakistan's
100,000 military personnel and 1,200 check-posts;
real-time intelligence sharing; caution in the use of
artillery and aerial attacks, to avoid accidents or
territorial violations; supply of counter-insurgency
equipment requested by Pakistan; more effective
checking of the 40,000 daily legal crossings, including
through use of biometric identity cards; and relocation
of Afghan refugee camps close to the border from
Pakistan to controlled sites in Afghanistan.

The bonds that bind the peoples of Pakistan and
Afghanistan, the mutuality of our strategic interests
and the democratic mandates of our Governments
dictate that political relations between our countries
should be much better than they have been in recent
months. Foreign Minister Spanta and I have made a
beginning by exchanging visits during the last two
months. President Karzai, whom I had the honour to
meet in Kabul, was one of the last people to see our
martyred leader, Benazir Bhutto, hours before her
tragic assassination.

Yet, clearly, we need to do more to overcome
suspicion and distrust. We will do our best to reassure
our Afghan brothers and sisters that our Government is
inspired by nothing but goodwill towards them. They
too should make every effort to address our concerns.

I would suggest that we take some initial steps,
such as the following: declaring mutual respect for
each other's sovereignty and territorial integrity, in
accordance with the Kabul Declaration; not allowing
our respective territories to be used against each other;
avoiding provocative statements; intensifying the
frequency of mutual visits at all levels; reviving and
reinvigorating the jirga process, in which respect
Pakistan will soon convene the smaller jirga meeting
we have agreed on; and supporting the Ankara process
as well as the Afghanistan-Iran-Pakistan tripartite
cooperation process.

The economic relationship and cooperation
between Pakistan and Afghanistan is already intimate
and intense. Our trade amounts to around $1 billion; its
potential is far more. We want to realize its full
potential. Most of Afghanistan's trade transits through
Pakistan. Pakistan has committed $300 million for
Afghanistan's reconstruction. We have pledged an
additional $20 million for the resettlement of Afghan
refugees. Responding to the food crisis, and despite
shortages in Pakistan, we have authorized the export of
50,000 tons of wheat to Afghanistan at subsidized
rates. Pakistan supports the Afghan National
Development Strategy, endorsed in Paris, as the engine
for economic growth and equitable development. We
will host the next meeting of the Afghan Regional
Economic Cooperation forum in Islamabad from 28 to
30 August this year.

Pakistan and Afghanistan must press forward on
all possible avenues to exploit the significant potential
for mutual economic cooperation, for example by:
jointly establishing reconstruction opportunity zones
along the border, in which Pakistan entrepreneurs
would be prepared to invest; implementing Pakistan's
plans to import electricity from Central Asia; and
implementing the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-
India gas pipeline project.

Afghanistan and Pakistan can succeed in
achieving their objective of peace, stability and
prosperity through mutual cooperation. They can
succeed only if they enjoy the unconditional support of
the international community. This debate is a good
opportunity to commence an honest and objective
evaluation of the challenges we face in Afghanistan
and to devise a cooperative strategy for success. That
strategy must combine military containment with
political reconciliation, administrative control and
rapid socio-economic development. The military
option should be used as the last, not the first, resort.
Military tactics should not create more alienation, more
opposition and more enemies. We are convinced that
dialogue and reconciliation together, with the
calibrated use of force, are the best means to promote
peace.

To win this war it is vital to win the hearts and
minds of the people. We must build peace in
Afghanistan through a bottom-up approach, Village by
village, district by district, offering incentives and
disincentives in order to win the cooperation and
support of the local population. Most important, our
strategy for success must accelerate reconstruction and
development. It must offer hope to the people: hope for
peace, for jobs and for better lives for themselves and
their children.

