Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you,
Mr. Minister, as President of the Security Council. We
are grateful to you for organizing this meeting on this
theme of such importance to international peace and
security.

In recent years, the United Nations, its Security
Council and Secretary-General and many regional and
subregional bodies have done significant work to
identify the reasons for and to prevent conflicts. It is
clear that efforts here must be focused, first and
foremost, on overcoming the often long-standing
political and socio-economic problems that are
exacerbated by a wide range of new transborder threats
and challenges. Among them are international
terrorism, drug trafficking, organized crime and the
danger of the spread of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. This list, of course, is far
from exhaustive.

There are no quick formulas for resolving large-
scale challenges in the area of preventing and resolving
conflicts. There is a need for multidimensional and
careful joint efforts to break the vicious cycle when
insufficient development leads to social problems and
when, against that backdrop, increasing political and
military instability leads to the outbreak of a conflict.
As a result, the effective realization of socio-economic
development programmes becomes impossible. The
complexity of those tasks requires working out a
balanced strategy stemming from the interrelated
nature of the problems of security, socio-economic
development and human rights.

States themselves should be at the forefront of
action. Of course, any assistance from the international
community to prevent the outbreak of new hotspots of
conflict should not be imposed. It is quite clear that the
duplication of efforts, any kind of competition and,
especially, hidden rivalry do not serve the common
cause.
To a large extent, success in the early prevention
of conflicts depends on the comprehensive use of early
warning instruments and on taking into account the
specific characteristics of individual conflict situations.
We are convinced that investment, both material and
intellectual, in the early prevention of conflicts and the
strengthening of the capacity of the United Nations in
the area of peaceful mediation, political analysis and
assessing conflict situations will pay off for the
international community.

Today's conflicts cannot be resolved by force.
The solution must be sought by involving all sides in
dialogue and negotiation, and not by isolating any of
them. The Russian Federation will consistently work to
achieve a political diplomatic settlement to regional
conflicts on the basis of collective actions by the
international community.

Russia believes that it is extremely important to
continue to actively use the provisions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which encourage
regional organizations to take more initiative in their
preventive diplomacy actions and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The existence of strong regional
organizations that can take on greater responsibility for
the situation in their regions will allow the United
Nations to deal in a more targeted manner with
genuinely global issues in the interest of the entire
international community.

Given the increasing demands of the effective
and judicious distribution of work between the United
Nations and regional organizations, the leading role of
the Security Council remains essential, under the
Charter, in questions of maintaining international peace
and security. This has to do first of all with obligatory
sanctions and control over regional and coalition
peacekeeping operations, which provide for the use of
force.

We note with satisfaction the noticeable growth
in activities of African States, primarily of the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations, in
the prevention and settlement of conflict situations on
the continent. This demonstrates the readiness and
increasing ability of Africa to take responsibility for
resolving its problems.

Russia itself participates in mediation activities
and efforts to prevent conflicts and actively supports
the relevant efforts by the United Nations and other
international and regional organizations.
