Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Today, Russia accused the majority of the Security
Council of attempting to destabilize the region by
supporting the United Kingdom's draft resolution
(S/2018/156). This is perverse, when in fact Russia's
veto today serves only to protect Iran's efforts to
destabilize the region and spread its malign influence.

The Security Council's failure to pass the
United Kingdom draft resolution today has set back
our collective efforts to promote peace in Yemen.
Not all Member States are responsible for this
egregious failure, but we will all have to deal with its
consequences - continuing conflict and suffering in
Yemen and the possibility of a wider war in the region.
The report of the Security Council's Panel of Experts on
Yemen (see S/2018/68) has laid out in devastating detail
the evidence of Iran's ongoing destructive defiance of
the Security Council's resolutions. The Panel has found
significant evidence that Iran has violated the Yemen
arms embargo established by the Council in 2015 in
resolution 2216 (2015).

Iran failed to prevent the transfer of ballistic
missiles, related military equipment and unmanned
aerial-vehicle technology to the Houthi militants. And
how did the Panel know? It knew because the ballistic
missiles launched by the Houthis, which struck near
civilian areas in Saudi Arabia, were found to be Iranian
origin. As the United States intelligence community
has long known, Iranian weapons are getting into the
hands of Yemeni militias, and these militias are using
them to target the capitals of Yemen's neighbours.

In response, the United Kingdom's draft resolution
was a simple common-sense one. It called out Iran
for giving the Houthis the tools to threaten Yemen's
neighbours and to threaten freedom of navigation
through the Red Sea. But this common-sense attempt to
hold Iran accountable has failed, and all members ofthe
Council should be aware of the potential consequences.
The Panel of Experts warned that the Houthis' use
of ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia has "the
potential to turn a local conflict into a broader regional
one" (5/2018/68, p. 2).

In the Council, we talk a lot about using preventive
diplomacy. It is in fact how we fulfil the mandate of the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain peace and
security. Today, preventive diplomacy has failed. We
have rolled over the sanctions but we have not targeted
the party that is destabilizing Yemen. The principles
of the United Nations Charter have been betrayed and,
as a result, the world is a step closer to a worsening
confrontation in the Middle East.

Our partners have spoken often about their desire
to address the Iranian regime's regional misbehaviour
in the context of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. We thank those members of the Council
who stood by this commitment today. Their votes in
support of the United Kingdom draft resolution sent
the clear message that they expect Iran to live up to its
international obligations.

Russia, Bolivia, China and Kazakhstan sent
an opposite but equally clear message. Instead of
demanding accountability from Iran, they decided to
shield Iran from responsibility. Instead of protecting
their fellow Member States, they have declined to
step in and defend partners like Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates. And instead of insisting that
Iran live up to its international obligations, they have
invited Iran to continue promoting chaos in the Middle
East. Their actions will not be forgotten, nor will they
go unanswered.

Today's vote was a deep disappointment, but this is
far from the end of the road to accountability for Iran.
Across the region, Iran is entrenching itself. We see this
in Lebanon, Syria and Iraq. It is flouting its obligations
under multiple Security Council resolutions as we speak,
and it is making the world a more dangerous place. We
will not hesitate to continue to make the world aware of

Iran's misdeeds, and we will not stop until Teheran is
stopped and peace is once more possible for the people
of the Middle East.

