Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Recent significant developments in Cyprus, including
the results of the referenda on the Secretary-General's
peace plan and the entry of Cyprus into the European
Union, have fundamentally changed the situation in
Cyprus and necessitate a critical examination of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) and of the need for the UNFICYP mission.
We welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
provide recommendations on UNFICYP'S mandate,
size and concept of operations within three months. We
also look forward to recommendations regarding future
funding of UNFICYP.

The United States voted in favour of this
resolution because it articulates a timeline by which the
Council will act upon those recommendations. It
should be clear that the appropriate action for the
Council will be to adopt a new mandate for UNFICYP
in the light of the Secretary-General's
recommendations. Resources for peacekeeping
operations are under strain, as the demand for United
Nations peacekeeping has risen significantly in recent
years. The Council must be willing to review ongoing
peacekeeping operations to make changes as required
by new circumstances in order to be a responsible
steward of peacekeeping resources and to sustain
support for new peacekeeping operations.

This resolution also addresses remaining
restrictions on UNFICYP's operations by Turkish and
Turkish Cypriot forces. We regret that, owing to the
results of the referenda - specifically, the Greek
Cypriot rejection of the United Nations plan - the
territorial transfer envisioned to occur under the plan
has not been realized. That would have resulted in the
peaceful transfer of areas in which UNFICYP has dealt
with, and must continue to deal with, violations of the
military status quo, such as in Strovilia.

I would also like to take this opportunity to say a
few words regarding the Secretary-General's report on
his mission of good offices in Cyprus (S/2004/437).
We regret the results of the 24 April referenda on the
United Nations settlement plan, which represent a
missed historic opportunity for peace. We deeply
appreciate the even-handed work of the Secretary-
General and of his Special Adviser, Alvaro de Soto, in
the search for peace on Cyprus, and we welcome and
support the Secretary-General's objective, balanced
and accurate report.

We wholeheartedly support the conclusions and
recommendations contained in that report. We agree
with the report's conclusion that the rejection of the
Secretary-General's settlement plan by the Greek
Cypriot electorate raises fundamental questions
regarding their commitment to a bizonal, bicommunal
federal solution of the Cyprus problem. We support
both the report's suggestion that Greek Cypriots may
wish to reflect on that matter and the conclusion that, if
they remain committed to such a solution, that needs to
be demonstrated not just by words, but by action.

We agree with the report that the way ahead to a
settlement is for the Greek Cypriots to articulate, with
clarity and finality, concerns that they have indicated
regarding implementation of the settlement plan and its
security provisions. Only when they have been
articulated can such concerns be addressed by the
Secretary-General and by the Security Council, where
we stand willing to play a constructive role.

We support the report's assessment that Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriots have done everything
possible to reach a Cyprus settlement. We share the
Secretary-General's appreciation for the efforts of
Turkish Cypriot community leader Talat, both in the
talks and in the run-up to the referenda. As the report
says, the Turkish Government gave strong support to
the Secretary-General's efforts to reach a solution.
Prime Minister Erdogan kept his commitment to be one
step ahead in the efforts for a solution, and in fact it
was the change of policy engineered by the
Government of Turkey that made this year's peace
effort possible.

With the Secretary-General, we appreciate
Greece's support for his efforts, including specifically
for his final settlement plan as well.

As the report states, Turkish Cypriots have, with
their "yes" vote on 24 April, clearly and convincingly
come out in favour of the reunification of Cyprus in a
bicommunal, bizonal federation. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation in paragraph 93
of the report that members of the Security Council
should encourage the Turkish Cypriots and Turkey to
remain committed to the goal of reunification. We
agree that, to that end - and not for the purpose of
affording recognition or assisting secession - the
Security Council should give a strong lead to all States
to cooperate, both bilaterally and in international
bodies, to eliminate unnecessary restrictions and
barriers that have the effect of isolating Turkish
Cypriots and impeding their development. We concur
with the Secretary-General's assessment that such a
move is consistent with Security Council resolutions
541 (1983) and 550 (1984).

We look forward to strong Security Council
action in support of the Secretary-General and the
recommendations contained in his report.

