Mr. Chergui: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the important subject ofenhancing capacities
for peace and security in Africa. I would like to express
my gratitude to the People's Republic of China for
the invitation both on behalf of the African Union
Commission and for myself personally. I am pleased to
be briefing the Security Council under the presidency of
China, which has made such an invaluable contribution
to peace and security in Africa. In that regard, I would
like to recall the donation of $100 million that China
has provided in support to the enhancement of the
African Standby Force and the regular contributions it
has made in recent years to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), to name only a couple.

I am also grateful for the Secretary-General's
comprehensive presentation and would like to pay tribute
to his unflinching commitment to peace, security and
stability in Africa and his tireless efforts to consolidate
and further promote the strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations, including in
the area of peace and security. I would like to assure
him of Africa's full respect and support.

The African Union is an indispensable partner in
the promotion ofpeace and security in Africa. Through
those efforts it is making a consistent contribution
to the task of addressing global security challenges,
which are becoming increasingly complex and
transnational - indeed transregional. Over the past
decade, the African Union has mandated or authorized
the deployment of more than 100,000 uniformed and
civilian personnel, many of them to some of the world's
most high-risk and volatile environments. That has
come at a huge human cost. In that regard, it is worth
mentioning that in the past decade, the casualties
among African troops in peace support operations have
exceeded the total combined casualties experienced
by United Nations peacekeeping missions over the
past 70 years. This compelling reality demonstrates
the commitment of Africans and the African Union to
durable peace and stability on the continent.

Despite these sacrifices and commitment, African
troops are faced with some of the most challenging
situations due to inadequate force enablers and
multipliers, as well as financial resource gaps. Last
week, the African Union Peace and Security Council
declared that AMISOM. had successfully achieved its
mandate over the past decade, on the basis of a recently
concluded lessons-learned study by the African
Union Commission. Yet, AMISOM. remains the least-
resourced Mission in comparison with other deployed
regional or international enforcement missions with
similar mandates. It is against that background that I
would like to make a few proposals for the consideration
ofthe Council on how best to support African capacities
in the prevention and effective response to peace and
security challenges in Africa.

First, the United Nations and the international
community should promote greater strategic
cooperation and coherence in the prevention of conflicts
in Africa. Conflict prevention remains the most cost-
effective conflict management tool, yet it is the least
resourced. I would therefore like to recommend to the
Council that both the African Union Commission and
the United Nations Secretariat establish an institutional
approach that will allow for real-time consultations,
joint assessments and joint analysis with a view to
recommending coherent options to our respective
policy organs that would allow for timely prevention
of conflicts, including but not limited to preventive
diplomacy. The April 2017 Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security represents a good foundation
through which to institutionalize that practice. I have
already established an internal secretariat within the
Peace and Security Department of the African Union
to develop an implementation matrix of the Joint
Framework, and dedicated staff has been assigned to
fulfil this objective.

Some of the concrete priorities we are working on
in the area of conflict prevention include enhancing
coordination between the African Union and relevant
African Union organs and regional economic
communities in order to create better synergies
between the African Governance Architecture and the
African Peace and Security Architecture; strengthening
platforms for engagement in early warning issues
through regular horizon scanning to the Peace and
Security Council; assisting our member States to
strengthen their own national peace infrastructure;
assisting member States to identify and address local,
political and socioeconomic root causes of conflict.
In that regard, the African Union has developed the
Continental Structural Conflict Prevention Framework,
which allows member States to identify their resilience
and vulnerabilities and brings various stakeholders
together to work on a mitigation strategy. As we speak,
one of our member States is currently going through
this exercise.

Other priorities include strengthening efforts to
encourage member States to sign, ratify and domesticate
African Union instruments related to conflict
prevention, and supporting member States in the
delimitation, demarcation and reaffirmation of African
borders with the objective of preventing conflict and of
transforming borders from barriers to bridges.

Secondly, the enhancement of the operational
readiness of the African Standby Force must be fully
supported. The African Union and its regional standby
forces have put in tremendous efforts to develop and
operationalize the African Standby Force and its Rapid
Deployment Capability as one ofits conflict management
tools, as enshrined in the African Peace and Security
Architecture. That was evidenced by the declaration
of full operational capability of the Force in January
2016 by the African Union Specialized Technical
Committee on Defence, Safety and Security. Despite
this historic achievement, the Ministers of Defence
of African Union member States further recognized
that there are challenges ahead, especially with the
mandating process, funding and logistics support and
therefore called for further strengthening of the ASF.
The enhancement process will be achieved within the
framework of the Maputo Five-year Strategic Workplan
on the African Standby Force, which has been finalized.
As I speak, a high-level technical team is undertaking
the verification of the capabilities of the five brigades
of the African Standby Force. I will encourage Council
members and partners to support the implementation
of the African Standby Force Strategic Workplan. We
look forward to closely working with the new Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Vladimir Ivanovich Voronkov.

Thirdly, the spread of violent extremism remains a
source of concern. The recent authorization of regional
coalitions such as the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram and the Group of Five for the Sahel
force are innovative ways through which the African
Union and its member States are responding to the
prevalence of terrorist activities within the framework
of the African Union Peace and Security Architecture.
Yet, prolonged conflicts and governance deficits
provide fertile grounds for a cycle of radicalization
and extremism.

Therefore, the African Union and United Nations
must work together to resolve seemingly intractable
conflicts by building resilience through sustainable
post-conflict reconstruction and development
initiatives. This entails supporting the African Union's
efforts in countering violent extremism through greater
investment in political, human rights, humanitarian
and developmental approaches. In addition, the African
Union Counter-terrorism Fund, as well as activities
of the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, the Nouakchott and Djibouti processes are
important coordination platforms through which the
African Union can be supported in the fight against
terrorism. Here, I should like to reiterate our readiness
to work with the new Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Vladimir Ivanovich Voronkov.

Fourthly, the financing of peace support operations
remains a perennial issue of discussion, which we hope
can be resolved soon. In that respect, I am pleased to
note that the implementation of the Kigali Summit
decision on financing is now under way. We are
convinced that the efforts that we have invested in the
African Union since 2001 to realize alternative sources
of funding will be achieved. As a way of enhancing
our accountability measures, the African Union
Commission has requested that the United Nations and
the European Union nominate representatives to the
governance structure of the Peace Fund. Yet, it is clear
that Africa will not be able to fund peace initiatives
on its own. Therefore, the prospects of predictable and
sustainable funding for addressing peace and security
challenges, including through the utilization of United
Nations assessed contributions remains a common
African position. We therefore look forward to further
deliberation and possible decision by the Council, in
September 2017, on the dedicated support from the
United Nations to all Council-mandated African peace
support operations.

In conclusion, Council members will agree with
me that the new leaderships of the African Union
Commission and the United Nations are determined to
promote greater synergy between peace, security and
development. Both organizations have set mutually
reinforcing and ambitious, but not insurmountable,
strategic priorities, as reflected in Agenda 2063 and
Vision 2030 respectively. We continue to count on
the political leadership and guidance of our member
States, especially in the Council, in the realization
of our institutional mandates. Without the political
cooperation and support of the Council, the attainment
of collective security within Africa and beyond will be
difficult to achieve.

