Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for having convened this
important debate.

In the light of the time, I am shortening my
statement. I express my thanks to the Deputy Secretary-
General and the other briefers, and I pay tribute to all
United Nations peacekeepers, who do such Vital work
in increasingly difficult circumstances.

Since the United Nations first invented
peacekeeping, the nature of conflicts has changed, and
with that change has come a dramatic change to the
risks that peacekeepers face. The threats that they now
face now are more complex and more lethal, ranging
from sophisticated spoilers who use terrorist tactics to
armed groups pursuing criminal objectives. The United
Kingdom agrees with the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations that United Nations peacekeeping
operations are not suited to engage directly in military
counter-terrorism operations. But they do operate in
environments where asymmetric threats are high, so we
cannot turn away from those high-threat environments.
All too often, in fact, they are where the United Nations

is most needed. The issue at hand is how we operate
safely and effectively in such environments - how we
get better at understanding and predicting the threats
and how we get better at mitigating those threats.

The High-level Panel concluded that peacekeeping
missions lacked the specific equipment, intelligence,
logistics, capabilities and specialized military
preparation required to engage in military counter-
terrorism operations. We need to ensure that
peacekeeping operations have enough capability in
each of those areas to operate effectively in high-
threat environments and to do what they can to
support broader capacity-building efforts in countering
violent extremism and terrorism. The framework
that we call the three "PS" - planning, pledges
and performance - which was discussed at the
London peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting in
September, provides a good framework for addressing
those points.

Turning to the first "P", in challenging environments
strengthened and coherent planning is crucial. The
whole United Nations system needs to come together
so that we have effective horizon-scanning and better
conflict analysis. With greater use of intelligence and
threat assessments and scenario-planning, peacekeeping
missions will be better prepared before they deploy and
will have systems in place to anticipate and react at the
operational and tactical levels once peacekeepers are
on the ground. Such enhanced planning also needs to
take account of parallel forces, where they exist. As
I have said, United Nations peacekeeping missions
should not themselves be mandated to conduct counter-
terrorism operations directly. But they need to be ready
to work alongside others more suited to address those
threats directly.

Secondly, on pledges, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is leading work through its
strategic force-generation and capabilities planning
cell and the peacekeeping capability readiness system,
which the United Kingdom supports, to increase the
pool of troops and police who are ready to deploy.
Capability gaps exist, and we need to fill them quickly.
We also need to get better at matching the experience
of troop-contributing countries with the areas where
they are deployed. The United Kingdom has offered
its engineering expertise where it is needed in South
Sudan and Somalia, and our medical expertise with
the forthcoming deployment of a field hospital in
South Sudan.

The third "P" is performance. Peacekeepers must
arrive properly trained and equipped to carry out their
mandated tasks. That means training to a consistent
standard and, in the context ofthis debate, emphasizing
the force-protection aspects of working in high-threat
environments. It should also be clear right from the start
what is expected of peacekeepers when they deploy to
an environment. As the Council, we need to get better
at engaging troop- and police-contributing countries
and, in turn, they need to come ready to share their
experience and knowledge.

Finally, there is perhaps a fourth "P" relevant to
today's debate - the one that the Deputy Secretary-
General reminded us of: preventing violent extremism.
No matter how well trained and equipped peacekeepers
may be to cope in high-threat environments, their
preparation will help deal only with the symptoms of
violent extremism. Preventing violent extremism in the
first place will help deal with the causes. The United
Kingdom strongly supports the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, and we
need to consider what more peacekeeping can do to
support that agenda while integrating the work of the
relevant United Nations bodies and, again, remembering
the importance of capacity-building and working with
host Governments to tackle extremism and terrorism
through security-sector reform, judicial reform and
strengthened rule of law.
Taken together, all those elements can help enable
peacekeeping to rise to the challenge of dealing with
asymmetrical threats.

