Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, we would like to congratulate your friendly country on its membership in the Security Council and on having assumed the presidency of the Council for this month. My delegation has read attentively the concept note for this meeting (S/2020/1, annex) and notes that its contents highlight the commitments of all Governments of the world under the Charter of the United Nations, without distinction or selectivity and free from double standards. My delegation deplores the fact that the Government of the United States of America refused to give an entry visa to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic republic of Iran so that he could take part in this meeting. The host country is preventing the Council from hearing the point of view of an essential party that is involved in the maintenance of international peace and security in our region. This behaviour by the host country undermines its commitments under the host country agreement and the provisions of the Charter that stress the equal rights and obligations of Member States. No one can deny that we are living in a world that suffers from increased polarization because some Governments think that their political, military and economic might gives them the right to decide the fate of others. But what is more dangerous today is that the credibility and the status of the United Nations are suffering, which means that the Organization could meet the same fate as the League of Nations, which collapsed when it succumbed to the pressure exerted by major European colonial Powers aimed at giving legitimacy to occupation and aggression, even though it was supposed at the time to defend security, stability and peace in the world. What is stated in the concept note is important, as global circumstances have been constantly changing. However, the Charter and the multilateral system established as a result have encountered severe tests. We firmly believe that this meeting should come up with recommendations based on transparency, self-criticism and defining mistakes, so that specific threats can be dealt with seriously, at the forefront of which are the rise of international terrorism; the spread of practices and measures that are outside the scope of international legitimacy; the increased manufacturing of weapons and their proliferation; violations of international conventions on the proliferation of weapons; the imposition of an economic blockade on a number of States; and the misuse of the Charter, particularly its Article 51, with a view to justifying aggression against countries, including my country Syria. The Government of Syria, along with its partners, has scored victories in the war against terrorism, which will have important effects in terms of decreasing the threat of terrorism worldwide. However, while the Syrian people have paid a high price, irresponsible practices continue on the part of certain Governments, some of which hold permanent seats on the Council. Those Governments have done everything in their power to overthrow the legitimate Government in my country, using terrorism and United Nations mechanisms to achieve this goal by any means, even by falsifying facts, as they did in Iraq, Libya, Venezuela and other countries. I would ask all present to reflect and to come up with honest answers to the following questions, which are raised earnestly by the Syrian people and many peoples of the free world. Of course, the answers will clarify the real factors and reasons for the non-implementation of the provisions of the Charter on the maintenance of international peace and security. The questions are as follows. Why do Palestinians and Syrians continue to suffer under Israeli occupation? Why does the Security Council remain silent as certain permanent Council members continue to legitimize settlements and acknowledge the Israeli occupation's fake right to sovereignty over Jerusalem and _ the occupied Syrian Golan? Why does the Council fail to implement its own relevant resolutions on combating terrorism and to hold accountable Governments that continue to fund and support activities of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front in Syria? How is it that the Council remains silent on the United States criminal assassination of Iranian and Iraqi leaders who were combating the terrorist Da'esh and Al-Nusra Front in Syria and Iraq? How is it that the Council continues to be held hostage to the will of certain Governments that try to obstruct the operations of the Syrian army and its allies against the Al-Nusra Front, which has been designated by the Council as a terrorist entity, as it occupies Idlib and its environs in order to make them a centre for terrorism and extremism? Why do many Governments, mainly in the European Union, ignore the need to repatriate their national foreign terrorist fighters, who have wreaked havoc and committed murder in Iraq and Syria, and their families? There are 300,000 foreign terrorists and their family members in Idlib. How is that the Council remains silent with regard to aggression and military occupation carried out by forces of the United States, Turkey, France, Britain and other countries against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of my country? How is it that the Council remains silent in the face of the aggression of the Turkish regime on Libyan territory and of its transfer of terrorists from Idlib to Libya as it seeks to fuel the conflict in that fraternal country? How is it that some in the Secretariat even praise the Turkish regime as it continues its so- called humanitarian work in the northern part of Syria, whereas, in fact, Turkish forces have occupied parts of that region and displaced hundreds of thousands of people there? The answers to these legitimate questions are very clear. As we speak of consolidating the Charter for ensuring international peace and security on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding the United Nations, we have only one solution to that end. The Charter should be for all and above all, without consideration or immunity for any political, economic and military Power.
