Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to associate myself with previous speakers in thanking
Mr. Robert Serrry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East. I also thank the representatives of
Palestine and Israel for their statements.

On the occasion of this debate, I shall limit my
statement to addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the situation in Syria. Before I do so, I should like
to reiterate my country's firm condemnation of the
cowardly act of terrorism perpetrated against Israeli
tourists on 18 July in Bulgaria, killing and wounding a
number of individuals. We again extend our condolences
to the Governments of Israel and Bulgaria, and to the
families of the victims. We wish the wounded a speedy
recovery.

The situation on the ground in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has seen no significant progress since the
Council's most recent meeting on this issue (see S/PV.6788). There remain concerns arising from the
unilateral initiatives and provocations of both parties,
which continue to erode trust and confidence. Indeed,
during the reporting period settlement activities did not
stop. They include permits issued for new settlement
construction and the expulsion of Palestinian families,
including refugees, from their homes, including in Beit
Hanina.

Togo believes that the Israeli authorities should
take appropriate steps not only to put an end to acts of
violence committed by settlers, but also to bring their
perpetrators to justice. In that regard, we welcome the
decision taken by the Israeli Supreme Court to order the
expulsion of settlers who had forcibly occupied houses
in Beit Hanina. We note that, as a result ofthis decision,
the settler families announced in June that they would
leave voluntarily. My country also congratulates the
Israeli Parliament, which, on 6 June, rejected a draft
law that would have retroactively authorized settler
homes built on private Palestinian land. These brave
steps are likely to help to ease tensions and should be
continued in order to create a climate conducive to the
resumption of direct negotiations, which we fervently
hope to see.

In that context, we believe that the ongoing blockade
of the Gaza Strip does not contribute to a resumption of
the negotiating process. We therefore invite Israel to
lift the blockade, pursuant to resolution 1860 (2009).
We also urge Israel not to impede the reconstruction
of damaged or destroyed infrastructure and to approve
suspended projects of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, the United Nations Development Programme and
other United Nations agencies in the region, including
in the field of construction. Furthermore, we remain
concerned by the issue of political prisoners. While we
welcome the recent release of a number of these, we
believe that the parties should continue negotiations to
progressively expand this programme to all remaining
detainees.

We urge Israel to put an end to the reprehensible
actions of the settlers, lift the blockade of Gaza and
work for peace, but we also express our deep concerns
over the ongoing launching of rockets at Israel from
Gaza and all acts ofviolence and provocation by Hamas
and associated groups aimed against Israel.

The Palestinian Authority - whose encouraging
progress in the West Bank in many fields, especially that
of security, we commend - should pursue its efforts
within the framework of reconciliation with Hamas to
prompt that organization to renounce violence and join
initiatives aimed at achieving a comprehensive solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through dialogue
and negotiation. My country has always believed that
the path of dialogue is the best possible option for
achieving a lasting settlement of the issue, and urges
the parties to accord it pride of place, despite its proven
limitations - which, it should be said in passing, are the
result of deficient political will and formal commitment
on the part of both sides.

In that respect, Togo again urges the Quartet to
continue its efforts to lead the parties to resume direct
negotiations, and welcomes the commitment of Jordan
to this matter and encourages that country to continue
to work for the timely resumption of direct negotiations.

As to Syria, my country remains extremely
concerned by the violence that continues to rage
throughout the country. The refusal of the Government
and the opposition to implement the six-point plan
of the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) has pushed
the country into civil war. Togo believes that the
Council's inability to speak with one voice has greatly
contributed to this situation, which is now beyond the
United Nations control. Although we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2059 (2012) on 20 July, extending
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in Syria by a month, we are forced to note that it has had
a minimal impact on events, so strong is the compulsion
of the parties to fight it out. The announced withdrawal
of half of the observers is proof of the Mission's current
inability to operate on the ground.

It is not too late, however, for the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities before the mandate expires, as the
Syrian crisis now poses a challenge to all humankind
and represents a failure of the international community,
and above all the Security Council, which, let us recall,
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Far from throwing in the towel, the entire world
should continue to seek a solution to the Syrian crisis.
Countries that have proven influence on the parties
should bring greater pressure to bear in order to persuade
them to end the hostilities and prioritize dialogue
based on the six-point plan and the Final Communique
adopted in Geneva on 30 June (S/2012/522, annex). The
Syrian-led formation of a Government of national unity
remains the best way to overcome the crisis. To that end,
we welcome the recent announcement in the media that
the Syrian opposition is ready to accept a transitional
Government led by a member of the Al-Assad regime.

The current situation in Syria gives rise to genuine
fears regarding the spread of war to neighbouring
States. The inter-communal clashes of the past month in
Tripoli, Lebanon, and the incursions of Syrian soldiers
into the Golan Heights, in violation of the 1974 accord,
further exacerbate those fears. My country is also
alarmed by the recent threat of the use of chemical and
bacteriological weapons by the Syrian authorities. We
urge the Syrian Government to exercise restraint, act
responsibly and preserve the fragile regional security.

Finally, Togo urges all parties to avoid exporting
the war beyond Syria's borders and invites the countries
of the region to continue to work with the Syrians for a
negotiated settlement to the conflict.

