Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sanqu for their briefings
and for their work chairing the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011), 1373
(2001) and 1549 (2004). The Council has recently had
the chance to demonstrate its resolve in the fight
against terrorism in the debate held on 4 May (see S/PV.6765). The work of the three Committees is a
crucial response to the ongoing and varied threats
posed by terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery.

I align myself with the statement to be made by
the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

The threat posed by Al-Qaida has changed but
remains an immediate danger. Efforts to improve the
implementation of resolution 1989 (2011) must
therefore be pursued. In that regard, I commend the
work of the Monitoring Team, which, through regular
contact with Member States, contributes to improving
the implementation of sanctions. It has also helped to
make the sanctions list more functional by finding
mechanisms to improve its accuracy and by modifying
its procedure so as to facilitate its implementation and
by States and financial institutions.

To continue to adapt to the threat, it is important
that the Committees continue its cooperation with
INTERPOL and the Financial Action Task Force.
Inasmuch as the threat posed by Al-Qaida has expanded
to new regions, we believe that the Monitoring Team
should concentrate more intensively on those areas.

We recall that resolution 1989 (2011) improved
guarantees of due process, thanks especially to its
strengthening of the role of the Ombudsperson, whose
excellent work we commend. Strengthening the role of
the Ombudsperson not only promotes the rights of
individuals and entities on the list, but is also a key
factor in guaranteeing the list's legitimacy.

The implementation of sanctions against
Al-Qaida is crucial, but we know that it alone cannot
constitute a response to the threat of terrorism. All
States must therefore build up prevention and
suppression mechanisms. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), with the support of its Executive
Directorate, helps States to do that. The Committee has
studied in depth the resources and needs of all States,
thanks to resolution 1373 (2001), producing
preliminary evaluations. We commend the efforts under
way to improve that analysis tool.
Since the last Council meeting on the subject (see S/PV.6658), the Committee has also studied the
Directorate's global survey of the implementation by
Member States of resolution 1624 (2005) (see S/2012/16), which aims to prevent incitements to
terrorist acts. It is vital that the report dedicate a
section to upholding human rights on that complex
subject. We also wish to welcome the efforts of the
Committee, and in particular of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), in
involving other organizations in those activities, in
particular the contacts on the Sahel between CTED and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum.

Finally, the holding of thematic workshops
should be encouraged, as they allow us to raise specific
subjects related to countering terrorism at the regional
level and to step up regional cooperation. As an
example, I would cite regional workshops conducted
on the prevention of the abusive use of non-profit
organizations for funding terrorism. We know the
difficulties that certain non- governmental organizations
can encounter in trying to protect themselves from that
risk.

Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism remains one of the main threats to our
security. The Council reiterated that point in its
presidential statement of 19 April (S/PRST/2012/14)
during the debate on nuclear security (see S/PV.6753).
Progress has been made in responding to the threat.
The issues and actions arising from resolution 1540
(2004) since 2004 have been widely taken up
throughout the United Nations, and States have
adopted numerous measures to implement the
resolution. In particular, since we are meeting just a
few weeks after the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit,
major efforts have been made at the very highest levels
to better combat the nuclear terror threat and to
safeguard the most vulnerable sources.

In that respect, we are pleased that the Seoul
Summit took fully into account the question of
radiological terrorism. It also provided an opportunity
for reiterating our collective support for existing
instruments and mechanisms to strengthen nuclear
security and highlight the need for the relevant
resolutions to be fully implemented by all the States
concerned. For its part, France recently revised its
rules for the physical protection of nuclear materials.
All those efforts must be continued ahead of the third
summit in the Netherlands in 2014.
Regarding the 1540 Committee, resolution 1977
(2011) gave it the tools to better carry out its mandate.
We are welcome the progress that the Committee has
made in its implementation since our last meeting by
conveying to the Council its annual review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
recommendations for the group of experts. But that is
not enough. It is vital above all for the group of experts
to be established. Only three experts are currently
helping the Committee, and their contracts will expire
on 31 May. That situation is not tenable when the
workload continues to grow.

Moreover, it is necessary for the Committee to
define, as stipulated in the resolution, specific
priorities for its work and to develop knowledge-
sharing and good practices. It is by making full use of
those new instruments that the 1540 Committee will
see its capacities improved and that we will be able to
offer real help to countries in fighting proliferation and
adapting to new challenges in that realm.

I now come to assistance in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). As the Council knows, my
country coordinates the Working Group on that issue.
Much progress has been made, although there is still a
long way to go. The Committee regularly updates its
database of requests for and offers of assistance; that
data was presented at the Group of Eight (G-8) meeting
in Washington, DC, in late January. In that respect,
we welcome the attempt of the Committee and its
experts to step up dialogue with the G-8 working group
in that area. Moreover, the development of country-
specific visits is a step forward that should be
continued. Finally, other efforts are under way to
improve the Committee's procedures for providing
assistance, better respond to relevant requests, and
continue regular dialogue with the various stakeholders
regarding assistance.

It is paramount not only to continue unceasingly
to improve coordination among the United Nations
counter-terrorism committees, but also to strengthen
cooperation with other United Nations forums and
external forums, for example, the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum. We are counting on the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to enhance that
cooperation.

Finally, as the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will take place in
June, it is vital to strengthen coordination of the
various United Nations counter-terrorism bodies. In
that respect, we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to create the post of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.

