Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would also like to join
others in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
very succinct briefing. We appreciate very much his
contributions to the efforts to consolidate peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, indeed, in the
entire region.

Nigeria welcomes the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
Despite persistent political challenges, the Federation
Government continues to function effectively. The
dexterity with which General Ratko Mladic was
arrested and subsequently transferred to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is indeed an affirmation that with profound
commitment residual issues can be resolved amicably.

We are, however, concerned by the continued
attacks against Bosnia and Herzegovina's State-level
institutions, competencies and laws, as well as against
the authority of the High Representative under the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Indeed, the
sustained use of inflammatory nationalistic rhetoric not
only fuels mistrust; it also constrains the
implementation of the mandates of both the High
Representative and the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board.

This prevalent political climate compels national
leaders to exercise restraint and refrain from divisive
and anti-Dayton rhetoric. They should demonstrate the
political will that is so necessary to the promotion of
conciliation, peace and development in the country and
in the region. They should also commit to dialogue and
show flexibility and compromise in resolving their
many differences.

We are pleased with the momentum generated by
the commencement of negotiations on Government
formation and the adoption of the reforms that are
necessary in order to fast track European Union and
NATO membership. This momentum should spur
further progress, not only on the implementation of
constitutional reforms, but especially on outstanding
items from the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.

In the first six months of this year, economic
indicators pointed to signs of progress. That, we
believe, is a welcome development. To consolidate
those gains, efforts must be made to address the
stalemate in the 2011 budget, the growing
unemployment rates and the decreasing foreign direct
investment figures. The formation of a new Council of
Ministers would undoubtedly boost confidence in the
system.

While the main responsibility for making
progress and achieving economic success in the
country lies with the Government and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, international support must
remain steadfast and unrelenting. In that connection,
we welcome the role of the European Union Force,
which, in collaboration with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina armed forces, is helping to foster security
and stability. We also welcome the engagement of the
European Union and NATO in the country.

I want to take this opportunity to reiterate my
country's strong support and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and

Herzegovina. We believe that it is only when all parties
commit to and take practical steps towards the
consolidation of peace that the challenges of nation-
building in the country can be overcome. The
supportive role of the Security Council in attaining
lasting peace, security and stability in the country
cannot be overemphasized. I believe that we must seize
every moment to make that peace realizable.

