Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Our delegation is grateful for the convening
of this meeting and to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his enlightening briefing.

After eight years of strife and a death toll of several
hundred thousands, no one can deny that the Syrian
people are exhausted by war, violence, permanent- and
sometimes forced - displacement and the uncertainty
of their future. When the Russian Federation and
Turkey signed the agreement establishing Idlib as a
demilitarized zone on 17 September, we, the members
of Security Council, lauded it because we believed that
that commitment, as well as the environment conducive
to peace that it would create, would allow for restarting
peace negotiations aimed at achieving a lasting solution
to the conflict. However, the demilitarization of Idlib
governorate should first of all improve the precarious
humanitarian situation of the almost 3 million civilians
living there and its surrounding areas. Despite the sharp
decline in military offensives, the presence of radical
terrorist groups jeopardizes attempts to stabilize that
part of Syria. In that regard, it is important to remind
the parties that any further escalation in the conflict
would entail consequences inevitably causing harm
to civilians. We call on the parties to commit to the
demilitarization of the area and to implement it
in line with their obligations under international
humanitarian law.

The situation in the Al-Rukban camp, on the
Syrian-Jordanian border, continues to be extremely
worrying despite the fact that the Security Council has
repeatedly called for it to be improved. As the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/947) underlines, that
camp hosts approximately 45,000 Syrians in terrible
conditions. In order to remedy that situation and provide
vulnerable people with protection and assistance,
there is no option other than to guarantee access to
humanitarian convoys in that area by the national parties
to the conflict. In addition, the necessary conditions
must be created to allow for the voluntary return of
the mass of internally displaced persons to those cities
and localities that have been liberated from the Islamic
State. Moreover, we agree with the Secretary-General
that in difficult-to-access areas, such as Deir ez-Zor
governorate, which is currently the target of military
attacks directed against the Islamic State, in Aleppo
and Idlib, the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic should spare no effort
to ensure cross-border assistance without restrictions
pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017),
thereby allowing cross-border assistance to reach
those in need by the most direct routes so those who
are vulnerable continue to enjoy access to the vital
assistance they require.

With regard to Deir ez-Zor governorate, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it is
necessary to avoid an increase in violence at all costs.
Where hostilities are already occurring, we must ensure
that the parties do everything possible to avoid the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas and that
combating terrorist groups is conducted in accordance
with obligations under international humanitarian law.
Moreover, it is essential to ensure that civilians who
want to flee to other areas can enjoy the freedom of
movement. No one, however, must be forcibly displaced
from their homes, and those who stay must never
become military targets.

The conflict in Syria cannot be resolved by military
means. We can achieve a robust, long-term armistice
only through a political process in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).

