Mr. Jurica (Croatia): It is our pleasure
Mr. President, to welcome you to the Security Council
today. I would like to thank you for your initiative in
organizing this open debate on the strengthening of
collective security through the general regulation and
reduction of armaments. We would also like to
welcome the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Panama, Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, to this
debate, as well as High Representative of the
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Sergio
Duarte.

Croatia recognizes the primary responsibility and
the leading role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security: the
Council is the only global body mandated with that
task. In that context we see today's debate as a
contribution to the fulfilment of that role. The notion of
collective security is, in our opinion, compatible with
the lofty duties and responsibilities of the Security
Council. Consequently, we believe that it is useful for
the Council to discuss issues related to the
strengthening of collective security through the general
regulation and reduction of armaments.

Similarly, Croatia would also like to stress the
important role and activities of the General Assembly
as well as other elements of the United Nations
machinery in the field of the disarmament. Moreover,
one should not overlook ongoing efforts and action at
the multilateral, regional, bilateral and national levels
on the issue of the strengthening of collective security
through disarmament and the reduction of armaments.

Croatia would like to underscore the importance
of regional and subregional organizations in matters
relating to the improvement of international collective
security. As a European country, Croatia especially
values the active role and contribution to collective
security of a number of European regional
organizations, most notably the European Union, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The reduction of armaments can contribute to
regional and subregional security and stability. A good
example of a successful subregional arms control
agreement is the adoption and implementation of the
relevant provisions of annex I-B of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of 1995, which contributed to collective
security and stability in South-East Europe through the
establishment of limitations and ceilings in
conventional arms and armaments for the signatory
countries to that agreement.

On a regional level, it should be mentioned that
the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe -
the CFE Treaty - has contributed to the security and
stability of post-coId-war Europe. It is our hope that
the difficulties encountered in confirming the CFE
Treaty as adapted in 1999 will soon be overcome, so
that the countries of South-East Europe will be given
the chance to take part in this pan-European
arrangement.

However, it is also very important to note that in
some countries throughout the world the reduction of
armaments and armies does not necessarily translate or
lead to greater stability and security. There is an urgent
need in some areas of the world to rebuild armed and
police forces in order to deal with a wide spectrum of
security challenges. In that context, we would like to
note the importance of security sector reform in the
process of post-conflict stabilization.

My delegation concurs with the notion that a
reduction in military spending and expenditures can,
where appropriate, contribute to committing more
resources to development and can be important in
achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
although we believe that this idea should be coupled
with the principle of responsible governance and
should not negatively affect national or regional
security and stability.

In the context of development, we would like to
recognize once again that development, peace, security
and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing.

As regards the promotion of development through
the reduction and prevention of armed violence, we
would like to take particular note of the importance of
the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development, which was endorsed by more than 100
countries, including Croatia. In this framework, I
would like to draw the Council's attention to a regional
meeting that was held in Sarajevo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, only a few days ago, at which the
countries of South-Eastern Europe adopted the
Sarajevo Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development.

Croatia supports international efforts for more
effective arms control. We would also like to stress the
importance of compliance with agreements already in
place, which greatly contributes to collective security
and has beneficial effects on confidence between
nations in their international relations. In this regard,
Croatia would like to stress the utmost importance of
upholding the relevant provisions of the Charter as
they relate to the legal effect of decisions adopted by
the Security Council.

We would also like to reiterate our support for
existing international agreements and instruments in
the field of non-proliferation, disarmament and arms
control, which contribute positively to collective
international and regional security and stability. In
addition, we would also like to stress our support for
the process that was recently launched aimed at the
adoption of an arms trade treaty, as well as our support
for the opening for signature of the Convention on
Cluster Munitions later this year in Oslo.

Let me conclude by expressing once again
Croatia's support for this debate and any further efforts
aimed at strengthening the existing international
system of collective security. Our discussions here
today are a step in right direction.

