Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate. I also
thank all our briefers for what they have just told us.

I want to underscore the United Kingdom's
commitment to the links between the African Union
and the Security Council. I said it in the informal
session and I will say it here: when we cooperate, we
make a real difference. The corollary of that, of course,
is that when we do not cooperate, we both lose.
I want to focus my remarks on one particular
example of this. Others have alluded to it, but I wanted
to go into it in a little bit more detail, because it matters
so much. The example I have in mind is the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
in Somalia. We touched on this subject in our formal
meeting yesterday, but our time was limited.

Last week, the Security Council saw at first
hand how our two organizations work together in
that country to make a real difference to the lives of
ordinary Somalis after a quarter ofa century of conflict.
I must pay tribute to the men and women of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The AMISOM
contribution to peace and security in the country and
the sacrifices it has made cannot be overstated.

I also welcome the contribution of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). UNSOS
logistical support has been crucial to AMISOM's
successes against Al-Shabaab. Working together, they
are providing space for the political process, allowing
the Special Representative and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia to carry out their vital
tasks. We are now discussing how to reinforce this
within the United Nations.

AMISOM. continues to play a vital role in
underpinning security in Somalia and keeping the
pressure on Al-Shabaab. In doing so, they are giving
the Somali national security forces crucial time to
develop so that those forces can eventually take up
the AMISOM. mantel. That process now needs to
accelerate, in step with Somali's political transition to
a federal future. But it is also critically important that
troop-contributing countries stay the course, with the
full backing of the Security Council. Early withdrawal
would put at risk the brave and significant investment
that they and regional partners have made in Somalia.

We all know that the long-term responsibility for
Somalia's security rests with its own security forces. To
succeed, they need the assistance of the international
community - assistance that can help them build
an inclusive and integrated Somali national army
and police force. Yet one of the most striking things
from last week's visit was how slow, fragmented
and uncoordinated this effort can be. The Federal
Government must articulate clearly the needs and gaps
in support in order for donors to be able to help to the best
of their ability. We need those who pledge assistance,
training, equipment and funds to be transparent and
coordinated in their approach as well. That is the only
way to secure an effective, professional security force
that can take on a greater share of responsibility for
security in Somalia, and underpinning that effort
must be sustainable financing for the Somali National
Army. We must all encourage the efforts of the Federal
Government towards greater transparency, and paying
salaries on time is key to achieving that goal.

For all the gains of the past four years, it is clear
that there is much more work to do. The year 2016 is
critical for Somalia. It is a crucial milestone towards
the democratic, representative future that Somalis
so urgently and so desperately deserve. Just after the
Council's visit to Somalia last week, the President
took a vital step towards that future by approving
the electoral model. I am pleased that the Council
could welcome that through a press statement agreed
yesterday. But that is just one step. Together, the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) need to stay the
course, so it is vital that the Council continue to support
both AMISOM. and UNSOS to help deliver the electoral
process and security for all Somalis.

Let me close with one final, broader thought.
Somalia shows what we can achieve when our two
organizations work together and how important it is to
continue to do so. But we know that there is so much
more that can be done across Africa. Just think what
we could achieve with even stronger cooperation on
conflict analysis, on early warning and on mediation.
Our efforts are heading in the right direction, but there
is always room to do more. That means getting better at
standing up, managing and eventually closing African
Union-led peacekeeping operations, and as Herve
Ladsous said, it means moving AU missions to a more
stable and sustainable financial footing. To do so, we
need to see the AU deliver on its own commitment to
contributing 25 per cent of AU mission costs by 2020,
on which basis the United Nations would be able to
regularize its own funding, which is in all our interests.

The work of Mr. Kaberuka, High Representative
for the AU Peace Fund, on a road map for meeting
that commitment is a very important step forward. We
look forward to seeing concrete proposals for greater
United Nations oversight of AU missions and greater
accountability. Through those steps, not only will
the finances of AU missions be regularized, but their
performance and accountability will improve. That
would make a substantial contribution to peace and
security in Africa and would have a lasting benefit for
so many people outside the Chamber.

