The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

I would like to begin by thanking Mrs. Angela
Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for the valuable information she presented to the
Council.

The Government of Peru has condemned the
attack by members of the Israeli Defense Forces
committed in the morning of Wednesday, 8 November,
in the Gaza residential area of Beit Hanoun that
resulted in the deaths of Palestinian civilians, including
eight children and seven women. That event is part of
the violent events in that area since last week. In
addition to the victims among the civilian population
and the damage to infrastructure, the military action
underway is having an impact on the peace process in
the Middle East as a whole. The right of any State to
defend itself - in this case against the continuous and
unacceptable launching of rockets - does not justify
the disproportionate use of force, which is counter to
international humanitarian law.

The ongoing occupation of Palestinian territory
by Israel and its repeated acts of aggression against
civilian targets are eroding the only platform on which
it is possible to reach a lasting solution, to be
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002), the earlier
agreements between the parties and the Road Map.

The recent war in Lebanon should teach us a
lesson about the risks inherent in allowing a conflict to
intensify because of a lack of dialogue between the
parties, and a delay in the resolution of substantive
issues on which a lasting settlement of differences
could be based.

We must bear in mind that it is essential to
promote the internal cohesion of the political regime in
Palestine, and that it must comply with the
requirements expressed by the Quartet. Problems of
governance make action to impede attacks from Gaza
even more difficult, even though such attacks against
Israeli targets are unacceptable.
Similarly, the lack of governability has made it
impossible to achieve the release of the Israeli soldier
who was kidnapped on 25 June, as well as to put an
end to the supply of illicit weapons to the interior of
Gaza. The current complex situation makes it more
urgent than ever to return to the peaceful path
contained in the Road Map, as outlined by the Quartet
and supported by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003). That is the only path that can realize the
goal of two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. It requires a
dialogue among all of the parties to the conflict,
simultaneously, so that progress on one negotiating
track is not undermined by regression on others.

To that end, Peru urges all parties involved to put
an end to all acts of violence, to abide by the standards
of international humanitarian law and to resume the
dialogue in order to bring the peace process back to
life. The international community must constructively
support that process in order to reduce tension, restore
stability and achieve a fair and lasting solution.

I now resume my duties as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.

