Mr. Dejammet (France)(interpretation from French): France will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council. This text seeks to extend, we hope for
the last time, the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) until 30 June 1997.

 

Much progress has been made since 6 April 1996.
Almost a year ago, after the looting in Monrovia, the
situation seemed desperate. Following those tragic events,
a new agreement was signed at Abuja on 17 August, and
on the basis of that agreement, the disarmament of factions,
a highly necessary phase, began on 22 November. That
process was successfully completed on 9 February. The
next stage will be the holding of elections on 30 May,
which will lead up to the installation of a new Government
on 15 June. When the UNOMIL mandate expires, the
entirety of the peace agreement signed by the factions
should in principle have been implemented.

We owe these positive results to the tireless efforts of
the countries members of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), but also to the excellent
work accomplished on the ground by the African
monitoring force. We also commend the devotion with
which the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has carried out his mission. All these efforts have improved
security in the country, which is an essential condition for
the restoration of the confidence and for the completion of
the peace process.

The elections, which as I noted earlier constitute the
next stage, appear for the first time to be an achievable
objective. The ECOWAS Committee of Nine met at
Monrovia on 13 and 14 February 1997 to establish an
electoral framework with the Council of State. We hope
that this process will be scrupulously respected.

However, the timetable for the elections could be
extremely tight, as is rightly noted by the Secretary-
General. For that reason, we note with concern that the
independent Elections Commission has not managed to
nominate its chairman as planned.We hope that this
difficulty will be overcome by 2 April so that the electoral
law can be promulgated on time. Then, names will have to
be placed on the electoral rolls during April and the
electoral campaign organized in May.

All Liberians, leaders of former factions in particular,
must make the necessary efforts to make the elections fair
and equitable. For our part, we are prepared to support the
role that the United Nations intends to play in the conduct
of the election. That is why we are pleased that the draft
resolution endorses the Secretary-General' s
recommendations concerning the tasks to be entrusted to
UNOMIL on that occasion.

Naturally, we know that the restoration of democracy
in Liberia will merely be a stage on the way to stability.
The programmes for demobilizing ex-combatants, for the
return of refugees unable to return before the elections
and the reintegration of those refugees into the economic
life of the country are, we feel, equally essential tasks.
France, within the framework of the European Union, is
helping to mobilize substantial resources to address these
difficulties. We hope that these efforts will not be in vain.

