Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
would like to begin by thanking the Deputy Secretary-
General for his briefing and leadership on this matter, as
well as to express my thanks for the excellent briefings
provided by our friends Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and by Ms. Helen Clarke, the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

My comments this morning will be brief and a little
bit different. I therefore respectively beg the Council's
understanding in advance.

We agree that inclusivity is the key to successful
post-conflict peacebuilding, but we do not agree it can
be attained through political processes or through an
economic development agenda alone, either separately
or together, as is proposed in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/746). Nor does it make any sense that
national ownership is highlighted repeatedly when the
very emphasis on the need for inclusivity makes it clear
that in most, if not all, post-conflict societies - as
opposed to normal developing countries - there is no
cohesive nation that can go about owning anything.
Own what? Owned by whom? By the nation still at war,
only there is no killing and we perceive the acrimony a
little less easily?

In post-conflict societies, the conflict is not
actually past; it is current, present; it is there now. Only
the killing is past, otherwise the conflict continues
as before, only now through political manoeuvres,
corruption and criminality.

That being the case, advancing the importance
of national ownership is the wrongful application of
ordinary development practices to a context that is
markedly different, even if the two contexts share some
of the same characteristics - youth unemployment,
poor education facilities, poor infrastructure, et cetera.
That is where we seem to have been fooled: post-killing
environments and ordinary development challenges are
not one and the same thing; they are different, much in
the same way the PBC and UNDP were established to
address, at their core, different challenges. The quicker
we understand that, the better.

It is absolutely true that the path to eventual national
ownership, once a country has graduated from a post-
killing status, under strict United Nations observation,
to weak-State status, has to - must, even - run
through the inclusivity stage first, if it hopes to get
anywhere. But there is a major piece missing in the
Secretary-General's analysis, and that is that inclusivity
cannot simply be obtained through political power-
sharing, elections, training, employment schemes and
the building of infrastructure alone. That approach has
now run its course. It is flawed, and has failed more
times than it has succeeded.

Nothing bears that point out more tragically than
then entire content of paragraph 15 in the Secretary-
General's 2012 report. Given what has happened in
South Sudan since the report was published, the contents
of paragraph 15 are a telling, if not tragic, example of
how the United Nations not only missed the bull's-eye
but was aiming in the wrong direction to begin with.

Inclusivity, at a level that makes it meaningful,
can properly be brought about only when a deeper
psychological accommodation is reached by ex-
combatants and their communities in recognition of
what has often brought them to fight in the first place.
In other words, the deficit of trust spoken of in the
Secretary-General's report can be reduced to zero only
when there is also a proper resolution to the divergent
historical narratives.

I will not repeat all we said on this subject in
January (see S/PV.7105), save to say events since the
thematic debate on historical narratives, events which
the Council has wrestled with every week, have only
brought into sharper focus the undeniable importance
of history, of understanding it properly, of not abusing
it, but finding the truth, rejecting the lies, and notjust by
the lied to, but more important, by the liars themselves
and, after a reckoning, a settling of history, the finding
ofa permanent reconciliation, and one that will produce
the "inclusivity" necessary for later, much-needed,
political processes and economic growth.

Finally, a point in relation to women and
peacebuilding: we all believe strongly that only
good can come out of greater female participation in
societies recovering from war. It is not just a women's
right or a human right; it is a matter of basic justice,
and it can only be for the betterment of the country.
But it is also obvious that, in many parts of the world,
very impressive economic growth was still achieved
following the end of devastating conflicts, without
women playing a major role in them. In other words,
it is better to make the argument that even more could
be achieved with the greater participation of women,
rather than by saying, simply, that women are necessary
for the successful economic development ofa society or
community.

