Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): 1, too, thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing and join
others in wishing him well in his new role. I also welcome
Deputy Prime Ministers Dacie and Ambassador Citaku
to this discussion.

As mentioned, the leadership of Serbia and Kosovo
have concluded several agreements since the Council
last considered this agenda item (see S/PV.7510).
Of particular note is the agreement relating to Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo. New Zealand
welcomes that significant progress. It demonstrates
the ongoing importance of the European Union (EU)-
facilitated dialogue in normalizing relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that both sides will
renew their commitment and energy to that process
of normalizing relations through dialogue and will
implement that which has been agreed. Their people
need to see their leaders living up to their commitments.
Gains made need to be banked.

Disagreement and vigorous debate is part of a
healthy democracy. However, we note with concern
efforts by some political actors to physically disrupt
the workings of the Kosovo Assembly. Such actions
are irresponsible and risk undermining confidence in
a critical democratic institution. We urge all political
actors in Kosovo to refrain from such actions and fully
respect democratic principles.

The last time the Council discussed the situation
in Kosovo (see S/PV.7510), New Zealand welcomed
Kosovo's progress towards establishing a specialist
court to address serious allegations arising from the EU
Special Investigative Task Force. We also said that, while
important first steps had been taken, there remained
much to do in order to fully establish the court. That
is still the case today. We echo the Secretary-General
in calling on all stakeholders to move expeditiously in
order to complete that process.

Engagement in the Working Group on Missing
Persons stalled during the reporting period. That is
deeply regrettable. Addressing the issue of missing
persons is an essential component of reconciliation
and is of fundamental concern to affected families. We
urge that all the necessary steps be taken to enable the
Working Group to continue its important work. Progress
on returnees to Kosovo and the careful curation of
cultural and religious sites will also be important for
reconciliation.

We welcome the adoption by the Government of
Kosovo of a five-year strategy for the prevention of
violent extremism and radicalization. The terrorist
attacks in the Middle East, Turkey and, most recently,
France underline the critical importance of addressing
violent extremism before it takes hold. We urge the
Government of Kosovo to implement its agreed action
plan.

The progress under way in Kosovo should be
taken into account when considering a more flexible
approach to how and when the Council should dedicate
its limited time and attention to this agenda item.

