Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
open debate. One of the greatest strategic issues that
the Security Council faces is its relationship with regional
organizations. Such relationships are constantly
evolving. We are grateful to Rwanda for this opportunity
to take stock of the peacekeeping partnerships, to reflect
on the progress that we have made and to anticipate the
challenges ahead. I thank the Secretary-General and
the briefers from the European Union and the African
Union for their contributions this morning.

The founders of the United Nations originally
envisaged a United Nations standing army. That proved
to be unrealistic. Yet the need for rapidly deployable
and adequately trained, equipped and financed troops
has increased considerably since 1945. In the face of a
multitude of African conflicts, the United Nations has
turned in particular to the continent of Africa as a critical
partner. In response to that, the maxim of African-led
solutions to African problems was developed. The
United Kingdom welcomes the aspiration behind that
maxim.

Such partnerships have brought many advantages
to international and regional peace and security efforts.
Over the past decade, 10 African Union and regional
missions have deployed. African contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping missions have increased
from approximately 10,000 troops in 2003 to more
than 30,000 troops in 2013. The African Standby Force
(ASF) was developed and achieved notable milestones,
including an annual continental training programme.
Good progress has also been made towards developing
a rapid reaction force within the ASF.

Troops in African-led missions often demonstrate
the kind of proactive peacekeeping required in modern
threat environments. 1 have in mind in particular
the troops deployed in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA). Such troops have the attitude and skills
necessary for the effective protection of civilians in
terrain teaming with spoilers.

Nonetheless, there is still progress to be made
in the development by the African Union and other
regional organizations of policy, guidance and training
in key areas, such as child protection and the prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence. We very much
welcome the framework of cooperation signed between
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the African Union
ealier this year. That demonstrates a real commitment
to developing standards and practices, and we urge its
speedy implementation.

Having highlighted some good progress, we should
also reflect on two key challenges that threaten the
delivery of rapidly deployable and adequately trained,
equipped and financed troops.

First, financial resources pose a huge challenge. A
key limitation to African capability with regard to peace
and security is the lack on access to adequate, timely
and predictable financing for peace support operations.
That hampers African Union missions and the activities
of regional economic communities as well. The African
Union's overwhelming dependence on outside parterns
for its operational budget is a significant constraint on
the narrative of African solutions. That issue is rising
up the African agenda and, as resolution 2167 (2014),
which we adopted today, reiterates, regional bodies have
a responsibility to secure human, financial, logistical
and other resources for their organizations.

In the absence of a ready solution, the United
Kingdom is pleased that the European Union has been
able to be a suoorting partner to AMISOM. and MISCA
through the African Peace Facility. However, that
cannot continue forever. A better means of financing
African peace operations and more sustainable financial
arrangements must be found. If African nations are
serious about taking greater responsibility for solving
the continent's problems, they need to be prepared to
devote more of their own resources to the task.

Secondly, the transition from African missions
to United Nations peacekeeping operations raises
a number of challenges. In Mali we saw a failure to
deploy critical enablers ahead of troops and an inability
to raise the number of troops deployed or to deploy them
at an adequate pace. We need to learn those lessons
for the Central African Republic, where difficulties
are also loomimg ahead of the 15 September handover
date to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
We therefore welcome the request in resolution 2167
(2014) for a full lessons-learned exercise for both
transitions. The challenges of re-hatting an African
Union mission into a United Nations one has yet to be
resolved.

Looking beyond the African Union, the United
Kingdom also commends the increasing cooperation
between NATO and the United Nations in the sharing
of doctrine, training and best practice. The traditional
peacekeeping model of an interposition force has been
superceded by a more multidimensional one, often with
the protection of civilians at its core. The Secretariat
should continue to forge close ties with organizations
able and willing to share their expertise and comparative
advantages.

I wish to highlight two important aspects of the
resolution that we adopted today. The first aspect is the
comprehensive review of United Nations peacekeeping
that the Secretary-General announced in June and to
which he referred this morning. The relationship with
regional organizations will no doubt form a key element
of that review. We encourage the Secretary-General to
be bold in his vision while ensuring concrete gains for
peacekeeping. In particular, we need to strategically
assess which of the seven different models of United
Nations peacekeeping currently in place are most fit for
the purpose and ensure that we use them in the right
circumstances.

Thirdly, I am pleased to note the encouragement
for greater engagement between the African Union
Peacekeeping Support Team within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Office to the African Union. Partnerships should be
operational as well as strategic.

Finally, let me end by paying tribute to the men and
women serving under all banners on peace and security
operations. Those individuals make up the forces of
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and other regional missions. They demonstrate
on a daily basis the importance of working in close
partnership in the maintenance of peace and security
in the most perilous of locations. The risks they take to
make our world a safer place must never be forgotten.

