Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
December. I am sure that, under your able guidance,
the Council will enjoy a smooth and productive
programme of work. I should also like to express our
sincere appreciation to Ambassador Thomas Mayr-
Harting and the entire Austrian Mission for their
excellent leadership of the Council during the month of
November.
I wish to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their comprehensive
briefings. Turkey greatly values the important work
carried out by the Tribunals in combating impunity and
providing justice to the victims of violations of
international humanitarian law committed on the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and of Rwanda. We
commend the judges, prosecutors and staff for their
dedication and hard work.

Despite the continued efforts of both Tribunals,
the projected dates for the completion of their work
will not be met, as indicated in the reports of the
Tribunals (S/2009/587 and S/2009/589). We
acknowledge that the delay in the trial schedule mainly
resulted from a number of reasons that are not
immediately within the control of the Tribunals. We
nevertheless urge the Tribunals to continue to
implement the completion strategies and complete their
work at the earliest date possible, while ensuring
international judicial safeguards and standards.

Cooperation between Member States and the
Tribunals is essential for the successful completion of
the Tribunals' mandates. In that regard, we welcome
the cooperation by Uganda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the recent arrest and transfer
of two fugitives to the ICTR. We also welcome
Prosecutor Brammertz's report of improved
cooperation by Serbia, and we share the hope that that
improved cooperation will result in the apprehension of
the fugitives Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic' in the
near future.

The arrest of the remaining fugitives sought by
ICTY and ICTR continues to constitute a top priority
for the completion of the Tribunals' work. All those
responsible for violations of international humanitarian
law committed on the territories of the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda must be brought to justice, and
we appeal to all States to cooperate with the Tribunals
so as to ensure the arrests of the remaining fugitives.

Prosecutor Brammertz's report (S/2009/589, annex II) also states that Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina have adequately responded to requests for
assistance by the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY.
We welcome the continued efforts of both countries in
order to fulfil their obligations to cooperate with the
ICTY. In that context, the establishment of a task force
by the Croatian authorities is a positive and important
step forward.

The referral of cases to national jurisdictions is
another important element of the fulfilment of the
Tribunals' mandates. The international community
should provide support, where necessary, in order to
strengthen the capacity of the national institutions of
the concerned countries. We welcome Rwanda's efforts
to meet the requirements for the referral of cases to its
jurisdiction.

Finally, as highlighted by the Presidents of the
Tribunals, retaining qualified staff is also of great
importance for the timely completion of the mandates.
Thus, both Tribunals should be provided with the
necessary means so that the judicial capacity of the
Tribunals can meet the current circumstances. Turkey
is ready to support every step in that direction.

Since their inception, the ICTY and ICTR have
made important contributions to international criminal
justice. As we are now approaching their closure date,
we also need to tackle legacy and residual issues. The
Informal Working Group on the International Tribunals
has been working intensively on those issues under the
chairmanship of the Austrian delegation and with the
valuable assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the residual
issues has greatly contributed to the discussions in the
Working Group, and we are pleased to note that the
Tribunals have already commenced the work on the
recommendations contained in the report. We are
looking forward to intensifying our discussions in the
Working Group with a view to reaching an agreement
on the residual issues in the near future.

