Mr. Holmes: I will start by apologizing to
members of the Council for my rather intermittent
attendance today. That would not have been my wish,
but there was urgent business connected to Myanmar
that I had to attend to, so I ask the Council's
indulgence for that. Nevertheless, I have listened very
carefully to those parts of the debate I have been able
to hear and to the comments that have been made, and
of course the comments made in my absence have been
fully reported to me.

I will say how much I welcome the clear
commitment that I have heard from every speaker
today to this important agenda of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and the recognition by, I
think, all speakers of the need to do more to ensure that
our words are more than just words and that they are
followed up by actions that have impact where they
matter most, which is on the ground. There was also a
very clear recognition by many, if not all, speakers that
civilians are more than ever the main victims of the
modern kind of conflict we so often see - that is,
internal conflict within States rather than outright war
between States.

Given that it is late, I will not try to respond to all
the detailed points made by individual delegations, but
let me comment briefly on some of the key points.

First of all, on the question of humanitarian
access, I welcome the support that many speakers
expressed for our own effort to improve our reporting
on and analysis of access constraints in conflict
settings in order to enable us to keep the Council better
informed in a systematic way. Several speakers called
for this monitoring to be proactive and to be a good
basis for action. Clearly, such analysis will provide an
opportunity for action in response to particularly grave
situations, but by the same token it will produce an
expectation of action by the Council. I am encouraged
by the recognition of that fact, but it will be a
challenge for us all to turn these expectations into truly
effective mechanisms.

Secondly, on the question of provisions for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping mandates,
which several speakers also referred to, and the
question of how well those protection-of-civilian
mandates are being implemented, clearly there is
concern that the success of these provisions to date has
been a little mixed. The reasons for that may vary -
and they can arise at any stage of the establishment and
implementation of a given mandate - from the actual
language that is in the resolution to how the concept of
operations and the rules of engagement for
peacekeeping forces are actually elaborated to, finally,
obviously, the actual implementation on the ground.

That is why, 10 years on from the establishment
of the first express protection-of-civilians mandate in a
peacekeeping forces mandate, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations have now
commissioned an independent study to review each
stage of that process, to look at where the fault lines
are and where we have made progress and where we
have made less progress, to identify the main
difficulties encountered by the key actors - and
therefore to identify areas where action is required -
as well as to identify the good practices to be
replicated in the future.

That will be a 12-month study, which should be
finalized, I hope, around this time next year. We expect
it to make recommendations for all the relevant actors
concerned - that is the Council, of course, the troop-
contributing countries, DPKO, OCHA and the special
representatives of the Secretary-General on the
ground - in order to try to make sure that all steps of
the process can be improved and the ability of
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians can be
increased. Obviously, we will be reporting to the
Council in due course on the findings and the
recommendations of that report.

Thirdly, a number of speakers have referred to the
Save the Children report, which I think was published
today, drawing attention to continuing evidence of
sexual exploitation and abuse by both humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers. The Secretary-General
issued a separate statement on this today that makes
clear his concern at that report and his recognition that
that continues to be a significant and painful issue, and
one that we have to address candidly, comprehensively
and robustly. As all members know, the United Nations
has already taken a series of measures designed to

tackle that problem. We are committed to training and
monitoring our civilian staff and working with police-
and troop-contributing countries to make sure that
everybody has the highest codes of conduct available
to them and is accountable for their behaviour in
response to those codes of conduct. Nevertheless, we
recognize that there is still more to do on this. There is
still some way to go to try to put a stop to this
shameful practice. Let me assure the members of the
Council that we do take it extremely seriously and are
in no way complacent about it.

Fourthly, there is the question - the broad
question if you like - of accountability, which was
mentioned in particular by several speakers in the
context of sexual violence, but also in the context of
violations of international humanitarian law, more
generally. I welcome that emphasis on accountability,
because it is very important in terms of trying to
prevent violations in the first place, as part of the
constant struggle to prevent a culture of impunity,
which does such damage where it takes root, as we can
see in countries such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the context of the sexual Violence there.

Clearly, there has been quite a lot of progress in
extending the reach of accountability mechanisms and
international justice mechanisms, in particular through
the International Criminal Court and other international
judicial mechanisms. But, I think it is also worth
drawing attention to the fact that States are also
obliged to take steps at the national level to try to
prevent and halt acts that contravene the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols, and to
search out, investigate and punish people who have
committed or ordered the commission of grave
breaches of the Geneva Conventions. It is at the
national level also where we need to see far greater
progress. Of course, the United Nations is prepared to
help countries in doing that.

Fifthly, on the question of the expert group of the
Council on the protection of civilians, I am heartened
by the support expressed during the debate by many
speakers for the establishment of such an expert group.
Let me just repeat that we are not suggesting, as one or
two speakers seemed to suggest that we were, the
establishment of a formal subsidiary of the Council
like the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. What we are suggesting is something
significantly more modest than that: an informal forum
for timely and systematic consultation on protection-
of-civilians concerns between all members of the
Council and OCHA and other relevant departments of
the Secretariat. The idea is to be able to communicate
and exchange, systematically and transparently,
information and analysis and, when necessary, propose
language on protection matters to all Council members
so that they have the best possible information when
they are considering mandates or other protection-of-
civilians issues. We believe that would help to ensure
more consistent application of the existing aide-
memoire and other protection-of-civilians concerns in
the Council's deliberations. What we find is that our
current efforts to engage the Council on those issues
tend to be rather bilateral, ad hoc and, often, rather
late. What we are therefore looking for through the
expert group is some way, as I said, in a very informal
and light way, of institutionalizing or regularizing and
systematizing the exchange to make it more effective
in all ways.

Several speakers also referred to the importance
of regional organizations as regards the question of the
protection of civilians. I agree very much that that is a
dimension that we need to focus on. It is very much
part of our current efforts to engage more with the
relevant regional organizations in all parts of the world
in order to help build the capacity they have inside
those regional organizations to deal with humanitarian
and protection-of-civilians affairs. For example, we
recently established an OCHA liaison office with the
African Union in Addis Ababa.

Many speakers referred to the problems in the
occupied Palestinian territory, and in particular to the
problems in Gaza. Let me repeat that we certainly still
believe that there is a tragic situation in Gaza. We
continue to appeal to Israel to relax the restrictions that
it has put in place. Those restrictions have been
described by many, including myself, as a kind of
collective punishment. We hope that that can be
brought to an end so as to allow Palestinians to live
and breathe rather more than they have the chance of
doing at the moment.

At the same time, it is clear that the
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza should stop. It
is also particularly clear, at least to me, that the
particularly cynical and unacceptable attacks against
the crossing points by Hamas, or from within Gaza, are
something that we should really focus on and try to
prevent, because they simply cannot possibly be seen
as helping the local Gaza population.

Finally, I think it was the representative of
Myanmar who questioned my reference to access
issues in the natural disaster context. The reason I did
that was because it seemed to me to be slightly
perverse, when I was addressing the Council at some
length on the problems of access that apply in armed
conflict and all the difficulties that that entails, not to
mention that there is a separate aspect to this - which
I made perfectly clear was outside the particular scope
of this debate. But not to mention at all the problems of
access we have been having in the particular natural
disaster situation in Myanmar, which merit further
consideration in due course, seemed to me slightly
perverse.

Let me conclude there. I would like to thank all
the speakers in the debate for the all the comments they
have made, which we will certainly take very seriously.
We look forward to the Secretary-General's next
report, in the autumn and a further opportunity to brief
the Council then on its main findings.

