Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting on the
peace process in Syria. We also welcome the presence
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other high-
level representatives at this meeting.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2254 (2015), despite the short
period of time with which we had to familiarize
ourselves with its content, because we believe that the
text reaffirms the view that the solution to the armed
conflict that affects that Arab country, as a result of the
criminal actions of terrorist groups, should be political,
peaceful and negotiated. We have always been in favour
of such an approach. We are pleased to note that there
is political will among the players with influence on the
crisis in Syria that can pave the way for peace, which
the Syrian people so yearn for. We must act decisively,
and we think the space opened up by the presidency of
the Council provides an encouraging sign.

We must seize the opportunity before us and
decisively move the peace process in Syria forward,
building on the momentum of Vienna, along the path
to a political solution to the armed conflict. In the same
vein, willingness should not only be expressed in words,
but with concrete actions resulting from a commitment
by both parties to put an end to such a conflict as this,
which has had very serious humanitarian consequences
and has affected international peace and security.

We express our appreciation and support for the
diplomatic efforts made by Mr. Staffan de Mistura to
achieve a firm and lasting peace in Syria. We are aware
that identifying common elements to lay the basis for
political negotiations is a difficult, but very important,
task that requires the commitment of all parties to
achieve concrete progress.

We believe that a positive aspect of the Vienna
process is the willingness to engage with the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad in order
to find a political way out of the conflict. Venezuela
believes the legitimate Government of President
Al-Assad to be one of the key players in the political
equation that could lead to a resolution of the conflict.
Ignoring that essential reality is to condemn the peace
process to failure.

The Syrian people must reaffirm their political
independence, with the help of the international
community, without foreign interference or solutions
imposed from outside that reflect interests that are
different from those of Syria. In that connection,
Venezuela reiterates its support for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of Syria
and its right to self-determination in accordance with
international law, including the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

The resolution of the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
linked to the end of hostilities. Continued conflict will
further exacerbate the tragic humanitarian situation
and will, in turn, create greater instability and have an
impact on neighbouring countries, which have taken
in millions of refugees fleeing the war. Furthermore,
it is important to draw up as soon as possible the lists
of terrorist and opposition groups in order to advance
the agenda proposed by the International Syria Support
Group in November. Opposition groups should be
aware that they must sit down and negotiate with the
Syrian authorities in a constructive spirit to achieve a
political and peaceful solution to the conflict.

With regard to the designation of terrorist groups,
there must not be any double standards or "good" and
"bad" terrorists. That aspect is important because the
Syrian Government is waging a merciless battle against
the terrorist organizations of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and Al-Nusra Front, among others,
which have expanded their activities to other countries
in the Middle East, North Africa and other regions. If
the international community does not act decisively
to prevent the financing, training and arms transfers
to those groups and stop their use and encouragement
as tools to overthrow Governments, all peoples will
continue to pay a high price to achieve the peace and
security that they so yearn for.

In that context, international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism must be strengthened. Venezuela
supports any action aimed at combatting ISIS and other
terrorist organizations, with the understanding that
it must be coordinated with the Syrian authorities.
That is why the effective implementation of the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council to combat terrorism - including
Council resolutions 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2253 (2015) - is of paramount importance as part
of the strategy designed collectively to put an end to
the financing, supply of arms and training to terrorist
groups and armed and violent non- State actors that later
become allies of ISIS and Al-Nusra Front in different
parts of the world, making them a global threat to
international peace and security.

We must prevent the collapse of Syria and its
institutions, as noted in the Vienna statement. That
is crucial, since the traumatic experiences in Iraq and
Libya - and their terrible consequences - must not
be repeated.

Finally, our country and our Government will
continue working towards achieving peace and the end
of this terrible conflict through our modest cooperation
in the Security Council, on the basis for a negotiated
political solution and with the leadership of the Syrian
people and its Government and institutions, thereby
ensuring the sovereignty and independence of that
brotherly Arab country.

