Mr. Rudolph (Germany): Germany is extremely
concerned about the situation in Burundi. There is reason
to fear that there may be a dramatic escalation. We are
therefore satisfied that the Security Council, in the
resolution it has just adopted, gives a clear and strong
signal to those who are encouraging ethnic violence in that
country. In this context, Germany associates itself fully
with the statement Italy made earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

As a first step to calm the situation, the political actors
in Burundi will have to engage in a comprehensive
dialogue. No important element of the political spectrum
should be left out, in order not to endanger such a process.
Such a dialogue, in the View of my Government, should
prepare the ground for establishing the rule of law, peace,
security and democracy.

At the same time, all parties are called upon to refrain
immediately from all acts of violence. The international
community will not tolerate any further deterioration.

Germany fully supports the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General, by the Organization of African Unity,
by the European Union and by the facilitators to bring
about the conditions necessary for a political dialogue in
Burundi. We will do all we can to support them in their
consultations with the political actors in Burundi.

Those who continue to encourage ethnic violence in
Burundi or who refuse to enter into a comprehensive
dialogue will have to face the sanctions of the
international community. In this context, we support the
call to cooperate in the identification and dismantling of
radio stations which incite hatred and acts of violence in
Burundi.

The Secretary-General is requested to report to the
Security Council by 20 February 1996 on efforts to
facilitate a comprehensive dialogue and preventive actions
that may be necessary in order to prevent the situation
from deteriorating further. My Government stands ready
to consider the proposals the Secretary-General will make
and, if necessary, to consider the imposition of measures
under the Charter of the United Nations.

