Mr. Goff (New Zealand): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative in organizing this
meeting to discuss the challenges involved in
peacebuilding. I would also like to also acknowledge
the presence of Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette and of Michael Ambiihl, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.

Denmark has asked us today to consider the
underlying problems and issues in peacebuilding,
including the substantial policy, institutional and
financial challenges. The comments that I am making
today on behalf of New Zealand are based on our own
experience in peacebuilding, particularly in the Pacific
region, but also elsewhere, such as in Afghanistan.

First, to be successful, I think that peacebuilding
has to be a long-term commitment. Peacebuilding is
about creating sustainable social, developmental and
governmental structures. Capacity-building and
restoration of civil society takes time. That is as true in
our Asia-Pacific region as elsewhere. The smaller scale
of conflict does not make peacebuilding any less
complex. Timor-Leste is a very clear example of the
extraordinary range of functions which the United
Nations had to undertake, and of the necessity for time
to be allowed for local capacity to be developed in
order to ensure that the transition was effective, as it
has been. In Afghanistan, New Zealand leads a
Provincial Reconstruction Team which has proven to
be an effective mechanism combining security,
development and capacity-building in the community.

I think we need to remember that in more than
50 per cent of conflicts the situation reverts to violence
within five years of the peace agreement. Issues behind
the conflict need to be dealt with or the conflict will
return. If this does not occur, peace will only be
sustained for the period of time that external forces
remain deployed.

Secondly, peacebuilding requires flexibility.
Different kinds of resources need to be committed,
ranging from the deployment of military, police, justice
and civilian advisers, to provision of aid and support
for non-governmental institutions, including with
respect to human rights.

Thirdly, sustainable peace depends on economic
progress. Successful reintegration of ex-combatants
requires sustained development assistance.
Opportunities for work and a better life are necessary
to draw combatants away from the cycle of conflict.
However, I think from experience in the Solomon
Islands and Bougainville we would have learned that
payment for weapons buy-back can be counter-
productive, as can be the concept of monetary
compensation as against traditional customary
reconciliation approaches. Throwing money at groups
often tends to encourage problems, rather than
resolving them.

Fourthly, peacebuilding requires cultural
sensitivity. Greater ownership and capacity among
local actors are needed for solutions to be acceptable,
implementable and sustainable. Getting alongside the
community in conflict situations, working with them in
their own structures and acknowledging and acting on
the validity of their own views is, in our experience,
essential. The pace and nature of the peacebuilding
process have to be in line with the culture of those
concerned and the context within which it takes place.
Regional approaches can be very important, as
interventions in Bougainville and the Solomon Islands
have shown, but adequate funding for regional
missions is no less important than it is for international
missions.

Fifthly, the role of civil society in peacebuilding
needs to be given greater emphasis in policy
development. The experience of the Pacific Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands and our
experience in Bougainville is that community
involvement - for example, through women's groups
and church groups - provides an important avenue for
the development of local ownership of the solutions.
These groups have a critical ability to represent grass-
root concerns in any given conflict and to grant
legitimacy and "buy-in" as peacebuilding occurs. A
further key strength of the intervention in the Solomon
Islands, which has turned around from being a failed
State to being a stable State, is that it was done not
only with the full support of the Solomon Islands
Parliament and Government, but also with all of the
countries of the Pacific Forum that agreed on this
intervention.

What lessons are there here for the United
Nations membership and the Security Council in
particular? New Zealand's view is that the practice
developing in the Security Council of mandating
"complex" missions, including policing, legal, human
rights, governance and development components, is
very positive, and we would encourage the Security
Council to continue doing so.

We would also encourage the Security Council,
and the United Nations Secretariat, to continue
engaging to the fullest extent possible with national
and regional neighbours on context-appropriate
peacebuilding mechanisms. Peacebuilding strategies
must be designed to fit the particular conflicts.

The Security Council should also consider the
earliest possible coordination with other actors in the
United Nations system so that planning for sustained
and long-term peacebuilding can take place. In this
context, I would like to put on record New Zealand's
strong support for the proposal of a Peacebuilding
Commission. A Peacebuilding Commission would
provide a much-needed forum for institutional and
political coordination between various arms of the
United Nations system. It could mobilize existing
resources, find new ones and provide much greater
strategic coherence than we have now. Critically, it
could also serve to deliver high-level political support
so that we do not lose sight of those countries which
are at risk.

Sustained, long-term commitment, tailored to
local circumstances, is essential for successful
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development are mutually dependent and need to be
addressed together. New Zealand strongly supports the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission and
urges member States to give this proposal their full
support.

