Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me extend my thanks to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his report on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I should like to
point out that his briefing on recent events in the
region is very disturbing. I should also like to thank
Ambassador Riyad Mansour for his statement to the
Council.

We are gathered in the Council today to consider
the situation in the Middle East and, in particular, the
issue of settlements in the Palestinian territories. That
is without a doubt an important issue that must be
resolved in the context of the search for a negotiated
settlement to a long-standing historic conflict. We
believe that the settlements violate international law,
the agreements established in the Road Map and the
negotiations conducted by the Quartet.

The Middle East issue has historically occupied a
permanent place in Colombia's foreign policy, which
includes a vision of Statehood. Even prior to the
General Assembly's resolution approving the partition
of Palestine in 1947, Colombia had referred to the
importance of ensuring genuine viability in the
process, which should be both stable and lasting.
Former Colombian President Alfonso Lopez, our first
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, said
in 1947 that "to divide Palestine without a real
alternative for the Palestinians would be a monumental
error". History has shown that our illustrious
compatriot was right. It was as true then as it is now
that we need to find a settlement that provides a better
basis for understanding and a comprehensive solution
to the unstable situation in the region.

Consistent with this conviction, Colombia
abstained in the voting on the resolution, despite our
belief that it was just to provide a national homeland
for Jews and Palestinians alike. However, we never had
any doubts about the core issue. Since then, and in the
following decades, the Colombian position has
remained clear. Israel is a State with the right to exist
in peace within secure borders, while the Palestinians
have the right to their own State where they can live
side by side with Israel in peace and work for common
prosperity.

Whenever we have been in the Security Council,
we have voted in favour of resolutions that seek to
establish lasting peace in the region. Moreover, on a
number of occasions, we have sponsored proposals to
that end within the various United Nations bodies. We
believe that two ancient peoples who have contributed
so much to science, the arts and the world economy
have the right and the obligation to live in peace.
Jewish and Palestinian immigrants alike have
contributed to the prosperity and even the identity of
our country. We view with interest and approval any
approach aimed at achieving and consolidating lasting
peace in the region.

For Colombia, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the obligation not to use force in international
relations and the self-determination of peoples are
fundamental principles, as are human rights and
respect for the dignity of all, without exception.

Israelis and Palestinians can no longer remain in
a situation of confrontation and mistrust. We strongly
urge both parties to continue negotiations on the basis
of mutual respect and recognition of the identity and
rights of each people.

Colombia has the highest regard for peace, built
on a solid and realistic basis, and we offer our firm
support to every possible approach aimed at promoting
sustainable and balanced solutions in the Middle East.

