Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We welcome to the
Security Council Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, and we commend you
on presiding over today's debate. We also thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Togo, Mr. Elliot Ohin,
and Ambassador Tekeda Alemu of Ethiopia for their
statements. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and support his efforts and initiatives to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa.

Let me start on a positive note. Four things
distinguish Africa today, namely, an impressive
economic turnaround, Africa's growing ownership
of its destiny, the effective leadership demonstrated
by the African Union and subregional African
organizations, and the successes in Somalia, Sierra
Leone, Liberia and cote d'Ivoire in conflict resolution
and management. We also welcome the recent signing
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Despite that good news, the fact is that roughly
62 per cent of the items on the Council's agenda
are African issues. Some issues are perennial and
protracted, others have shown recurrent relapse. Still
others point to the fragility of the peace and stability
that were so painstakingly achieved.

What are the divers of conflict in Africa? Without
sounding facile, we can say that they are perceived to
be the legacy of artificial borders, the exploitation of
Africa's natural resources, poverty, ethnic and tribal
divisions, the illicit trafficking in small arms and, now,
the rise of extremism and terrorism, with their national,
transnational and global dimensions. However, Africa
has decided to address those challenges head-on, and
it is determined to succeed. Africa is forging ahead.
For Africa, those are existential - and not mere
historical - issues.

Pakistan has a long-standing and abiding
commitment to stability and progress in Africa.
We were steadfast partners in Africa's struggle to
exercise its right to self-determination against colonial
rule. Over the past 53 years, Pakistani peacekeepers
have played an instrumental role in peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding in Africa. With the
help of other partners, we have also worked to prevent
the relapse of conflicts in a number of post-conflict
situations in Africa. Thus far, more than 132 of our
brave peacekeepers have laid down their lives, 119
of them in Africa. To date, we have contributed more
than 140,000 United Nations peacekeepers worldwide.
Today, 8,221 Pakistani peacekeepers are deployed in
six peacekeeping missions, 8,075 ofwhich are deployed
in Africa.

We believe that greater reliance on the tools for
preventive diplomacy provided under Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as those for
coordination under Chapter VIII, will help prevent
conflicts and stall their recrudescence.

Structural prevention in Africa can be achieved by
strengthening the nexus between security, development
and human rights, without embarking on the more
treacherous path of nation building. Nations will be
built by their own people, not by the Security Council
or the African Union, which can legitimately help them
prevent conflicts.

Integrated peacekeeping missions ensure that
efforts to address the root causes of conflict continue
even after the departure of peacekeeping missions.
Those missions assist in security sector reform (SSR),
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
the rule of law, the enforcement and monitoring of
human rights and national reconciliation. We laud
the role of the United Nations regional offices in
providing services to prevent conflicts and in helping
post-conflict countries with good offices, mediation,
dialogue, electoral assistance and assistance for SSR
and DDR. Similarly, the Peacebuilding Commission's
role is also critical in preventing the fresh eruption of
conflicts.

The economic development of Africa is the best way
to address the root causes of conflicts. Over the past
several years, Africa has experienced strong economic
growth and an improvement in social development
indicators. This year, Africa's gross domestic product
is projected to grow by 6 per cent, and the continent
is poised to become middle income by 2030. Since
2005, foreign direct investment flows have increased
by 50 per cent, and there is a boom in investment
conferences on Africa. Emphasis on optimal population
growth, urbanization, technology and good governance
are redefining the African landscape.

That does not mean that aid flows should dry
up. On the contrary, many countries, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa, need massive assistance for their
economies and social sectors.

Africa has resorted to the wide array of tools
available under Chapter VI, with a view to preventing
disputes and conflicts. African countries have put in
place a solid peace and security architecture through
regional and subregional organizations, with built-in
mechanisms for conflict prevention and mediation.
Bodies such as the Peace and Security Council and the
Panel of the Wise give strength to that architecture.

The African Union has provided strategic
coherence, leadership and on-the-ground management
in nearly all of the conflicts on the continent. Through
close partnership, it has added value to the work of
the United Nations, particularly that of the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

In recent times, there have been new flare-ups in
Mali, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are now witnessing the rise of terrorism, drug
and weapons trafficking and piracy. The entire Sahel
region is under threat of destabilization due to the rise
of organized crime. The conflict in Mali is linked to
terrorism and organized crime.

The integrated United Nations strategy for the
Sahel region, backed by the necessary financial
resources, must be made to work. The United Nations
should continue to provide support to strengthen
the African Union's capacity for conflict prevention
under the umbrella of the 10-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union. The deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali underscores the commitment of the continent to
address its conflicts. However, that is being hampered
by a shortage of resources.

Let me now turn to two pressing issues that have
been identified as potential sources of conflict by
the Secretary-General, that is, youth education and
employment and conflict and natural resources.

Some 60 per cent of Africa's population of
1 billion is under the age of 25. That youth bulge, if
not harnessed properly, could have grave costs. It
is therefore important to have a comprehensive and
integrated approach to youth development.

The continent is rich in natural resources, but poor
in wealth. Fights over natural resources, the absence of
land rights and land tenure systems and the large-scale
acquisition of land by foreigners for industrial
agriculture or logging keep fuelling and re-igniting
conflicts. The Security Council and the countries
concerned should make greater efforts to identify and
bring to justice those who are benefiting from that
illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa, both
within and outside the countries concerned. African
countries should be given assistance to exploit their
resources and get a fair share of their trade.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that
conflict prevention works, and works best when there is
synergy among all the relevant institutions and actors.
The United Nations and the international community
must therefore invest more in conflict-prevention
mechanisms. It is far better to invest in conflict
prevention than to expend resources in dealing with the
aftermath of conflicts. Pakistan stands ready to engage
in that effort.

