Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the People's Republic
of China for convening today's debate and for its
important concept note (S/2015/87, annex ), which has
enabled us to reflect on history and reaffirm Member
States' commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations on its seventieth
anniversary.

We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The evolution of world events has only confirmed
our deepest fears. We have reached a critical juncture
for civilization, and States are finding that their peace
and security are permanently endangered. We must
erase from our minds and our hearts all thoughts of war
and the culture of war, of violence, interference and
intervention, and replace them with a mindset and a
culture that value peace and prosperity for all.

We emphasize the importance of committing to and
strengthening the maintenance of peace and security,
particularly in these very dangerous times our world is
living through. No Member State can arrogate to itself
the right to the use or the threat of the use of force in
international relations. The exceptionalist policies of
which many of us have been victims in recent years
must end, for they only create more conflicts and
threaten people's peace and security. We will never
tire of reiterating that conflicts are resolved through
dialogue and political negotiation, and that the United
Nations, based on its raison d'etre and its Charter, must
shoulder its historical responsibility and lead the world
in promoting and ensuring world peace and rejecting
warmongering policies, war and confrontation. Given
the challenges we face, it is becoming increasingly
imperative for us to thoroughly reform the United
Nations so that it can be a forum in which we all
participate, have our voices heard and possess the
power to decide all matters affecting the interests of
our peoples and in turn of world peace and humankind.

Nicaragua takes a principled position in rejecting
and condemning any action aimed at undermining
peace and security, such as regime change, breaches
of constitutional order, incitement to violence, the use
of force and coups designed to overthrow legitimate
Governments - in short, any action that threatens
international peace and security. The 33 countries
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC) recently proclaimed our region as a
zone of peace, and thereby undertook, as our Heads of
State and Government put it,

"a permanent commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in order to forever banish
the use and threat of use of force in our region".

However, policies of subversion and aggression and
attempted coups against some countries in our region
have continued, as has been the case with our sister
State the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where a
coup d'etat and the assassination of President Nicolas
Maduro Moros were planned. At the most recent CELAC
summit, our leaders expressed concern about the
aggressions and attempted coup against the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Reprehensible acts that do not
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Similarly, we welcome the start of talks between
the sister Republic of Cuba and the United States for
the restoration of diplomatic relations between the
two, which should lead to the immediate lifting of the
inhuman and criminal blockade and other aggressive
acts against that sister nation. This continued aggression
against these two sisters in our region undermine the
aspirations of our region to live in peace and security.

In Nuestramerica, a zone of peace, we will
continue to fight to eradicate colonialism, particularly
in our Caribbean, including Puerto Rico, and to end
the occupation of the Malvinas Islands. The occupying
Powers must cease these policies that threaten peace in
our region.

Seventy years since the founding of the United
Nations, the world is again on the brink of another
major catastrophe, caused by hegemonic Powers that
do not respect international law or the Charter of the
United Nations and practice interference, intervention,
aggression and crime as methods to resolve conflicts
according to their own interests. It is their responsibility
to commit themselves, before the peoples of the
world, to setting aside their imperial practices and to
contributing to our common progress towards a world
in which the right to international peace and security
prevails.

We call on the international community to work
together in this world of profound crises that intersect
and interact with each other, and where an unjust
imbalance of development among nations prevails.
Working for cooperation and development and in
solidarity with mutual respect, we can overcome these
crises and eradicate, in the shortest period of time, all
the scourges threatening us, which constitute major
obstacles to fulfilling the purpose for which we are
here and for which our Organization was founded 70
years ago - the maintenance of international peace
and security.

I wish you, Sir, best wishes for the Chinese lunar
New Year, the preparations for which we had the
opportunity to witness at the historic CELAC-China
meeting, held recently in Beijing.
