The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Germany and Italy, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/582, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, France,
Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2010/575, containing a letter
dated 8 November 2010 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-eighth report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1948 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.
10-64226

