Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President,, for convening today's
important meeting. I would like to start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive
Director Coninsx and Ms. Cook for their informative
briefings. We are particularly pleased to see Ms. Cook
here today, as the insights of research institutions and
civil society organizations are extremely valuable to
our understanding of how to best address the evolving
threat of terrorism. I thank her for her presentation.
Civil society is often best placed to identify the risks
of radicalization, which, if not prevented, can lead to
violent extremism and terrorism. The collaboration
between the United Nations and civil society should
therefore be further strengthened. In that regard,
we appreciate Under-Secretary-General Voronkov's
ongoing efforts to increase cooperation between the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and civil society.

The links between terrorism and conflict are clear.
Although the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
been pushed back considerably, it remains locally
embedded in a number of protracted conflicts - for
example, in Afghanistan and Libya. Efforts to combat
terrorism cannot therefore be viewed in isolation but

must be seen within our broader efforts to resolve and
prevent conflicts and promote peace. To fully implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
sustaining peace agenda should be at the core of those
efforts. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
are a longer-term endeavour, but remain the key to
preventing violent extremism, which should be our first
priority. The SDGs are relevant to that agenda in many
aspects, not least by generating hope. Ensuring the
sustainability of the financial system, as reflected in
SDG 16, is directly related to countering the financing
of terrorism, which is decisive in the fight against
terrorism. My Minister of Justice took part in the No
Money for Terror conference, held in Paris in April,
and we have undertaken significant domestic reforms
in that area. We stand ready to take part in efforts at
all levels - global, regional and national - to further
improve the system to cut off access to financing,
through the collective efforts of the United Nations, the
Financial Action Task Force and the European Union.

Ensuring accountability should be another essential
part ofour efforts to counter terrorism. We are concerned
in particular about the continued failure to prosecute in
cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including
sexual slavery, perpetrated by terrorist organizations.
The perpetrators of such horrendous crimes must be
held to account. It is not only important to deter further
such acts, but also to ensure thatjustice is served for the
countless number of victims of terrorism. We welcome
the fact that Tuesday marked the first International Day
of Remembrance of and Tribute to Victims of Terrorism.

We are pleased to see increased attention to both the
gender dimension and to children's rights in the fight
against terrorism. Ms. Cook's briefing has reminded us
that those issues deserve greater attention. For example,
it is important that we develop rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes that are tailored to children
and gender-sensitive.

Let me take this opportunity to highlight some
of our national counter-terrorism experiences that we
think could serve as an inspiration to others.

Last year, our national coordinator against violent
extremism presented a report on our efforts. A key
finding in the report was that municipalities were in need
of greater capacity and support to address the challenges
of violent extremism at the local level. Therefore, the
Swedish Centre for Preventing Violent Extremism
was established to support the municipalities in their
work to counter and prevent violent extremism - with
knowledge, research and good examples. In addition,
municipalities have now appointed local coordinators to
help strengthen cooperation between local and national
levels and access State funding for programmes to
prevent extremism.

Another report on children's involvement in violent
extremism, which was presented by the Ombudsman
for Children in Sweden earlier this year, showed that
there is a need to listen more to children's experiences
to ensure their successful reintegration into society. As
a result, social services have issued recommendations
on how to deal with returnees and their families, which
are now being implemented.

Although local, national and regional efforts are
important, international cooperation also remains
central if we are to be successful in our counter-terrorism
efforts. The first-ever High-Level Conference for Heads
of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, which
was successfully held at the end of June this year, was
very useful in facilitating such cooperation. Some of
the most valuable contributions during that Conference
came from civil society representatives. That is why we
stress the importance of having civil society present at
future meetings, without limitations.

Let me conclude by reiterating that all measures
against terrorism must be taken in compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law. Respect for
human rights must never be ignored in the fight
against terrorism.

