Mr. Sajdik: First of all, I would like to thank
China, in its capacity as President, for having invited
Ambassador Apakan and me to brief the members of
the Security Council about our common efforts for a
peaceful solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.

On 27 February 2015, my predecessor, Heidi
Tagliavini, briefed this body (see S/PV.7395) on
the results of the 15 February Minsk summit of the
Normandy Four, namely, the Presidents of France,
Russia and Ukraine and the German Chancellor.
Ms. Tagliavini also briefed the Council on the Minsk
agreements. Since then, the Minsk process continued
on track with the aim of implementing the agreements
by the end of 2015. We did not succeed in living up to
that ambitious target, but we have made considerable
progress in the four areas covered by the agreements,
namely involving, security, political, humanitarian and
economic issues. The main achievement of our efforts
is that we have succeeded in substantially reducing the
number ofvictims, both military and civilian, especially
last autumn with the ceasefire starting on 1 September,
the beginning of the school year.

Under the outstanding leadership of Ambassador
Apakan, important decisions in the security field were
reached, such as on the withdrawal of heavy weapons
and on demining. The implementation ofthose decisions
by the sides of the conflict, as we have just heard,
unfortunately leaves ample room for improvement.

Ceasefire Violations have lately reached alarming
numbers, as we also have just heard from Ambassador
Apakan. That needs to stop now. Ahead of the upcoming

Orthodox Easter holidays, the sides really need to fully
respect the ceasefire. Secure conditions must be created
for the people living in proximity to the hostilities as
well as for all those who will cross the line of contact
during the upcoming holidays.

In the political field, work is being concentrated
on the modalities for local elections in the certain
areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast and on amnesty.
The corresponding laws, which have to be adopted
by the Ukrainian Parliament, will directly impact all
actors involved. That will of course demand further
efforts, but most of all it will demand a willingness
by all participants to compromise. The elections will
have to be held in a secure environment - a secure
environment before and during, but also after the
elections. Repeated severe cases of intimidation against
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) with no
apparent consequences for the perpetrators have cast
a shadow on the impartiality of local security forces
in the certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk oblast,
which is a precondition for the holding of elections that
correspond to OSCE standards. In the humanitarian
and economic spheres, we have achieved some progress
in the release and transfer of detainees as well as in the
rehabilitation of railway and water-supply systems.

But there is still a long way to go, especially as to
unhindered humanitarian access, including in particular
for United Nations entities and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. One aspect of the
Minsk agreements is still waiting for an appropriate
answer - the full restoration of the territorial integrity
of Ukraine and the re-establishment of sovereign
control over the Ukrainian side of the State border with
the Russian Federation in the Donbas region.

Many issues of Minsk are intertwined. What we
therefore need is a package for a sustainable solution
to the conflict. I believe the examples I mentioned here
ShOW that Minsk works and that further progress is
possible, and will be possible with the firm political
backing of the Normandy Four and other important
actors.

