Mr. Plasai (Thailand): I would like to thank China
for convening this open debate today. Recent terrorist
attacks in many parts of the world have reminded us of
the urgent need for concerted international efforts to
address this growing threat. That is why today's debate
is highly relevant, offering an opportunity for a sharing
of views prior to the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June.

In our resolve to eliminate terrorism, all States
must be unified in the firm belief that any act of
terrorism is unjustifiable and should be condemned,
regardless of its motivations. The Kingdom of Thailand
firmly believes that terrorism is not associated with any
one religion, nationality or civilization. As experiences
have shown, terrorism does not discriminate against its
victims. Its impact is felt by people from all walks of
life. Against that backdrop, permit me to share with the
Council Thailand's perspective on how we can address
terrorism in a concerted manner.

At the national level, robust legislation is required
to prevent and to prosecute terrorism, as well as to
effectively and implement, in a timely fashion, the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
those related to funding of terrorist activities. In
the Kingdom of Thailand, terrorism offences have
been incorporated into our penal code since 2003. In
2013, the new Transnational Organized Crime Act
was promulgated to implement the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

Social media can be an effective tool for terrorists
to rapidly reach out to young people and marginalized
groups seeking political, social and economic
opportunities. While ensuring the protection of freedom
of expression, we must put in place effective national
regulation of the cyberspace and electronic media to
prevent abusive use and promote a constructive role
for social media in countering the dissemination of
terrorist propaganda and violent ideologies.

Closer regional cooperation is also required.
The Kingdom of Thailand continues to see the value
of participating actively in international counter-
terrorism forums, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation, the Asia-Europe Meeting and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. In many
regions, economic integration allows freer flows of
peoples and goods. It is important that States cooperate
on intelligence-sharing, countering terrorist financing
and building capacity, particularly on border security.
At the same time, freedom of movement of people and
trade must be maintained, an imperative that makes the
task at hand even more complex.

At the international level, we must work together
to gain momentum and support for the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the work of
United Nations agencies involved in counter-terrorism.
The upcoming review in June will be a timely
opportunity for Member States to examine synergies
between various United Nations agencies, thereby
leading to a more efficient fight against terrorism.

Member States must also be totally committed to
implementing related Security Council resolutions
aimed at disrupting the financing, recruitment and
movements of foreign terrorist fighters. For our part,
the Kingdom of Thailand has been doing its utmost to
implement its obligations in that regard, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. Most recently,
in accordance with relevant Council resolutions,
we started implementing the Advance Passenger
Processing System to ensure more effective border
control. Last month in Bangkok, we were able to share
our experience in that field with Member States at the
United Nations regional workshop entitled on raising
awareness and building capacity on advance passenger

information, which sought to establish an understanding
of the issue of foreign terrorists fighters and the efforts
required from the international community to address
that threat.

We strongly believe that the world needs a
comprehensive, international legally binding instrument
to fight terrorism. We therefore advocate finalization
of the pending draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. Countries must actively work
together to overcome the current deadlock, and in
particular find a compromise on a clear and precise
definition of terrorism.

Along with intensive efforts against terrorism at
all levels, we must continue to effectively address its
root causes. Poverty, lack of education, weak rule of
law, inaccessibility to justice and political and social
exclusion create desperation and grievances that may
lead to violence. Equality, tolerance and understanding,
including interfaith and intercultural dialogue, must be
promoted to help prevent incitement to terrorism.

