Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent debate of the
Council to discuss the current grave situation in
Palestine.

Like many others, my delegation condemns in the
strongest terms the ruthless attack in Gaza City on
Monday, 22 July, that killed 14 or, according to some
press reports, 15 Palestinians and wounded some 150
others. The well-planned and meticulously executed
attack by the Israeli defence force, using a fighter
aircraft on a heavily populated residential area, cannot
be justified no matter how hard Israel tries to do so,
including here in the Council today. Indeed, the first
words of Mr. Sharon, who proudly described the attack
and its deadly outcome as "one of our major
successes", belie the subsequent unconvincing attempt
by Israeli officials to explain away the incident in the
wake of strong condemnations by the international
community.

The killing and maiming of so many civilians,
including women and children, in the Gaza attack was
a heinous and indeed terrorist act, and was the latest of
the many atrocities committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people. It makes a mockery of Israel's
sincerity and commitment to the search for peace in the
region. The attack, using a highly sophisticated war
machine - the devastating, deadly F-16 - on a
densely inhabited civilian residential area, lowers
depths to which Israel has descended in its policy of
tit-for-tat and of meting out collective punishment on
the Palestinian people.

This mindless and brutal act, in pursuit of the
elusive goal of ensuring total security for Israel while
maintaining its occupation and expanding illegal
settlement activities, tarnishes even further Israel's
image as a so-called civilized country. No peace-loving
country, including my own, condones violence,
particularly against innocent civilians. But, as we all
know, violence begets violence, which is what the
Israeli leadership seems to be bent on doing.

Israel's use of massive and unmitigated force is
illegal and immoral and is a grave violation of
international humanitarian law. Israel's reckless killing
of civilians in the midst of efforts of the "quartet" to
bring peace and the genuine efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to cooperate in that respect, in spite of its
many constraints, as we all know, is most uncalled for.
Where is the sense of proportionality in Israel's action?
It makes a mockery of the recent call by Mr. Sharon for
a worldwide humanitarian operation to alleviate the
plight of the Palestinian people. Israel's action speaks
for itself. It gives a hollow ring to the Israeli
Government's claim of wanting to resolve the conflict
and makes one wonder if the latest action stemmed
from motivations other than peace.

We hope that the Council will not find it difficult
or inconvenient to condemn this latest atrocity and to
demand that Israel adhere to well-established principles
of international law and humanitarian law, which
should govern its conduct as the occupying Power. In
the wake of this latest attack, and in the light of the
mounting toll in lives and limbs in both communities
over the past two years, Malaysia reiterates its earlier
proposal to the Council that a United Nations or
international peacekeeping or monitoring force be
dispatched to the area. That call was made by many
other delegations as well. We are fully convinced that,
if it had been acted upon, the Council would certainly
have been able to save the lives and limbs of so many
innocent people on both sides.

It is high time that the Council take definitive
measures to ensure the implementation of its
resolutions, particularly resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002). Clearly, the responsibility of
implementing its own resolutions lies with the Council
itself. That is a heavy burden, but it is one that must be
borne by the Council.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
"quartet" and encourages it to intensify its work. We
are encouraged by the commitment, coupled with
concrete actions, to realize the vision of Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace and security - as
affirmed in resolution 1397 (2002) - within three
years. However, we hope that everything will be done
to ensure that the measures proposed to achieve that
goal are fulfilled in equal measure by both Israel and
Palestine. In the search for lasting peace, the onus
should not be heavier on one side than on the other.

In conclusion, let me say that it is now the
conventional wisdom that a Palestinian State will come
into being at some point in time. But how many more
lives must be lost, limbs torn apart, houses and
property demolished, livelihoods destroyed and hopes
and dreams of a people dashed before the international
community and its influential members will finally
bring themselves to declare that enough is enough and
bring Israel to heel?

There is no need for us to reinvent the wheel. The
principles and bases of a just, comprehensive peace are
well known to all and are already on the table. What is
needed is for all concerned, in particular Israel, to find
the wisdom and to muster the political will to get on
with the business at hand.

