Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
respective briefings. The information they presented is
shocking and shows that the tragic situation of human
rights in North Korea has not changed. We are talking
about ongoing systematic violations and crimes of
another era - arbitrary detention, forced labour, human
trafficking and extrajudicial executions. While the
existence of labour camps for prisoners of conscience
is already in itself intolerable to the human conscience
itself, we learn that torture is practised systematically in
many of those camps. The mere exercise of the freedom
of opinion and expression can lead to death, including
for senior officials of a regime that is destroying itself.
According to a report published on 8 September by the
Special Rapporteur (see A/70/362), between 2010 and
2014, 1,382 people were executed publicly for the most
questionable reasons and without the slightest respect
for the most basic rules of due process.

As we celebrate Human Rights Day today, I am
mindful of the direct victims of those violations and of
their families - victims of forced disappearances, who
live in the uncertainty of the fate of their relatives. The
forced disappearances are innumerable in a territory
that does not allow them to be counted. The victims
also extend to citizens of other countries - dozens of
Japanese nationals who were abducted, perhaps more.
The North Korean authorities have acknowledged
their responsibility for a certain number of the forced
disappearances. They must respond to the concerns of
families and allow the return of the abducted persons.
France lends its full support to the strategy of the
Special Rapporteur and his international approach in
that regard. France has also historically supported the
initiative on the issue of forced disappearances. It is
one of the countries at the origin of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, and it commends the work
that has been done by the Working Group on Enforced
or Involuntary Disappearances on the issue of forced
disappearances that North Korea could be responsible
for.

The violations in North Korea affect all individuals,
first of all dissidents and human rights defenders, but
also women, children and vulnerable groups. All those
who have testified, in particular before the Human
Rights Council's international commission of inquiry,
describe the same terror by a regime that commits
crimes as part of a State policy aimed at ensuring
limitless control over an enslaved population, "trapped
inside the country", to echo one of the headings of the
report (see A/70/362).

As the you know, Mr. President, France is
particularly committed to the fight against impunity.
Beyond indignation, it is the only response that would
enable justice and the rule of law to be restored. Those
responsible for crimes committed in North Korea
will be held accountable before the law. Some crimes
committed and described by the commission ofinquiry
could, owing to their scope and severity, constitute
crimes against humanity as defined by the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. In that regard, the
recommendation by the international commission of
inquiry in its report to refer the situation to the Court
deserves the Council's full attention.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
ratified several international instruments,including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. It has accepted
almost half of the recommendations that were made
to it during the Universal Periodic Review to which it
was subjected in 2014 in Geneva at the Human Rights
Council. We must ensure that those commitments are
effectively implemented. Until then, we must continue
to document the violations and shed light on the
crimes. That is why France commends the work of the
commission of inquiry. By documenting the crimes, it
is preparing the work forjustice. France also hopes that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Seoul will play its full role. Any
threats against it or its staff are unacceptable.

France welcomes the fact that, since the holding of
the meeting on this subject under the Arria Formula and
the first meeting in the Security Council a year ago (see S/PV.7353), the issue of human rights in North Korea
has come up regularly on the international agenda, not
only in the Human Rights Council and the General
Assembly, but also now in the Security Council. The
extent of the violations at the governmental scale, which
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world,
as the report says, is in itself a threat to international
peace and security. A regime that places itself in a
position of denial and entirely disregards the rule of
law, including on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, and at the same time continues to
develop nuclear and missile programmes, in flagrant
violation of all our resolutions, must not be allowed to
continue to act ruthlessly with impunity.

That is why it is important that the Security Council,
seized with the situation, remain mobilized, so that that
regime hears the voice of the international community,
puts an end to its violations, releases its prisoners of
conscience and all those who have been abducted, and
makes a firm commitment to the path of openness and
respect for the rights ofits people. We will make sure of
this, and we will not relent in our efforts.

