Mr. De Coninck (Belgium) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Belgium,
I too would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate, which enables us to
make a mid-course assessment of this issue, between
the first follow-up meeting of the 11+4 format of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, held
in Addis Ababa at the end of May, and the second, to
be held at the end of September on the margins of the
General Assembly.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Mr. Pierre Vimont on behalf of the
European Union, and would like to add the following
comments in its national capacity.

My country believes that the Framework agreement
constitutes a unique opportunity for achieving a lasting
solution to the nearly 20-year crisis in the Great Lakes
region. We support the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO),
which we hope will be effective and credible, as well
as the diplomatic action of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Mary Robinson. Belgium,
with its numerous bilateral contacts and expertise,
and as one of the international partners cited in the
Framework, is ready to contribute actively to finding
concrete solutions.

We have seen encouraging signs. The technical
support committee of the regional oversight mechanism
has produced a list of benchmarks. For its part, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has established
a national oversight mechanism. Ms. Robinson has
organized an important conference in Bujumbura on
the role of women in peace, security and development.
Besides these examples, a constructive first meeting
on regional cooperation took place last week in Addis
Ababa.

The process is still fragile, however. There is
a real risk that setbacks could wipe out the relative
progress made since the signing of the Framework.
Any slackening or loss of momentum could weaken the
process further. In that regard, I would like to discuss
three points that we believe deserve special attention.

First, a dangerous gap is developing between the
medium and the short terms. The implementation
of the Framework's commitments, such as regional
development, the re-establishment of State authority
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the reforms that must be undertaken are fundamental
goals for the medium term, but in the short term they
are dependent on a settlement of the current crisis
in North Kivu. We therefore believe it essential for
the international community to continue to insist
unanimously on a halt to all violence, whose victims
are the civilian population. The Mouvement du 23 mars
rebel group must stop threatening the city of Goma. It
must lay down its arms and abandon its ambitions for
establishing a parallel administration. In that regard,
we note the United States appeal about outside support
for that movement.

Secondly, in our View, it would be helpful to clarify
the relationship between the MONUSCO Intervention
Brigade's actions against armed groups and a
credible programme of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration/disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement. The
effectiveness and credibility of the Brigade's actions
depend on it.

Thirdly, security sector reform, especially reform
of the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo, is an essential factor, but it is sometimes
subject to misunderstanding between the international
community and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would like to see a more structured dialogue
between the relevant Congolese authorities and their
partners in the area ofmilitary cooperation. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in accordance
with the Security Council resolutions that define his
mandate, has an essential role to play here. Belgium
continues to actively pursue bilateral cooperation in
this area, and we are ready to participate in efforts to
organize a more structured dialogue.

