Ms. Lee (Singapore): Sir, the Singapore
delegation joins our colleagues in expressing our
pleasure at seeing you preside over the debate today.
We would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her concise summary of the crucial points
in the Secretary-General's report.

A prodigious amount of work has been done by
institutions such as the Carnegie Commission and the
International Peace Academy to better define the
concept of conflict prevention and identify its many
aspects. We also pay tribute to those individual States
Members of the United Nations, particularly Sweden,
which have also made substantial contributions to
promoting a better understanding of this issue.

We look forward to the statements to be made by
the non-members of the Council later today and will
therefore be brief. As this issue will come up again
next month in the General Assembly, we will also
confine our comments today to the role of the Security
Council.

This is the third open debate of the Security
Council on this issue. The Secretary-General has
suggested that the time has come for us to translate the
rhetoric of conflict prevention into concrete action. We
should heed his call and make practical suggestions on
how the role of the Security Council in preventing
armed conflict could be strengthened.

We need to bear in mind that the Council has by
no means an exclusive role. Whatever role is
envisaged, it should not be performed in contravention
of cardinal principles such as sovereignty and non-
interference in the internal affairs of States. In this
regard, the Secretary-General's report on the
prevention of armed conflict is not only comprehensive
in scope and conceptual analysis, but also rich in
practical suggestions. If each actor could play its role
in conflict prevention effectively, we would be well on
our way towards establishing a culture of prevention.

With respect to the role of the Security Council,
the Secretary-General noted in paragraph 34 of the
report before us that the Security Council's

"focus remains almost exclusively on crises and
emergencies, normally becoming involved only
when violence has already occurred on a large
scale."

This is not only a reflection of the heavy demands
on the time and attention of the Council, but also, to be
frank, a function of the lack of political will. We should
resolve, as a matter of priority, to address the gap
between what we say and what we do in the area of
conflict prevention. Our credibility depends on how
successfully we do this.

Until we can summon political will collectively,
our discussions on conflict prevention in this Chamber
will remain abstract. In this context, we commend
recent efforts of the Secretary-General to play a more
active role in conflict prevention and to strengthen the
Secretariat's early warning analysis capacities. The
Secretary-General's visit to the Middle East and active
role in the Middle East process is but the most recent
contribution he has made to the ongoing efforts to
achieve a just and lasting solution in the Middle East.
His involvement demonstrates the United Nations
continued commitment to the region and brings a
message of hope and promise. In a quiet and effective
way, the Secretary-General and his special
representatives are also active in numerous missions
across the globe aimed primarily at conflict prevention.

In this regard, we welcome the intention of the
Secretary-General to present to the Council periodic
reports on disputes, which would focus on inter-State
issues that could pose a threat to international peace
and security and on the Secretary-General's proposals
for preventive measures. This would significantly
enhance the capacity of the Council to take the
appropriate preventive action at the appropriate time.

