Mr. Dauth (Australia): First of all, as this is the
first time I have met with the Security Council this
month, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council in this
difficult month. It is a good thing for all of us that the
presidency is in such steady and reliable hands. In
addition, I should like to express the condolences of
my delegation and of Australia to the Republic of
Korea with regard to the sad losses that it has sustained
in East Timor in recent days.

Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on an issue of fundamental interest to my
country. I want also to thank my friend Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing today on
the current security situation and on the proposals for a
freeze in the peacekeeping force of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).

In addition, let me express my gratitude for the
kind references made in today's debate to the recently
concluded negotiations between my Government and
the Government of Timor-Leste to open the way for
development of the valuable petroleum resources in the
Timor Sea. As Council members are aware, under the
provisions of the Timor Sea Treaty, Timor-Leste will
receive 90 per cent of Government revenues from the
Joint Petroleum Development Area. That, of course,
will be a crucial element in promoting the long-term
stability and prosperity of Timor-Leste, to which -
needless to say - my country is deeply committed.

We are, however, seriously concerned by the
recent security incidents in Timor-Leste. They indicate
that Timor-Leste's transition to self-reliant statehood
remains a difficult path that requires the continued
attention and support of the United Nations and of
interested States. It is our assessment that these
incidents have been driven primarily by criminal
motivations and by internal political, economic and
social factors. Some incidents have involved
individuals and groups taking advantage of
spontaneous events for their own purposes. Some have
had a political motivation and have involved the use of
violence for political purposes. Others are likely to
have involved the settlement of old scores. Poor law-
enforcement capacity has allowed some incidents to
spin out of control.

These are all issues for law enforcement, both
preventive and investigative. We have no concrete
evidence of an external direction in the commission of
recent incidents, although indications are that some of
the individuals involved were West-Timor-based ex-
militia members. We note that senior members of the
Government of Timor-Leste have rejected the notion of
an external direction in these incidents. Australia is
strongly of the view that the United Nations police
(UNPOL) and the Timor-Leste police service - not
the peacekeeping force - should be the primary actors
in responding to internal security matters.

It is in that context that Australia does not
consider that recent internal security developments in
Timor-Leste warrant a freeze in peacekeeping force
numbers at this time. We are concerned that a freeze
would not address, and might deflect attention from,
the more urgent issue of developing Timor-Leste's law-
enforcement capacity.

It is imperative that UNMISET address the
shortfall in Timor-Leste's policing capabilities and
UNPOL weaknesses. The recent security incidents
make clear that law enforcement will be a continuing
challenge for Timor-Leste, including beyond the period
of UNMISET's mandate. We would therefore support a
temporary freeze in UNPOL numbers and an amended
schedule for the handover of policing authority from
the United Nations to Timor-Leste. That would allow a
major reorientation of UNPOL's approach and a
redirection of resources to focus seriously and
systematically on capacity-building within the Timor-
Leste police service.

We also consider that the final report of the joint
assessment mission on policing, which was released
publicly last week, provides the framework for a
renewed United Nations-led effort in police
development. Australia is willing to make a strong
contribution to these efforts, and we encourage other
interested countries to do likewise.

While Australia does not support a freeze in the
peacekeeping force drawdown, we accept that security
is an ongoing challenge. We would not wish the
international community to unintentionally signal to
elements within Timor-Leste that our focus on and
commitment to security in Timor-Leste are wavering.

Australia therefore supports a slower drawdown
of the peacekeeping force than envisaged to ensure that
the international community's commitment to Timor-
Leste's security is well understood. We would welcome
a further United Nations proposal on a less sharp
adjustment to the phasing and numbers of the
peacekeeping force drawdown. However, we reiterate
that this approach will work only if it is accompanied
by a vigorous and sustained effort to address the
shortfalls in T imor-Leste's policing capacity.

Australia recognizes the importance of ensuring
that the significant achievements made by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste are not undermined by a
deterioration in the security situation. At the same
time, we are concerned to ensure that UNMISET and
interested countries implement appropriate responses to
address these current problems. Australia, for its part,
remains committed to assisting the United Nations and
the Timor-Leste Government in responding effectively
to the current challenges, in order to ensure Timor
Leste's transition to a secure and self-reliant statehood.

