Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): 1 would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his briefing.

The formation on Monday 8 September of a
new, inclusive Government in Iraq was a landmark
achievement in the country's political transition. At
the least, it sets the stage for achieving lasting peace,
stability and progress. We are encouraged by the
resolve of Iraq's political leaders to overcome their
differences in the higher national interest. The decision
of the former Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri Al-Maliki,
not to remain in office has contributed significantly
to easing political tension in the country. That is a
remarkable accomplishment. The decision of Kurdish
leaders to set aside their demands on budget payments
and oil sales in order to facilitate approval of the new
Iraqi Government is also commendable. Prime Minister
Haider Al-Abadi has expressed his commitment to
resolving all outstanding issues with the Kurdish
Regional Government. In our view, this development
is an important element in giving the Kurds a sense of
belonging in the new Iraq.

While some Cabinet posts have been filled by
Mr. Al-Abadi, we note that the crucial positions of the
Ministers of Defence and the Interior remain vacant.
We hope they will be filled in due course. That is
particularly important in the light of Iraq's security
situation, inflamed as it is by the pestilence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The activities
of ISIS and other terrorist groups pose a grave threat to
the peace, stability and territorial integrity of Iraq. In
conjunction with terrorist groups all around the world,
it is a potent threat to global peace and security. ISIS
is committing grave violations of human rights, war
crimes and untold other atrocities. Its brutal activities
are inflicting hardship and terror on the people of Iraq
embroiled in the conflict. According to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, a total of 1,421
Iraqis were killed and another 1,370 injured in acts of
terrorism and violence in the month of August alone.
The activities ofISIS represent a grave threat not just to
Iraq but to international peace and security in general.

We have said over and over again that terrorism
is a global problem that requires a global solution.
The situation in Iraq must not be left for Iraq to deal
with alone. The world must stand together to tackle it,
and that is palpable today. What is urgently needed is
immediate, decisive and sustained action on the part
of the international community in support of Iraq.
Another significant aspect of the fight against ISIS is
the importance of countering its dangerous message,
which appears to be radicalizing young people all over
the world and fuelling the conflict in the whole region
as well as in Iraq.

In that regard, we take positive note of the leading
role the Arab States are playing in repudiating the
dangerous distortion of religion that ISIS propaganda
attempts to spread throughout the region and the world.
We welcome the declaration on fighting ISIS signed by
the United States and the Arab Gulf States with Iraq,
Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon. As efforts to confront and
eliminate ISIS gather momentum, the international
community must work in concert in order to maintain
close cooperation and effective coordination in seeking
our collective, common objective ofensuring a peaceful,
prosperous, strong and united Iraq, once and for all free
of the menace of a senseless ideology of destruction.

