At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234). My delegation paid keen attention to the briefing of the Special Coordinator and takes note of the Secretary-General's observations regarding the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The Niger deplores the lack of progress in the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), adopted four years ago, and remains concerned by what is set out in the report of the Secretary-General. The increase in the expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the continuation of the demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures, including schools and agricultural land, and the upsurge in attacks and violence against Palestinian civilians, including women and children, constitute flagrant violations of United Nations resolutions and the principles of international law, which we condemn and which must cease. The same goes for acts of provocation and hate speech; the launching of rockets towards residential areas in Israel; the disproportionate use of force against Palestinian civilians, who are often unarmed; arbitrary detention, including of children; and extrajudicial punishments. My delegation notes the upsurge in settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territories as one of the most worrisome trends, which threatens not only to undermine the work achieved since 1967 to the present day by the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, the parties themselves and the entire international community, but also to jeopardize the prospects for a future Palestinian State that is sovereign and viable and contiguous with Israel. The Niger takes note of the normalization of relations between Israel and Arab countries and expresses the hope that the momentum of that rapprochement will help to ease tensions in the area and pave the way for a lasting peace and peaceful coexistence in the Middle East. However, the normalization of relations must not come at the expense of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a viable independent State living in peace with Israel, as envisaged by the internationally accepted parameters for the settlement of the crisis. Any attempt to deal with the conflict outside those parameters will only prolong instability and violence and runs counter to the two-State solution, the only just and lasting option that will allow the two peoples to achieve their legitimate aspirations. It is equally crucial for all of us, in particular the Council, to spare no effort in implementing United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016). The situation in the Gaza Strip represents a further source of concern addressed in the report of the Secretary-General. The upsurge in rocket and mortar fire from Gaza towards residential areas of Israel continues to violate international law and such actions must cease. The many challenges facing Gaza - including poverty, food insecurity, overpopulation, high unemployment, restrictions on imports and the free movement of persons, and the fragility of the health system and of the management of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic - cannot be overcome without the lifting of the illegal blockade Israel has continuously imposed on the area for 13 years. It is just as important that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East have the resources it needs to continue providing vital services to the thousands of Palestinian families in need, especially amid the COVID-19 pandemic. I would like to recall that it is more important than ever for us to step up efforts and the necessary pressure to ensure that our decisions, especially resolution 2334 (2016), are not merely empty words. It is just as important that we push for the resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process following years of interruption. In that regard, the trend over recent months of normalization in relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours and the political will demonstrated by the Palestinian Authority must serve as a springboard for the revitalization of the peace talks with a view to achieving a just, lasting and equitable solution to the crisis. Finally, we commend Mr. Mladenov for his tireless efforts to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict throughout his time in office. We wish him the greatest of success in his new role.
