Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, the Israeli forces have made repeated
incursions into the Palestinian territories and have
carried out massive military operations causing huge
losses of life and property among the Palestinian
people. The Israeli forces have also repeatedly
besieged the headquarters of Chairman Arafat,
seriously threatening his personal safety. The acts of
the Israelis violate the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We oppose and condemn such acts.
Recently, a series of suicide bombing incidents have
taken place, causing a large number of casualties
among innocent civilians. We also express our
condemnations ofthat.

Recent developments in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict have shown that the efforts of the international
community to stop the escalation of violence cannot be
eased for even one instant. The settling of the Israeli-
Palestinian question must be linked to the
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle
East question. The relevant Security Council
resolutions and the principle of land for peace must be
implemented in earnest, especially resolution 1397
(2002), adopted by the Council last March. It needs to
be emphasized that the State of Palestine should be
created at an early date. The Israeli side must
immediately withdraw its troops from the Palestinian
territories it occupies. The authority and personal
safety of Chairman Arafat must be ensured.

Meanwhile, it must be pointed out that violent
suicide attacks against civilians must be stopped. The
evolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has also
demonstrated that it is now difficult to break the
deadlock by relying solely on the parties to the
conflict. The easing of tension requires the
involvement and assistance of third parties. In this
regard, the Security Council should assume the
responsibilities bestowed upon it by the Charter.

China will work continuously with all parties in
the international community and make unremitting
efforts for the political settlement of the Middle East
question. A Deputy Foreign Minister of China will visit
Palestine and Israel in the coming days.

