Mr. Tommasi (Italy): I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council.

Today, more than ever, the international community
needs and expects an efficient and effective Security
Council that is able to take prompt action, in accordance
with its mandate, for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At a time of growing frustration
and concern within the international community over
the persistence of violent crises, improved working
methods are crucial to enhancing the Security
Council's ability to carry out its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.
Transparency, openness, efficiency and interaction
with the rest of the Member States are needed to foster
a sense of ownership of the Council by the international
community and to avoid the misperception that the
Council is an autonomous body.

We appreciate the improvements that have already

been made to adapt the Council's working methods to
changing realities. I am referring, for instance, to the
increasing number of open debates, the organization
of informal briefing sessions by Security Council
Presidents on their monthly work, and the strengthened
cooperation with regional organizations. As a member
State of the European Union (EU), Italy commends
the attention dedicated to cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations. But more needs to be done to
enhance transparency on, access to and participation
in, the Council.

Some ideas for further improvements have already
been mentioned in the concept paper (S/2013/613, annex)
circulated before the meeting - for which I thank you,
Mr. President - and others have been brought up today
by colleagues.

I wish to draw the Council's attention to
two commitments taken by the President of the
Security Council, namely, first, maintaining regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Chairs of its country-specific
configurations, and secondly, improving consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs and PCCs). We support the involvement of the PBC
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
in the formal meetings of the Council. The PBC has
the potential to play an increasingly supportive role in
the post-conflict processes of stabilization and has a
capacity for analysis of peacebuilding dynamics that is
useful to the Security Council. It is equally important
to strengthen the Council's consultations with TCCs
and PCCs, especially when mission mandates are
being defined or renewed. A perspective from the field
is fundamental, especially from those who are being
called on to carry out the mandate.

Italy, a major contributor of troops to United
Nations peacekeeping, will lend its efforts, as always,
to giving TCCs a greater role. We therefore welcome the
commitments undertaken in the note by the President of
the Security Council issued yesterday (S/2013/630) and
we thank the Permanent Representative of Argentina,
Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval, for her efforts as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.

Improving working methods is part of the Security
Council reform process. It is one of the five pillars of
the intergovernmental negotiations on reform. As the
General Assembly agreed by consensus in its decision
62/557, we have pledged to deal with the five pillars
at the same time to achieve comprehensive reform. We

remain convinced that hurried and divisive piecemeal
approaches must be avoided. There is no alternative
to a comprehensive agreement. Partial solutions will
not lead to a genuine reform of the Security Council.
Only a comprehensive solution - including working
methods - can lead to a reform, shared by the whole
membership, that will yield a Security Council better
able to cope with the growing challenges of today.
