Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for the eighth report of the
Prosecutor on steps being taken to investigate the
situation in Darfur pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005), and for his briefing today. This
contained both analytical and emotional elements, as
well as political views that exceeded the boundaries of
the competence of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.

The Russian Federation views the report's
information on the unceasing violence in Darfur with
profound regret and concern. It is clear that this
violence can reliably be stopped only through clear
progress towards a political settlement in that region of
the Sudan. In that regard, the Security Council bears a
great responsibility with respect to ensuring the
effectiveness of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, carried out under a
Council mandate.

We take note of the Prosecutor's aspiration to
carry out his functions in an independent and unbiased
manner. But there is also a need to balance the
demands of personal responsibility and the interests of
the peace process. Work in the legal sphere must
proceed taking into account the joint efforts towards a
settlement of the situation in Darfur and in the Sudan
as a whole.

On numerous occasions in the past, the Russian
Federation has noted the importance of an objective
assessment of the actions of all parties to the conflict.
We are satisfied by the fact that steps are being taken
in the investigation to clarify the circumstances of the
September 2007 attack on African Union peacekeepers
at Haskanita. At the same time, however, in spite of the
difficulties in this area of the investigation, it is
important to step up work to gather information about
the activities of rebel factions.

It is well known that the Prosecutor's decision to
approach the judges of the ICC with a request for an
arrest warrant against President Al-Bashir of the Sudan
did not produce a unanimous reaction: it evoked
diverse reactions in international circles. Specifically,
authoritative regional organizations such as the African
Union and the League of Arab States expressed their
concern about an indictment's possible negative
consequences for the situation in the Sudan. We fully
understand their position on this issue.

At the present politically sensitive stage, it might
well make sense to focus efforts on measures designed
to restore dialogue and trust among the parties to the
conflict. In our View, steps taken by the Sudan side to
create its own capacity to investigate crimes that fall
within the jurisdiction of the ICC should be
encouraged. In that regard we take note of the letter
dated 17 November 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2008/714), containing
information about Khartoum's latest initiatives in this
area.

For its part, the Russian Federation will continue
to do everything in its power to bring about peace in
Darfur.

