Mr. Amendola (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely debate on an issue that
demands a comprehensive global response and cannot
be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group. The evaluation of the threat confirms
the need to face this challenge through a global
response of a wide-ranging nature. It is a challenge
without borders, and it is a challenge that requires a
multidimensional answer.

Italy advocates that our response must be holistic in
terms of answering through holistic political, cultural
and diplomatic actions. Italy's approach focuses on
training local security forces and countering financial
flows to extremist groups. It takes into consideration
all aspects of those borderless challenges. Together,
we will defeat the military terrorist organizations, but
together we must eradicate the roots of those extremist
activities, and we must do it all together.

First and foremost comes prevention. I would
like to reiterate the Italian support for the Security
Council's discussion and debate and for the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674), because the Plan of Action involves a
comprehensive approach that encompasses not just
security-based counter-terrorism measures, but also
systematic preventive ones.

We have a twofold responsibility, because for
any long-term solution we must base our actions on
understanding the forces that alienate individuals,
young people in particular, and lead them to join
extremist groups. That means tackling the root causes
of the phenomenon. We need to address the conditions,
such as the lack of socioeconomic opportunities,
marginalization and discrimination, poor governance
and violations of human rights and the rule of law, as
well as radicalization in prisons and in marginalized
communities.

Our twofold responsibility entails acting together
not simply to combat those organizations but also
to respect the freedom and values that every society
should defend and especially disseminated to the young
generation. We need to prevent sectarian political
conflict, which we believe opens the door for totalitarian
political organizations, such as Da'esh. At the same
time, we need to fight Islamophobia, which serves as a
major asset to terrorist organizations, since a minority
within certain groups want to become the majority.

Secondly, we must fully implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions adopted to cut off the
financial sources of terrorism. But we must also show
the value of community when we have crises, like that
of refugees flowing from the theatres of war. We must
show solidarity, as we are doing in Italy by developing
human corridors to save the lives of refugees escaping
from war, especially those from Lebanon.

Thirdly, we are speaking about counter-narratives,
which means building bridges of understanding,
starting from our resolutions on youth, in particular.
That is because we must engage the youth community,
especially when it is marginalized, around the
discussion of shared values and mutual respect. At the
same time, we must of course fight together to introduce
innovative counter-terrorism legislation. Our twofold
responsibility and twofold actions requires us to create
and build bridges of understanding in our societies.

After the recent attack in Paris, our Government
proposed and approved a new concept in our budgetary
legislation. For each euro that we spend on counter-
terrorism - last year we spent €1 billion - we must
spend the same amount on culture. That entails building
within society a space for involvement, inclusion
and strengthening. That is a message from a society
that respects freedom and the inclusion of the young
generation in particular. It is a commitment and action
based on what we are doing now, not just on the local or
national level, but also involves opening ourselves up
to a multilateral dimension that prevents conflict, helps
refugees to escape war and attempts to solve conflicts
through political means. These minority groups,
especially Da'esh in the Middle East and North African
region, want to create borders between the values of
the majority that we respect and a new community that
wants to become a State.
My final point concerns culture and education. In
our multidimensional approach, by focusing on culture
and invest in education we are investing in building a
bridge of understanding. This is not just a narrative; it
involves promoting and reorganizing our society based
on the concept of inclusion and shared values. Terrorists
seek to divide us by race, ethnicity, nationality and
values. This is the opposite of the identity and diversity
of the Mediterranean region, which is a melting pot of
various religions and cultures that together create an
intense and beautiful heritage.

Iwish to express my condolences for what happened
yesterday in Baghdad. When I last visited Iraq, I visited
an Italian-Iraqi institute that defends the beautiful
archaeological heritage of the country. In that Visit,
we studied what is taking place in Mosul. Via satellite
imaging, we saw the first destruction of antiquities by
Da'esh. What they are doing in Iraq, what they have
done in other places, is an attack on the very idea of
the Mediterranean region. The Mediterranean region is
an idea of identity and diversity that together created
the most intense experience of civilization in the past
century.

Only by protecting our cultural heritage, refugees
and the idea of a society where security, respect for
freedom and the promotion of integration work together
can we create not just a counter-narrative but an idea of
society consistent with the efforts of the United Nations
and expressive of the values underlying relevant United
Nations resolutions that can fight terrorist and extremist
organizations and eradicate the roots of terrorism
and extremism, while actively promoting practical
proposals for our communities.

