Ms. Wronecka (Poland): First of all, I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Modibo Toure and Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their useful briefings.

Poland is following with growing concern the
current situation in Guinea-Bissau. We support the
efforts of the international community aimed at
peacefully resolving the political crisis in the country.
We therefore call on all political and civil society actors,
regardless of their personal differences and ambitions,
to engage in dialogue in a spirit of compromise. In that
context, we take note that the army is not interfering in
the political process.

The implementation of the 2016 road map and the
Conakry Agreement is crucial to maintaining peace
and stability in the country. We appeal to the Guinea-
Bissau authorities to complete their implementation
and carry out the parliamentary elections scheduled for
May in a peaceful atmosphere that guarantees political
pluralism and impartiality. We think that women and
young people should be included in all decision-making
structures related to security sector reform, the national
reconciliation process and institution-building. In
this regard, we urge the Guinea-Bissau authorities to
ensure the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the freedom of speech
and information.

Poland commends the important role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea-Bissau in
promoting good governance, political dialogue and
national reconciliation. We also welcome the significant
financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
under the PBF Immediate Response Facility. Since the
PBF began its activities, Poland has provided financial
support to the Fund.

Poland also supports the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB) as it is an important factor in reaching
consensus solutions and cooperation. The decision ofthe
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, published
on 4 February, imposing sanctions on those responsible
for non-implementation of the Conakry Agreement
is a step towards holding responsible those who are
impeding a peaceful, consensus solution to the crisis.
Due to the fragile security situation in the country, the
presence of ECOMIB is most important. In this regard,
we welcome the decision to extend ECOMIB's mandate
until the end ofMarch. Its role is essential, especially in
view of the upcoming legislative elections.

The mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
expires at the end of this month. The United Nations
should remain engaged in efforts towards peace in the
country and support ECOWAS efforts to resolve the
political crisis.

In conclusion, Poland encourages all the parties in
Guinea-Bissau to engage in dialogue. We also express
our full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure. We look forward
to the upcoming UNIOGBIS mandate renewal.

