Mrs. Alingue (Chad) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of the Council during your presidency, and
the whole of the team that has supported you. I would
also thank you for organizing this monthly meeting
to assess the Security Council's work in accordance
with note S/2010/507 of the President of Council. We
believe that such meetings remain the only means of
ensuring transparency in relation to non-members and
allowing them to follow our work. The assessment
meetings at the end of each presidency make it possible
to systematically review the Council's work and give
us an overview of the priorities reflected in the media.

We remain concerned by the lack of consensus
in the Council regarding extremely serious situations
that threaten international peace and security, namely,
those in Syria, Iraq, Ukraine, Yemen and Libya, as well
as other threats, such as terrorism, violent extremism
and the spread and circulation of light weapons, illicit
trafficking and migration issues. We believe that
Council members can do better by listening to each
other and by taking into account each other's legitimate
concerns in a spirit of consensus.

The adoption of resolution 2220 (2015) on the
strengthening of cooperation to counter the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, adopted
with nine votes in favour and six abstentions, reveals
the power play within the Council and the position of
some member States with regard to the others.
Concerning the political crisis in Burundi,
we underscore the necessity for the international
community to take action to help Burundi overcome
the political crisis it is experiencing. We also note the
primary role ofthe West African community in settling
the crisis and call for close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, so as to support
regional efforts for an exit from the crisis in the interest
of the Burundian people.

During the month of June, the Security Council
examined ways to make peacekeeping operations
more effective, to protect civilians and to guarantee
the security of mission staff. The need to guarantee
the security of the Blue Helmets themselves was
underscored with concern by force commanders and
by delegations, who talked about, for example, the
planting of mines and improvised explosive devices by
armed groups in Mali. We think that appropriate means
should be made available to United Nations forces to
allow them to protect themselves.

With regard to the restrictions imposed by some
countries on the ways in which their troops can be
used, we think there is a need to have a single chain of
command within military and police contingents and to
uphold the hierarchy of which they are a part, without
giving priority to the orders of national authorities.

With regard to sexual abuse during United Nations
missions, which has been unanimously and strongly
denounced by all delegations, we believe that the
zero-tolerance policy must be made a reality. In that
connection, we endorse the proposal to include more
women staff in peacekeeping operations, including in
high-ranking posts.

With regard to violence against children in armed
conflict, our country agrees with the Secretary-
General's recommendation, namely, that the Council
should ensure that grave violations perpetrated against
children be considered crimes subject to Security
Council sanctions. We encourage States and financial
partners to shore up actions to reintegrate former child
soldiers and prevent their recruitment into armed forces.
Chad welcomes the fact that it was de-listed from the
list of States with children in their armies. Of course,
we stand ready to share our modest experience in that
area with interested parties.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again my
congratulations to the President and the whole Malaysian
team for the significant work undertaken, the relevance
of the topics addressed and the perseverance they
demonstrated throughout their presidency. I would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate New Zealand
ahead of time on its assumption of the presidency in
July and wish it every success. The delegation of New
Zealand can count on Chad's support.

