Mr. Blix: Resolution 1441 (2002), adopted by the
Security Council on Iraq in November last year, asks
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
"update" the Council 60 days after the resumption of
inspections. This is today. The updating, it seems,
forms part of an assessment by the Council and its
members of the results, so far, of the inspections and of
their role as a means to achieve verifiable disarmament
in Iraq.

As this is an open meeting of the Council, it may
be appropriate briefly to provide some background for
a better understanding of where we stand today. With
the Council's permission, I shall do so.

I begin by recalling that inspections as a part of a
disarmament process in Iraq started in 1991,
immediately after the Gulf War. They went on for eight
years, until 1998, when inspectors were withdrawn.
Thereafter, for nearly four years there were no
inspections. They were resumed only at the end of
November last year.

While the fundamental aim of inspections in Iraq
has always been to verify disarmament, the successive
resolutions adopted by the Council over the years have
varied somewhat in emphasis and approach. In 1991,
resolution 687 (1991), adopted unanimously as a part
of the ceasefire after the Gulf war, had five major
elements. The first three related to disarmament. They
called for declarations by Iraq of its programmes of
weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles,
verification of the declarations through the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
IAEA, and supervision by these organizations of the
destruction or the elimination of proscribed items and
programmes. After the completion of the disarmament,
the Council would have the authority to proceed to a
lifting of the sanctions and the inspecting organizations
would move to long-term ongoing monitoring and
verification.

Resolution 687 (1991), like the subsequent
resolutions to which I shall refer, required cooperation
by Iraq, but this was often withheld or given
grudgingly. Unlike South Africa, which decided on its
own to eliminate its nuclear weapons and welcomed
inspection as a means of creating confidence in its
disarmament, Iraq appears not to have come to a
genuine acceptance - not even today - of the
disarmament that was demanded of it and that it needs
to carry out to win the confidence of the world and to
live in peace.

As we know, the twin operation "declare and
verify", which was prescribed in resolution 687 (1991),
too often turned into a game of hide-and-seek. Rather
than just verifying declarations and supporting
evidence, the two inspecting organizations found
themselves engaged in efforts to map the weapons
programmes and to search for evidence through
inspections, interviews, seminars, inquiries with
suppliers and intelligence organizations. As a result,
the disarmament phase was not completed in the short
time expected. Sanctions remained and took a severe
toll until Iraq accepted the oil for food programme and
the gradual development of that programme mitigated
the effects of the sanctions.

The implementation of resolution 687 (1991)
nevertheless brought about considerable disarmament
results. It has been recognized that more weapons of
mass destruction were destroyed under this resolution
than were destroyed during the Gulf War: large
quantities of chemical weapons were destroyed under
UNSCOM. supervision before 1994. While Iraq
claims - with little evidence - that it destroyed all
biological weapons unilaterally in 1991, it is certain
that UNSCOM. destroyed large biological weapons
production facilities in 1996. The large nuclear
infrastructure was destroyed and the fissionable
material was removed from Iraq by the IAEA.

One of three important questions before us today
is how much might remain undeclared and intact from
before 1991 and, possibly, thereafter; the second
question is what, if anything, was illegally produced or
procured after 1998, when the inspectors left; and the
third question is how we can prevent any weapons of
mass destruction from being produced or procured in
the future.

In December 1999 - after one year without
inspections in Iraq - resolution 1284 (1999) was
adopted by the Council, with four abstentions.
Supplementing the basic resolutions of 1991 and of the
following years, it provided Iraq with a somewhat less
ambitious approach: in return for "cooperation in all
respects" for a specified period of time, including
progress in the resolution of "key remaining
disarmament tasks", it opened the possibility, not for
the lifting, but for the suspension of sanctions.

For nearly three years, Iraq refused to accept any
inspections by UNMOVIC. It was only after appeals by
the Secretary-General and Arab States, and pressure by
the United States and other Member States, that Iraq
declared, on 16 September last year, that it would again
accept inspections without conditions.

Resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted on 8
November last year and emphatically reaffirmed the
demand on Iraq to cooperate. It required this
cooperation to be immediate, unconditional and active.
The resolution contained many provisions that we
welcome as enhancing and strengthening the inspection
regime. The unanimity by which it was adopted sent a
powerful signal that the Council was of one mind in
creating a last opportunity for peaceful disarmament in
Iraq through inspection.

UNMOVIC shares the sense of urgency felt by
the Council to use inspection as a path to attain, within
a reasonable time, verifiable disarmament of Iraq.
Under the resolutions I have cited, it would be
followed by monitoring for such time as the Council
feels would be required. The resolutions also point to a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction as the
ultimate goal.

As a subsidiary body of the Council, UNMOVIC
is fully aware of and appreciates the close attention that
the Council devotes to the inspections in Iraq. While
today's "updating" is foreseen in resolution 1441
(2002), the Council can and does call for additional
briefings whenever it wishes. One was held on 19
January, and a further such briefing is tentatively set
for 14 February.

I turn now to the key requirement of cooperation
and Iraq's response to it. Cooperation might be said to
relate to both substance and process. It would appear
from our experience so far that Iraq has decided in
principle to provide cooperation on process, notably
access. A similar decision is indispensable to provide
cooperation on substance in order to bring the
disarmament task to completion through the peaceful
process of inspection and to set the monitoring task on
a firm course. An initial minor step would be to adopt
the long-overdue legislation required by the
resolutions.

I shall deal first with cooperation on process. This
relates to the procedures, mechanisms, infrastructure
and practical arrangements to pursue inspections and
seek verifiable disarmament. While inspection is not
built on the premise of confidence but may lead to
confidence if it is successful, there must nevertheless
be a measure of mutual confidence from the very
beginning in running the operation of inspection.
Iraq has, on the whole, cooperated rather well so
far with UNMOVIC in this field. The most important
point to make is that access has been provided to all
sites we have wanted to inspect, and, with one
exception, it has been prompt. We have further had
great help in building up the infrastructure of our office
in Baghdad and the field office in Mosul.
Arrangements and services for our plane and our
helicopters have been good. The environment has been
workable. Our inspections have included universities,
military bases, presidential sites and private residences.
Inspections have also taken place on Fridays, the
Muslim day of rest; on Christmas Day; and on New
Year's Day. These inspections have been conducted in
the same manner as all other inspections. We seek to be
both effective and correct.

In this updating, I am bound, however, to register
some problems, the first relating to two kinds of air
operations. While we now have the technical capability
to send a U-2 plane placed at our disposal for aerial
imagery and for surveillance during inspections and
have informed Iraq that we planned to do so, Iraq has
refused to guarantee its safety unless a number of
conditions are fulfilled. As these conditions went
beyond what is stipulated in resolution 1441 (2002)
and what was practiced by UNSCOM. and Iraq in the
past, we note that so far Iraq is not complying with our
request. I hope this attitude will change.

Another air operation problem, which was solved
during our recent talks in Baghdad, concerned the use
of helicopters flying into the no-fly zones. Iraq had
insisted on sending helicopters of its own to
accompany ours. This would have raised a safety
problem. The matter was solved by an offer on our part
to take the accompanying Iraqi minders in our
helicopters to the sites, an arrangement that had been
practiced by UNSCOM. in the past.

I am obliged to note some recent disturbing
incidents and harassment. For instance, for some time,
far-fetched allegations have been made publicly that
questions posed by inspectors were of an intelligence
character. While I might not defend every question that
inspectors might have asked, Iraq knows that they do
not serve intelligence purposes, and Iraq should not say
so.

On a number of occasions, demonstrations have
taken place in front of our offices and at inspection
sites. The other day, a sightseeing excursion by five
inspectors to a mosque was followed by an
unwarranted public outburst. The inspectors went
without United Nations insignia and were welcomed in
the kind manner that is characteristic of the normal
Iraqi attitude to foreigners. They took off their shoes
and were taken around. They asked perfectly innocent
questions and parted with the invitation to come again.
Shortly thereafter, we received protests from the Iraqi
authorities about an unannounced inspection and about
questions not relevant to weapons of mass destruction.
Indeed, they were not.

Demonstrations and outbursts of this kind are
unlikely to occur in Iraq without initiative or
encouragement from the authorities. We must ask
ourselves what the motives may be for these events.
They do not facilitate an already difficult job, in which
we try to be effective, professional and, at the same
time, correct. When our Iraqi counterparts have some
complaint, they can take it up in a calmer and less
unpleasant manner.

The substantive cooperation required relates
above all to the obligation of Iraq to declare all
programmes of weapons of mass destruction and either
to present items and activities for elimination or else to
provide evidence supporting the conclusion that
nothing proscribed remains.

Paragraph 9 of resolution 1441 (2002) states that
this cooperation shall be "active". It is not enough to
open doors. Inspection is not a game of catch as catch
can. Rather, as I noted, it is a process of verification for
the purpose of creating confidence. It is not built upon
the premise of trust. Rather, it is designed to lead to
trust, if there is both openness to the inspectors and
action to present them with items to destroy, or credible
evidence about the absence of any such items.

On 7 December 2002, Iraq submitted a
declaration of some 12,000 pages in response to
paragraph 3 of resolution 1441 (2002), and within the
time stipulated by the Security Council. In the fields of
missiles and biotechnology, the declaration contains a
good deal of new material and information covering the
period from 1998 and onward. This is welcome.

One might have expected that in preparing the
declaration, Iraq would have tried to respond to, clarify
and submit supporting evidence regarding the many
open disarmament issues, with which the Iraqi side
should be familiar from the UNSCOM. document
S/1999/94 and the so-called Amorim report of March
1999 (S/1999/356). These are questions that
UNMOVIC, Governments and independent
commentators have often cited.
While UNMOVIC has been preparing its own list
of current unresolved disarmament issues and key
remaining disarmament tasks in response to
requirements in resolution 1284 (1999), we find the
issues listed as unresolved in the two reports that I
mentioned professionally justified. These reports do
not contend that weapons of mass destruction remain in
Iraq, nor do they exclude that possibility. They point to
a lack of evidence and to inconsistencies, which raise
question marks and which must be straightened out if
weapons dossiers are to be closed and confidence is to
arise.

Those issues deserve to be taken seriously by
Iraq, rather than being brushed aside as evil
machinations of UNSCOM. Regrettably, the 12,000
page declaration, most of which is a reprint of earlier
documents, does not seem to contain any new evidence
that would eliminate the questions or reduce their
number. Even Iraq's letter sent, in response to our
recent discussions in Baghdad, to the President of the
Security Council on 24 January does not lead us to the
resolution of those issues.

I shall only give some examples of issues and
questions that need to be answered, and I turn first to
the sector of chemical weapons.

The nerve agent VX is one of the most toxic ever
developed. Iraq has declared that it only produced VX
on a pilot scale, just a few tonnes, and that the quality
was poor and the product unstable. Consequently, it
was said that the agent was never weaponized. Iraq
said that the small quantity of agent remaining after the
Gulf War was unilaterally destroyed in the summer of
1991.

UNMOVIC, however, has information that
conflicts with this account. There are indications that
Iraq had worked on the problem of purity and
stabilization and that more had been achieved than has
been declared. Indeed, one of the documents provided
by Iraq even indicates that the purity of the agent, at
least in laboratory production, was higher than
declared. There are also indications that the agent was
weaponized.

In addition, there are questions to be answered
concerning the fate of the VX precursor chemicals,
which Iraq states were lost during bombing in the Gulf
War or were unilaterally destroyed by Iraq.

I would now like to turn to the so-called Air
Force document that I have discussed with the Council
before. This document was originally found by an
UNSCOM. inspector in a safe in Iraqi Air Force
headquarters in 1998 and taken from her by Iraqi
minders. It gives an account of the expenditure of
bombs, including chemical bombs, by Iraq in the Iraq-
Iran war. I am encouraged by the fact that Iraq has now
provided this document to UNMOVIC.

The document indicates that 13,000 chemical
bombs were dropped by the Iraqi Air Force between
1983 and 1988, while Iraq has declared that 19,500
bombs were consumed during this period. Thus, there
is a discrepancy of 6,500 bombs. The amount of
chemical agent in these bombs would be in the order of
about 1,000 tonnes. In the absence of evidence to the
contrary, we must assume that these quantities are now
unaccounted for.

The discovery of a number of 122 millimetre
chemical rocket warheads in a bunker at a storage
depot 170 kilometre southwest of Baghdad was much
publicized. This was a relatively new bunker, and
therefore the rockets must have been moved there in
the past few years, at a time when Iraq should not have
had such munitions.

The investigation of these rockets is still
proceeding. Iraq states that they were overlooked from
1991 from a batch of some 2,000 that were stored there
during the Gulf War. That could be the case. They
could also be the tip of a submerged iceberg. The
discovery of a few rockets does not resolve, but rather
points to, the issue of several thousands of chemical
rockets that are unaccounted for.

The finding of the rockets shows that Iraq needs
to make more effort to ensure that its declaration is
currently accurate. During my recent discussions in
Baghdad, Iraq declared that it would make new efforts
in this regard and had set up a committee of
investigation. Since then it has reported that it has
found four more chemical rockets at a storage depot in
Al-Taji.

I might further mention that inspectors have
found at another site a laboratory quantity of
thiodiglycol, a mustard gas precursor.

While I am addressing chemical issues, I should
mention a matter, which I reported on 19 December
2002, concerning equipment at a civilian chemical
plant at Al Fallujah. Iraq has declared that it had
repaired chemical processing equipment previously
destroyed under UNSCOM. supervision and had
installed it at Fallujah for the production of chlorine
and phenols. We have inspected this equipment and are
conducting a detailed technical evaluation of it. On
completion, we will decide whether this and other
equipment that has been recovered by Iraq should be
destroyed.

I turn to biological weapons. I mentioned the
issue of anthrax to the Council on previous occasions
and I come back to it, as it is an important one. Iraq has
declared that it produced about 8,500 litres of this
biological warfare agent, which it states it unilaterally
destroyed in the summer of 1991. Iraq has provided
little evidence of that production and no convincing
evidence of its destruction.

There are strong indications that Iraq produced
more anthrax than it declared and that at least some of
this was retained after the declared destruction date. It
might still exist. Either it should be found and be
destroyed under UNMOVIC's supervision, or
convincing evidence should be produced to show that it
was indeed destroyed in 1991.

As I reported to the Council on 19 December last
year, Iraq did not declare a significant quantity, some
650 kilograms, of bacterial growth media, which was
acknowledged, as reported in Iraq's submission to the
Amorim panel in February 1999. As part of its 7
December 2002 declaration, Iraq resubmitted the
Amorim panel document, but the table showing this
particular import of media was not included. The
absence of this table would appear to be deliberate, as
the pages of the resubmitted document were
renumbered.

In the letter of 24 January of this year to the
President of the Security Council, Iraq's Foreign
Minister stated that "all imported quantities of growth
media were declared". This is not evidence. I note that
the quantity of media involved would suffice to
produce, for example, about 5,000 litres of
concentrated anthrax.

I turn now to the missile sector. There remain
significant questions as to whether Iraq retained
SCUD-type missiles after the Gulf War. Iraq declared
the consumption of a number of SCUD missiles as
targets in the development of an anti-ballistic missile
defence system during the 1980s. Yet no technical
information has been produced about that programme
or data on the consumption of the missiles.

There has been a range of developments in the
missile field during the past four years, presented by
Iraq in the declaration, as non-proscribed activities. We
are trying to gather a clear understanding of them
through inspections and on-site discussions.
Two projects in particular stand out. They are the
development of a liquid-fuelled missile, named
Al Samoud 2, and a solid propellant missile, called
Al Fatah. Both missiles have been tested to a range in
excess of the permitted range of 150 kilometres, with
the Al Samoud 2 being tested to a maximum of 183
kilometres and the Al Fatah to 161 kilometres. Some of
both types of missiles have already been provided to
the Iraqi Armed Forces, even though it is stated that
they are still undergoing development.

The Al Samoud's diameter was increased from an
earlier version to the present 760 millimetres. This
modification was made despite a 1994 letter from the
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM. directing Iraq to
limit its missile diameters to less than 600 millimetres.
Furthermore, a November 1997 letter from the
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM. to Iraq prohibited
the use of engines from certain surface-to-air missiles
for use in ballistic missiles.

During my recent meeting in Baghdad, we were
briefed on these two programmes. We were told that
the final range for both systems would be less than the
permitted maximum of 150 kilometres.

These missiles might very well represent prima
facie cases of proscribed systems. The test ranges in
excess of 150 kilometres are significant, but some
further technical considerations need to be made before
we reach a conclusion on this issue. In the meantime,
we have asked Iraq to cease flight tests of both
missiles.

In addition, Iraq has refurbished its missile
production infrastructure. In particular, Iraq
reconstituted a number of casting chambers, which had
previously been destroyed under UNSCOM
supervision. They had been used in the production of
solid-fuel missiles. Whatever missile system these
chambers are intended for, they could produce motors
for missiles capable of ranges significantly greater than
150 kilometres.

Also associated with these missiles and related
developments is the import, which has been taking
place during the last few years, of a number of items,
despite the sanctions, including as late as December
2002. Foremost among these is the import of 300
rocket engines that may be used for the Al Samoud 2.

Iraq has also declared the recent import of
chemicals used in propellants, test instrumentation and
guidance and control systems. These items may well be
for proscribed purposes; that is yet to be determined.
What is clear is that they were illegally brought into
Iraq; that is, Iraq or some company in Iraq
circumvented the restrictions imposed by various
resolutions.

I have touched upon some of the disarmament
issues that remain open and that need to be answered if
dossiers are to be closed and confidence is to arise.
Which are the means at the disposal of Iraq to answer
these questions? I have pointed to some during my
presentation of the issues. Let me be a little more
systematic. Our Iraqi counterparts are fond of saying
that there are no proscribed items, and if no evidence is
presented to the contrary, they should have the benefit
of the doubt, be presumed innocent. UNMOVIC, for its
part, is not presuming that there are proscribed items
and activities in Iraq, but nor does it or anyone else,
after the inspections between 1991 and 1998, presume
the opposite - that no such items and activities exist
in Iraq. Presumptions do not solve the problem.
Evidence and full transparency may help. Let me be
specific.

Information provided by Member States tells us
about the movement and concealment of missiles and
chemical weapons and mobile units for biological
weapons production. We shall certainly follow up any
credible leads given to us and report what we might
find, as well as any denial of access.

So far, we have reported on the recent find of a
small number of empty 122-millimetre warheads for
chemical weapons. Iraq declared that it appointed a
commission of inquiry to look for more. Fine. Why not
extend the search to other items, declare what may be
found and destroy it under our supervision?

When we have urged our Iraqi counterparts to
present more evidence, we have all too often met the
response that there are no more documents. All existing
relevant documents have been presented, we are told.
All documents relating to the biological weapons
programme were destroyed together with the weapons.

However, Iraq has all the archives of the
Government and its various departments, institutions
and mechanisms. It should have budgetary documents,
requests for funds and reports on how they have been
used. It should also have letters of credits, bills of
lading and reports on production and losses of material.

In response to a recent UNMOVIC request for a
number of specific documents, the only new documents
Iraq provided was a ledger of 193 pages, which Iraq
stated included all imports from 1983 to 1990 by the
Technical and Scientific Importation Division, the
importing authority for the biological weapons
programme. Potentially, it might help to clear some
open issues.

The recent inspection find in the private home of
a scientist of a box of some 3,000 pages of documents,
much of them relating to the laser enrichment of
uranium, supports a concern that has long existed that
documents might be distributed to the homes of private
individuals. This interpretation is refuted by the Iraqi
side, which claims that research staff sometimes may
bring home papers from their work places. On our side,
we cannot help but think that the case might not be
isolated and that such placements of documents is
deliberate to make discovery difficult and to seek to
shield documents by placing them in private homes.

Any further sign of the concealment of
documents would be serious. The Iraqi side committed
itself at our recent talks to encourage persons to accept
access also to private sites. There can be no sanctuaries
for proscribed items, activities or documents. A denial
of prompt access to any site would be a very serious
matter.

When Iraq claims that tangible evidence in the
form of documents is not available, it ought at least to
find individuals, engineers, scientists and managers to
testify about their experience. Large weapons
programmes are moved and managed by people.
Interviews with individuals who may have worked in
programmes in the past may fill blank spots in our
knowledge and understanding. It could also be useful
to learn that they are now employed in peaceful
sectors. These are the reasons why UNMOVIC asked
for a list of such persons, in accordance with resolution
1441 (2002).

Some 400 names for all biological and chemical
weapons programmes, as well as for their missile
programmes, were provided by the Iraqi side. This can
be compared to over 3,500 names of people associated
with those past weapons programmes that UNSCOM
either interviewed in the 1990s or knew from
documents and other sources. At my recent meeting in
Baghdad, the Iraqi side committed itself to
supplementing the list, and some 80 additional names
have been provided.

In the past, much valuable information came from
interviews. There were also cases in which the
interviewee was clearly intimidated by the presence of,
and interruption by, Iraqi officials. This was the
background of the provision of resolution 1441 (2002)
for a right for UNMOVIC and the IAEA to hold private
interviews "in the mode or location" of our choice, in
Baghdad or even abroad.

To date, we have asked 11 individuals for
interviews in Baghdad. The replies have invariably
been that the individual will speak only at Iraq's
monitoring directorate or, at any rate, in the presence
of an Iraqi official. This could be due to a wish on the
part of the invited to have evidence that they have not
said anything that the authorities did not wish them to
say. At our recent talks in Baghdad, the Iraqi side
committed itself to encouraging persons to accept
interviews "in private" - that is to say, alone with us.
Despite this, the pattern has not changed. However, we
hope that, with further encouragement from the
authorities, knowledgeable individuals will accept
private interviews, in Baghdad or abroad.

I must not conclude this update without some
notes on the growing capability of UNMOVIC.

In the past two months, UNMOVIC has built up
its capabilities in Iraq from nothing to 260 staff
members from 60 countries. This includes
approximately 100 new UNMOVIC inspectors, 60 air
operations staff, as well as security personnel,
communications, translation and interpretation staff,
medical support, and other services at our Baghdad
office and Mosul field office. All serve the United
Nations and report to no one else. Furthermore, our
roster of inspectors will continue to grow as our
training programme continues - even at this moment
we have a training course in session in Vienna. At the
end of that course, we shall have a roster of about 350
qualified experts from which to draw inspectors.

A team supplied by the Swiss Government is
refurbishing our office in Baghdad, which had been
empty for four years. The Government of New Zealand
has contributed both a medical team and a
communications team. The German Government will
contribute unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance
and a group of specialists to operate them for us within
Iraq. The Government of Cyprus has kindly allowed us
to set up a field office in Larnaka. All of these
contributions have been of assistance in quickly
starting up our inspections and enhancing our
capabilities. So has help from the United Nations in
New York and from sister organizations in Baghdad.

In the past two months, during which we have
built up our presence in Iraq, we have conducted about
300 inspections to more than 230 different sites. Of
these, more than 20 were sites that had not been
inspected before. By the end of December, UNMOVIC
began using helicopters both for the transport of
inspectors and for actual inspection work. We now
have eight helicopters. They have already proved
invaluable in helping to "freeze" large sites by
observing the movement of traffic in and around the
area.

The setting up of a field office in Mosul has
facilitated rapid inspections of sites in northern Iraq.
We plan to establish soon a second field office in the
Basra area, where we have already inspected a number
of sites.

We now have an inspection apparatus that permits
us to send multiple inspection teams every day all over
Iraq, by road or by air. Let me end by simply noting
that that capability, which has been built up in a short
time and which is now operating, is at the disposal of
the Security Council.

