Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan) (interpretation from Russian): Kazakhstan expresses its grave concern over the
escalation of hostilities in Afghanistan. The ongoing
armed conflict in that country poses a serious threat to
regional and international security, and is accompanied by
massive violations of human rights. One alarming
symptom of this is the evacuation from Afghanistan of
personnel of United Nations humanitarian agencies and
other international humanitarian organizations; this could
exacerbate the already drastic humanitarian situation in
that country.

Kazakhstan firmly condemns the recent killing of
two Afghan staff members of the World Food Programme
and of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Jalalabad, and of the
Military Adviser to the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan in Kabul.

We also share the serious concern of the Member
States of the United Nations regarding the fate of the
diplomats and staff members of the Consulate General of
Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and other Iranian citizens seized in
Afghanistan.

On 15 August, the President of the Republic of
Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbaev, made a special
statement in which he called on the Afghan parties to the
conflict to cease hostilities. The head of our Government
voiced the hope that the conflict would not extend beyond
the borders of Afghanistan. In case of the emergence of
a threat to the external borders of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) in that region, Kazakhstan -
together with the States parties to the Treaty on Collective
Security of the CIS - retains the right to undertake all
necessary measures to strengthen the security of the
external borders of the Commonwealth within the
framework of that Treaty.
In its practical actions regarding the situation in
Afghanistan, Kazakhstan bases itself on the need to agree
upon all actions with the States parties that attended the
meeting held in Almaty on 4 October 1996.

The current events in Afghanistan seriously threaten
to destabilize the situation in Central Asia. Therefore, on
the initiative of the President of Kazakhstan, on 22
August 1998 a meeting was held in Tashkent of the

 

Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, during which they
discussed issues linked to the exacerbation of the situation
in Afghanistan and its possible impact on the region of
Central Asia.

In supporting the efforts of the United Nations aimed
at the cessation of the conflict in Afghanistan and the
preservation of Afghanistan's territorial integrity,
Kazakhstan expresses its firm commitment to the decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly on
Afghanistan. Throughout the conflict in Afghanistan our
country has consistently favoured having the United Nations
play the central role in a settlement. This position of
Kazakhstan remains unchanged. Kazakhstan firmly
condemns any foreign interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and supports the appeal for an immediate
cessation of the delivery of military supplies from outside
and halting active military support to the factions in
Afghanistan.

Kazakhstan is in favour of a speedy, peaceful solution
to the conflict in Afghanistan. In our view, only by taking
into account and respecting the interests of the various
ethnic, religious and political groups in Afghanistan can we
ensure the stability of the political system, as is attested to
by the history of that country. Allow me once again to
express the hope that this discussion of the question of
Afghanistan in the Security Council will yield positive
results for the settlement of the conflict and will assist in
putting an end to a war that has gone on for many years.

