Mr. Salame: Allow me to congratulate the
Dominican Republic on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council.

The south of the country, which encompasses
almost 1 million square kilometers of land, remains
Libya's vulnerable heart. The source of much of the
nation's natural wealth, thanks to its water and oil, has
been woefully neglected. Despite years of promises to
address the situation there, conditions are deteriorating
at an alarming rate. I had an opportunity to visit the
region's capital, Sabha, just a few days ago, in what was
the first visit to the south by a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General since 2012. I heard at first hand
from citizens who spoke movingly about the terrible
hardships they endure, from the wanton brutality of
Da'esh to wading through lakes of sewage that were
created due to the lack of investment in basic public
infrastructure. Added to that is the insecurity posed
by completely porous borders and the presence of
foreign mercenaries and common criminals who prey
upon citizens and migrants alike. Many told me that
they were fearful to see their families step outside
their homes after sunset. I urge the Government and
the international community to move swiftly and
decisively in support of the south. The United Nations
Support Mission in Libya has set up a specific task
force to tackle the situation there. Agencies are going
to do their duty and help, but it is the Libyan authorities
who must shoulder the burden.

There is a cost to that inaction. The anger of the
southerners, unfortunately, has translated into attacks
against water pipelines and oil facilities, which hurt
Libya's slowly recovering economy.

While the south is an acute case, similar woes, and
a failure to alleviate them despite repeated pledges,
plague the entirety of Libya. All Libyans struggle
with deteriorating public services. Prison detainees,
migrants, journalists and members of the judiciary, to
name just some of those affected, are subject to abuse
and violence at the hands of armed groups. Many
thousands live with humanitarian concerns. Civilians
continue to live in fear of becoming casualties of
violent conflict.

After months of calm resulting from the September
ceasefire agreement, Tripoli was again rocked by
renewed clashes two days ago. We have worked closely
with all parties to stop breaches of the ceasefire from
going any further. For now, the violations have been
contained. Fighting in Derna is not over. Civilians
have been killed in the conflict, families displaced and
homes looted. Unconditional, unimpeded and sustained
humanitarian access to the affected civilians in the
old city is essential but denied. Civilians, including
women and children, have been arrested and held in
detention facilities without charge. Meanwhile, the
Libyan National Army started to move into the south,
beyond the positions that it held before. Wherever
there is fighting, parties must take all measures to
protect civilians and civilian facilities and adhere to
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Where they do not, we will in time ensure that they face
the consequences.
There are signs of hope. Over the past months,
we have seen some progress in efforts to stabilize the
country and to improve the lives of the Libyan people.
The Government of National Accord has continued
to appoint new ministers, most recently to the vital
portfolios of health and local governance. The reshaped
Cabinet has improved our scope to support service
delivery and reform. We are looking at the various
ministries and deciding how, with Member States, we
can further assist them in their efforts to reform and
to deliver.

The ceasefire negotiated between the major armed
actors in September remains in place, although it must
be constantly watched. The Minister of the Interior has
been working hard to advance the security arrangements
for Tripoli, which underpin the fragile ceasefire. The
Mission has been providing technical assistance to the
newly established security arrangements committee
and to the development of a joint operations centre
charged with coordinating the implementation of the
security plan for greater Tripoli. While much remains
to be done, those initiatives have helped to bring calm
to the city.

More broadly, there is a need to improve security
across the country. Terrorists strike in various towns
and cities, most recently in the attack by Da'esh on the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tripoli on 25 December.
There are still sporadic clashes across the country, since
law enforcement remains to a great extent in the hands
of armed groups, not professional security officials.

There is also hope in that regard. Last month, I
attended the opening of the refurbished Libyan Police
Academy, and this week I was at the ground-breaking
ceremony for a model police station that will build
on community-oriented and citizen-focused policing.
Efforts are under way to train hundreds of police and
judicial police.

We are working closely with the Libyan authorities
to transfer the control of prisons from armed groups to
trained professionals under the control of the Ministry
of Justice. We are also pressing the Government to
address the travesty of civilians being held in prison
without charge or due process. We have been told that
hundreds have been released and that the cases of many
others are under consideration.

The economy has continued to stabilize. The black-
market price of the Libyan dinar against the United
States dollar has collapsed as a result of the economic
measures announced last September. The difference
between the official and the black-market exchange
rates has narrowed significantly, while the parallel rate,
which was 10 dinars to the dollar a year ago, today stands
at 4.3 dinar to the dollar and is expected to fall further.
That has had a tangible economic impact on the lives
of many people in the country. Inflation has stabilized
and commodity prices have dropped substantially in a
country that imports a huge part of its needs in hard
currency. Prices have dropped, some by 40 per cent.

The liquidity crisis has finally been overcome. In
most, if not all, cities and villages, the long queues
of people standing for days outside automatic teller
machines to obtain a small fraction of their assets are
now over. Ministers are looking at ways to further that
trend. The Ministries of Finance and Economy are both
restructuring and reviewing their personnel to enable
them to better deliver on their agendas. Financial crime
advisers are being deployed by our partners in the
European Union. Thanks to the German Government,
staff of the Central Bank of Libya are receiving
technical training from Bundesbank officials.

Efforts to conduct an audit of the Central Bank
are making good progress. We have facilitated an
agreement between the Central Bank in Tripoli and the
Al Bayda branch on the terms for the audit, which we
are overseeing. The financial audit will entail a broad
review of the balance sheet and financial transactions
since the institutional split in 2014 and the formulation
of recommendations for follow up. That is an important
step towards the unification of the institution.

Oil production had been at more than 1 million
barrels per day, bringing much needed revenue into the
treasury. Unfortunately, disturbances at the oil fields
in the south over the lack of services to the region have
led to a recent reduction in production. It is essential
that such grievances be addressed without resorting to
harming the national economy. Much more time and
work are needed to create the prosperous, resilient and
transparent economy that Libya needs.

The Mission has reconfigured itself in order to
better support that transformation. There is now a unit
in the Office of my Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs dedicated to advancing that agenda.
It works closely with the international financial
institutions concerned.

Furthermore, in order to strengthen all fronts of the
United Nations support efforts, we have redeployed the
Mission in full force to Libya. I expect to finally reopen
our office in Benghazi at the end of this month. We
have relocated most of our staff back to the country. If
security permits, I aim to reopen our office in the south
this year.

It is vital that we are in Libya. Apart from all the
points that I mentioned above, we dedicate tremendous
efforts to preventing conflict. In a country so finely
splintered, every day brings with it new divisions that
must be closed and fresh potential violence that must
be stopped. The work ofa Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is also that of a firefighter, and the
fires that need to be extinguished are many. Clearly,
that cannot be done from abroad. We must be present.

We must also be realistic. Without united and
concerted national leadership, even the best of efforts
will go only so far. The various gains that I have
described are fragile and reversible. In that political
environment, they will eventually collapse. Predators
will find ways to circumvent the economic reforms.
Actors will choose violence over politics. The recent
events in Tripoli are a good example of that. We can
fight fires but, eventually, there will be an inferno that
cannot be extinguished. We must therefore do more
and tackle the underlying dysfunctionalities of the
Libyan State.

The political deadlock in Libya has been
underpinned by a complex web of narrow interests, a
broken legal framework and the pillaging of Libya's
great wealth. Only Libyans themselves can plot a path
out of that malaise towards stability and prosperity.
Over the past year, we have received growing demands
that we facilitate a national conference to allow them
to do exactly that. In the coming weeks, we will seek
to do so. Libyans, women and men, from across the
country will gather in one place and decide how the
nation should proceed to the end of the transition.

Given the criticality of the event, it is vital that the
national conference be held under the right conditions
and with the right people and that it be capable of
concluding with an outcome that is acceptable to the
broad majority. We are working night and day to pull
together those various elements in order to ensure the
most productive event. Once the essential ingredients
for a new consensus on a national agenda to rebuild a
capable and united Libyan civil State have been agreed
upon by the major players, we will be ready to announce
the exact date and venue.

I am encouraged by the commitment that the
Libyans have expressed towards a new national agenda
and by their forward-looking approach. It is high time
that the political class respond to the daily calls for it
to overcome its fractious, narrow and self-interested
definition of governance.
It is indisputable that the citizens of Libya wish
to have elections at the earliest opportunity. One key
outcome of the national conference must be to spell out
the electoral path ahead. The High National Election
Commission is working to ensure that technical
aspects are in place for any electoral event, including a
referendum on the constitutional proposal. We take note
of the discussions between the Commission and House
of Representatives with regard to referendum legislation
and, as always, encourage constructive engagement.

Prior to any election, key concerns must be
addressed. Fundamentally, there must be genuine
political support for whatever election is held and
guarantees that the results will be accepted and respected
by all. Funding is required. Security arrangements for
electoral events must be determined. Public services
must be working. If the status quo actors truly engage
on the national conference, I believe that much of that
can be more smoothly addressed. Municipal elections
are an important element of grass-roots democracy and
have provided an encouraging test for national elections.
After the successful holding of elections in Zawiya,
Derj and Bani Walid, I welcomed the start of the voter
registration on 12 December for approximately 60 more
municipal council elections, with polling planned to
start in March.

The past months and years have been defined by
a struggle between entities and individuals, fuelled
by personal ambitions, underpinned by institutional
dysfunctionalities and leading only to a deteriorating
status quo. However, what is past can be a prelude.
Now is the time for Libya to come together in the
spirit of compromise and overcome past difficulties. I
beseech the members of the various Libyan institutions
to see the national conference as a patriotic concern
that transcends partisan and personal interests and
to embrace it as a means to be the leaders this great
country needs.

Of course, there will be those who seek to
undermine the national conference and its outcomes,
in particular individuals hoping to delay elections so
they may remain in their seats. Competing interests
are natural. However, they should not undermine
State-rebuilding and institutional reunification.
Without the concerted support of the international
community, spoilers will sabotage the political process
and undo any progress made. If that were to be allowed,
Libya's progress would be set back years and would
almost certainly open the door to those who believe
that there is only a martial solution to Libya's woes.
Vital counter-terrorism activities will continue to be
hamstrung without the accompanying State-building
that they need to be truly effective. The Council's
support for our efforts and clear signals of resolve to
the many potential spoilers are vital. As it is within
the grasp of Council members, they the can provide
the opportunity to ensure the success of the national
conference and to make municipal, parliamentary and
presidential elections a reality in order to foster Libya's
transformation into a stable and secure State, based on
unified bodies and democratically elected institutions. I
can only encourage everyone to seize this opportunity.

