Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): First of all, I wish to associate
myself fully with the statement that Ireland is going to
deliver in its capacity as Presidency of the European
Union.

The international community is deeply troubled and
shocked by the tragic conflict that is tearing asunder
Afghanistan, a country rich in history, culture and
tradition, a country that for centuries was the crossroads
of different civilizations and that for far too many years
has been the theatre for a seemingly endless conflict that
has sown devastation and taken countless victims.

The taking of Kabul by the Taliban is the latest step
in an escalating conflict that the United Nations has been
following with concern for months, for two basic reasons:
the humanitarian situation of the Afghan people and the
risk that the spread of war - for we are talking here
about a civil war that has split the country into opposing
camps - will cause a chain reaction and jeopardize peace
and stability in Central Asia.

 

It was not hard to foresee that the developments of
late September in Kabul would have major repercussions on
the civilian population of the capital and other cities. The
Security Council expressed itself clearly on these events,
reaffirming the principles of the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. The
deep-rooted nature of the conflict, the increasing bitterness
of the clashes, and the widening of the battlefield with the
entrance into the conflict of the heads of all the different
factions make such predictions more realistic and
worrisome.

The hostilities must cease immediately and the
political negotiations must be relaunched quickly. For this
we trust in the work of the Head of the United Nations
Special Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Holl. However, direct
responsibility for a constructive resumption of the
negotiations lies with the parties themselves. Given the
conditions that beset the country, there is no room for
uncompromising behaviour in the negotiations. A
constructive dialogue must include all the parties on the
basis of respect for an effective truce and renunciation of
the use of force. Nor is there room for extremist views with
regard to human rights, the treatment of the population and,
particularly, the condition of women.

My delegation wishes firmly to reiterate that
Afghanistan, whatever party may be in power, is required
scrupulously to respect the principles established by the
United Nations Charter and the guarantees provided in the
field of human rights by several international treaties.

I wish to recall that Afghanistan, as one of the first
countries to sign those treaties, is also bound by the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. We are outraged by the
treatment of women and girls in Afghanistan, which is
contrary not only to basic human rights but also to the very
interests of Afghanistan itself. In fact, the participation of
women in the economic life of the country, the schooling
of girls and respect for the individual are prerequisites for
economic development, as is the establishment of
democratic institutions. It is essential for the future of the
country that this situation be corrected immediately.

What has happened in recent weeks in Kabul and in
other Afghan cities seriously undermines the social fabric
of the country and the future prospects of its economic
development. Hence, it also compromises the international
community's ability to assure sorely needed financial
support and resources.

 

My delegation fully shares the positions expressed
over the past few days by very prominent figures who
have voiced the deep concern of the international
community. I would like to recall the statements by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Ayala Lasso, and
the Commissioner of the European Community
Humanitarian Office, Ms. Emma Bonino. We join their
appeals for tolerance and responsibility, and we note their
emphasis on the need to restore the foundations for
peaceful coexistence and to settle differences through
peaceful means.

We strongly hope that today's meeting of the
Security Council will send a clear signal that the use of
force is unacceptable to settle disputes between or within
States and that violence against the people and violations
of human rights are intolerable in the international
community as it approaches the threshold of the year
2000.

