Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and your team on your able
guidance of the work of the Security Council for the
month of September and for convening today's debate.

I would also like to pay my respects to and
welcome to the Security Council His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, who joins us here today. And I offer my
appreciation of the briefing by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and the important work done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) under his able leadership.

However, before I proceed any further, I would
like to speak about and offer a eulogy for that great
personage Ustad Burhanuddin Rabbani, who was
unfortunately martyred at a time when the world
needed him most. For those of us here who were not
aware of his contributions, his genius, his capabilities
and his immense efforts, he was a person who brought
together not only Afghans, but also the people and
Government of Pakistan with the people and
Government of Afghanistan. I am not terribly sure if
there is anyone who can step into his shoes, and I
would like to state that we stand by the people of
Afghanistan not only in this hour of grief but at this
tremendous moment of trial. He was martyred by the
enemies of peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

Those forces can be defeated only by an even
greater resolve for reconciliation and reintegration. A
reconciled Afghanistan was his dream until the very
last moment of his illustrious life. In fact, he ran back
post-haste from Tehran to Afghanistan to meet this
awkward end. He was a person who had a dream and
who knew that the long-term solution to security
challenges was rooted in effective reconciliation and
reintegration. I feel that it is important to bring certain
aspects of this to the attention of this assembly of
personages in the Security Council.

I will now read from portions of an article by
Bashir Ahmad Gwakh of the Asia Times, contributed to
by Frud Bezhan of Radio Free Afghanistan and its
correspondent Zarghona Mangal. Mr. Rabbani was
summoned to his home to receive a man bearing a
"special message" from Afghan Taliban leader Mullah
Omar. Let there be no doubt about that fact. An
eyewitness from the National Directorate of Security
(NDS) of Afghanistan who was witness to this
gruesome act said that Rahmatullah Wahidyar, a
member of the High Peace Council and Deputy
Minister in the former Taliban regime, was the one
who brought the bomber to meet with Rabbani and
with top presidential adviser Mohammad Masoom
Stanekzai, who was also seriously injured in that day's
attack.

Who is Rahmatullah Wahidyar? A document
issued by the Security Council itself de-listed him, at a
time when I sat here and said before the Council and
Mr. De Mistura, "We are de-listing a lot of people. I
hope we know what we are doing". Unfortunately, it
seems that was not necessarily so. He was de-listed -
vide a letter dated 18 July 2011 from the Chairman of
the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1988 (2011).

The other important aspect of this was that after
this gruesome incident - and the revered President
Karzai himself has said that it was Mr. Stanekzai who
first alerted him that a messenger had arrived in Kabul,
bearing an important message from the Taliban -
initially, and very interestingly, the Taliban spokesman
Mr. Zabihullah Mujahid claimed responsibility for the
attack in an interview with Reuters. But as world
indignation built up, the same spokesman later wrote in
a statement to Radio Free Afghanistan that the group
did not know about the incident, which was very pat.

I will then go a step further. This is very
interesting; it reminds me of the last part of the film
Casablanca. Major Strasser has been shot dead:
"Round up the usual suspects". Now, the next day, the
Balkh provincial Governor, Mr. Atta Mohammad Noor,

tells Radio Free Afghanistan, that it was Pakistan's
Inter-Services Intelligence that was supporting them. I
wonder where he got that from in Balkh. Anyway, this
was considered very credible by some people, I am
sorry to say. But then the NDS intelligence spokesman,
Shafiqullah Taheri, said that it was possible that the
Quetta Shura was involved. This was a new
interdiction. The Quetta Shura is the leadership council
of the Afghan Taliban that is believed to based in
Pakistan, which I find very intriguing; how this all
shifts into a mould with great ease.

Now it changes again. The same person says our
investigations are continuing, despite such major
accusations being made. As far as we know, it was a
person named Hamidullah Akhund who came to talk to
the Peace Council, claiming, and I stress this, to
represent the Quetta Shura. That means -
conclusion- that the Quetta Shura was involved in
the attack.

I have no time for the Quetta Shura or anyone
else who propagates violence. But I do wonder why it
is in a way moved towards Pakistan in matters that
normally become inamicable to my country. I now
quote what I have said to the Council itself many
times: "the opposition grouping headed by opposition
leader Abdullah Abdullah has strongly opposed the
idea of negotiating with the Taliban and has
characterized the group as unworthy of participating in
the Government".

Those are all matters raised by Radio Free Kabul
and Mr. Gwakh in the Asia Times. I thought it pertinent
to read them out before the Council.

Mr. Rabbani's untimely demise must not leave a
void. We hope that the Security Council will respect
his legacy. We respect the determination of the Afghan
Government and its people for a viable and results-
oriented reconciliation process. Only an Afghanistan at
peace with itself can ensure the security of its own
people, assets and visitors. Only when the Afghans are
settled will my country, Pakistan, be settled and face
less of a security threat than it does today.

The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration (S/2011/590) has rightly underlined the
need for constructive dialogue and reconciliation while
avoiding the politics of mistrust, intimidation, fear or
revenge. We agree with that observation.
Reconciliation under the threat of coercion or
retribution is inferior at best.

Pakistan is working for Afghanistan's security
and stability on three distinct layers. First, we have
maintained a robust presence of our forces along the
international border. We would hope that this is being
done on the other side as well. The total number of our
troops in paramilitary deployment in the border regions
far exceeds the number of international troops in all of
Afghanistan.

Secondly, we provide and seek cross-border
security and intelligence cooperation in concrete terms.
That is done under the auspices of the Tripartite
Commission, which also includes the United States and
the International Security Assistance Force. Since its
inception in 2003 in Islamabad, the Tripartite
Commission has met 35 times and remains a potent
platform for seeking operational clarity and
coordination on the ground.

Thirdly, in terms of multilateral cooperation, we
are engaged in a number of important regional
initiatives in Afghanistan, with other friendly countries
like Iran, Tajikistan, Turkey, the Russian Federation,
China, the United States and even Kyrgyzstan. Besides
regional connectivity for economic cooperation,
security is a common theme of these initiatives.
Undertaken at the highest political level, the exchange
is credible and meaningful.

In deference to such concrete and comprehensive
interactions, we tend to avoid a blame game, even
when militants cross over from the other side and
attack our troops and innocent civilians. As stated by
our Foreign Minister in the general debate at the
General Assembly on Tuesday, we must work closely
together and as responsible partners in a cooperative
manner, and not rush to judgments or question each
others' intentions (see A/66/PV.29).

The report of the Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out that development, governance and the rule
of law are crucial for irreversible transition processes,
as envisaged in the Kabul Conference. The Secretary-
General has stressed the need for capturing the current
political and financial interest in transition to set the
country on a sustainable course. He has also underlined
the value of long-term international support and private
sector investment in facilitating the transition. That has
not, despite many words here, quite materialized, and
has been the bane of the problem in Afghanistan. These
are valid observations that merit serious attention from
Afghanistan's international partners.

Pakistan is not oblivious to Afghanistan's
developmental needs or the imperatives of a successful
implementation of the Kabul process. We will continue
our assistance programmes in Afghanistan, the largest
that we have with any country at the moment, being the
State that we are, despite our serious resource
constraints. We have also offered assistance in
capacity-building for Afghan security forces.

We are still hosts to millions of Afghan refugees,
at very considerable cost to us. The present report on
the situation in Afghanistan does not update us on the
refugee situation. We hope it will do so in the next
report. We hope that the international community will
remain cognizant of Pakistan's problems.

