Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-
General Ursula Mueller for their briefings. We are also
pleased to have President Festus Mogae and, as always,
we appreciate his briefing on the recent developments
in South Sudan, particularly those relating to the high-
level revitalization forum.

The security situation in South Sudan still remains
fragile and the dire humanitarian situation continues to
be ofserious concern. That is why reaching an agreement
on the cessation of hostilities was accorded the
utmost priority at the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) High-level Revitalization Forum.
In fact, the parties were able to sign on 21 December
2017 the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access. This
is a major achievement that should be welcomed, and
we commend all the relevant stakeholders who worked
tirelessly for it to come to fruition. The agreement is
hoped to bring an end to the senseless violence in the
country so that conducive conditions would be created
for a more substantive political discussion among the
parties to address the complex challenges the country
is facing, as well as to ensure a safe environment for
delivering the acutely needed humanitarian assistance.

However, the reported violation of the cessation
of hostilities agreement - here both sides are
implicated - is dimming the prospect for progress in
ending the conflict. This is very unfortunate and deeply
regrettable. It will undermine the genuine efforts being
exerted to help South Sudanese parties to address the
root causes of the conflict in South Sudan through
an all-inclusive dialogue that would pave the way for
national reconciliation and the building of effective
State institutions through a democratic process.

All the parties must live up to the letter and spirit
of the agreement that they themselves have agreed
to uphold if there is going to be any hope of turning
the tide in South Sudan. As we have been saying all
along, the success of the revitalization process and in
addressing the enormous challenges that South Sudan
faces will really depend on the willingness of all the
parties. All violations of the cessation of hostilities
agreement must be investigated, and we appreciate what
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism has been able to accomplish so
far in collaboration with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan - reporting and verifying violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement under very
difficult and challenging circumstances.

We would like to stress that all signatories to the
cessation of hostilities agreement are obligated to
ensure unrestricted access to the Mechanism's ceasefire
monitors so that they can accurately and speedily
report on the situation around the country. We must
also stress that those reported violations should not be
used as an excuse to undermine the second phase of the
High-level Revitalization Forum, which is scheduled to
be held during the first week of February. In fact, we
should build on the positive momentum generated so
far. The upcoming IGAD meeting is expected to lay the
groundwork for the resumption of the second phase of
the Forum.

In all of that, the support of the international
community, in particular that of the Security Council,
remains absolutely critical. The Council should
maintain its unity and continue speaking with one
voice, as expressed in its latest presidential statement
(S/PRST/2017/25), in urging the parties to participate in
the Forum and live up to the commitments they made.

We are extremely grateful for the support provided
to the revitalization process so far by the African
Union, the United Nations, as well as other regional
and international stakeholders. That support needs to
be further strengthened and continue on a regular basis.

We are pleased to note, as President Mogae
indicated earlier, that the leaders of the United Nations,
the African Union and IGAD will meet on 27 January
on the sidelines of the African Union Summit, as part
of maintaining the unity of purpose among the three
organizations in the search of lasting peace, security
and stability in South Sudan. We hope that will provide
impetus for the second phase of the Forum.

