Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): Like previous
speakers, I wish to welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you
preside over today's meetings of the Security Council.
We are also pleased to see here the Chief Minister of
the Second Transitional Government of East Timor,
Mr. Alkatiri, and are grateful for his important
statement. Let me thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for
his usual comprehensive briefing.

We believe that the report of the Secretary-
General and his video address today to the Security
Council complement one another, providing a deep
analysis of the long-term tasks that lie ahead of the East
Timorese and the United Nations on the way towards
independence for East Timor. In View of the long list of
speakers we have today, I shall confine myself to a few
remarks, in particular in respect of the concept of a
further international presence in East Timor.

We cannot but mention that significant progress
has been in the implementation of key elements of the
mandate of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), including the
transition to independence, the establishment of a
public administration and the creation of a stable
security environment. We are encouraged that much
progress has been achieved in the field of economic
and social development, in the health and education
sector in East Timor and in the building of the East
Timorese ciVil service. In this regard, I would like to
pay tribute to the UNTAET staff for their efforts, and
personally to the Special Representative, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for his able and effective leadership of
the mission.

At the same time, there should be no doubt that
once independent, East Timor will still require further
substantial international support in many areas in order
to ensure security in the country and the viability and
stability of its government structures. We believe that
such support could be provided through an integrated
successor mission mandated by the Security Council.
We need a comprehensive, realistic and lasting concept
of this mission, based on the recent conditions and the
future needs and aspirations of the East Timorese -
first of all, in those areas requiring ongoing support. In
this context, we endorse the valuable recommendations
contained in the recent report of the Secretary-General.

We are of the opinion that the Security Council's
strategies in East Timor will require the inclusion in
the successor mission of military, civilian police and
civilian components. Security requires, in effect, a
police and military presence. We feel it is essential that
such a presence be proportionate to the security risks
and threats that might exist on the ground. We
therefore support the need for a continuing force, the
size of which has to be determined, to maintain a
secure environment. The peacekeeping force should be
highly mobile, with the ability to counter an external
threat and provide security support to attend to trouble
spots inside the country. We believe that a
peacekeeping force will continue to operate in close
coordination with the East Timor Defence Force to
maintain a secure environment, with a particular
emphasis on a robust presence in the border areas.

It is important to enable the East Timorese to play
an increasingly greater role in enforcing public safety
and in defence of East Timor's borders. We are of the
View that the United Nations has to stage its drawdown
in step with the gradual establishment of the East
Timor Defence Force and the East Timorese police.
The raising of the Timorese infantry battalion and the
opening of the training facility are significant
achievements. The establishment of an effective East
Timorese police force is a crucial element that needs to be
developed. To my mind, the role of the civilian police
component is greatly increasing, and the main objective
of the civilian police component will be to promote the
capacity of the East Timor police force and to endorse
institutional structures in the field. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the substantial strength of the
United Nations civilian police should be maintained
until East Timor police are fully trained and deployed.

Although great strides have been made towards
the Timorization of UNTAET, for certain critical areas
of government, local expertise does not exist, and the
civilian professional staff need to remain within a
successor mission to provide key assistance to the new
Government. It is our View that the strengthening of
national justice, human rights structures and capacities
can be an important element in ensuring the stability of
the achievements of the peacekeeping operations in
East Timor after its withdrawal. These areas will need
the particular attention of a successor mission. It is
right and important that adequate and timely funding
be available for both military and civilian components.

We are convinced that a substantial international
presence will include a wider range of United Nations
agencies and programmes engaged in East Timor, as
well as other international financial institutions and
donors. This morning we listened carefully to the
important statements by the representatives of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme outlining the involvement of their
institutions in East Timor. We consider their
participation very useful in the Security Council
discussions on future strategies for peace-building.
I would like to end by looking ahead. We must
carefully consider the timing and consequences of a
reduction of the international presence in East Timor.
Our exit strategy should be greatly dependent on
progress in capacity-building, especially in the areas of
the police, the justice system, institutional capacity and
long-term security in East Timor.

