Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, I am very pleased to see you
presiding over today's meeting, and I wish to
congratulate Greece on the outstanding job it has done
since assuming the presidency of the Security Council.

The United Nations is the core of the
international collective security mechanism, and the
Security Council shoulders the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security. At a
time when the security interests of countries are
increasingly inter-connected in the face of growing
global security threats, China supports enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional,
subregional and other intergovernmental organizations
with a View to safeguarding international peace and
security.

Secretary-General Kofi Annan recently submitted
his report on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. China in principle endorses
the analyses and recommendations presented in the
report, and supports the development of an effective
global partnership. In that regard, I wish to make three
points.

First, it is important for all bodies involved to
complement each other's efforts and enhance
coordination among them. China welcomes the
contribution of regional and subregional organizations
to the maintenance of peace and security in their
respective regions as well as their contribution to world
peace and security, drawing fully on their experiences

and advantages in addressing issues in their respective
regions under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter.

We support the establishment of the basic
principles underlying this partnership, which should
ensure that the United Nations plays a leading role. In
their cooperation efforts, the actors involved should
bring into full play their comparative strengths,
complement each other's efforts rather than duplicate
them, and reinforce rather than compete with each
other.

Regional organizations should, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter, submit timely and
comprehensive reports to the Security Council on
relevant activities they have undertaken.

Secondly, it is important to promote a results-
oriented cooperation. The United Nations should
cooperate with regional organizations based on their
comparative strengths and unique characteristics in
such areas as confidence-building, conflict prevention,
crisis management and peacekeeping. Such cooperation
should be flexible and varied and should not be
confined to a particular modality or mechanism. The
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission marks
a new phase in the work of the United Nations in this
area. We support the active participation of relevant
regional organizations in that Commission.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen capacity-
building. Enhancing crisis-response capacity at the
regional level is the best way to end or prevent
conflicts. In that respect, regional organizations of
developing countries are playing an increasingly
important role. The United Nations should place
greater emphasis on its cooperation with such
organizations and provide them with assistance and
policy incentives in terms of institution-building,
information exchange and funding. China calls on the
United Nations, as well as on countries and regional
organizations that are in a position to do so, to provide
greater assistance to the African Union in the area of
capacity-building, so that the African Union can play a
greater role in maintaining peace and stability in
Africa.

