Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank our United Nations colleagues for their briefings
and once again to ask them to pass on our gratitude to
their teams on the ground, who are working tirelessly to
try and help the people of Yemen.

I wanted to start, ifI may, by once again expressing
our full support for Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
to welcome his recent meeting with President Hadi
Mansour and to reiterate that Mr. Griffiths has the
Council's backing as he tries to advance the broader
Yemen political process. I am sure that all the other
members of the Council will wish to express their
support as well.

Something that Mr. Griffiths but also that
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock said put together,
juxtaposed, very aptly illustrates the dilemma of
Yemen. Martin Griffiths that the war can end this year
and Mark Lowcock said that there were 30 different
front lines. So, having something that is potentially
within reach, yet is so difficult to achieve on the ground,
I think that in its private session the Council should try
and think of ways that we can turn what is needed into
concrete actions. I must say that I do not think that the
answer lies solely with the Council. I believe that all
those Member States in the wider United Nations with
influence, particularly on the Houthis, need to bring
that influence to bear. It is so extremely frustrating
to hear the accounts from the World Food Programme
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs of what could be achieved but is held up. So I
hope that we can spend some time in private session
looking at action.

I think the first thing that we need is for the
parties, following the meeting of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, to engage constructively with
General Lollesgaard and the Special Envoy in order to
finally get the outstanding negotiations completed so
that we can implement the first and second phases of the
Hudaydah Agreement. For the United Kingdom's part,
we are happy to play whatever role we can in bringing
that about. There are five main issues that I want to
raise today. I think that we risk a perfect storm on the
ground of various of these strands not coming together.

The first thing I would like to say relates to the
military dimension. I want to condemn the persistent
attacks by the Houthis on airports and infrastructure in
Saudi Arabia. It is vital that all parties avoid provocative
actions that could lead to escalation. Such actions
obviously undermine trust, and they risk threatening
undermining the political process. I also wanted to note
the reports of the Emirati starting their withdrawal
from Al-Hudaydah and say how welcome it is to see
efforts to de-escalate the conflict in Yemen.

I wanted to turn to the humanitarian access and the
situation relating to the WFP. I was going to be quite
critical, but I think that Mr. Beasley's point about the
agreement having been reached on Sana'a - even if
it has not been signed - is obviously very welcome.
We do not want to do anything that might impede the
signature of that agreement, and I wish him good luck
on that over the coming days.

I remain concerned, however, that the underlying
fundamentals are not changing. As Mr. Lowcock said,
there is a risk of the situation escalating and that we are
taking three steps back for every two steps forward. I
do not think that we can take our eye off any of those
aspects because, as I said, they risk creating the perfect
storm, if we cannot start making more and faster
progress. The risk of cholera returning is horrific, and
we need to do everything that we can to stop that from
happening. Obviously, we want all the parties to comply
with resolution 2451 (2018) and facilitate unhindered
humanitarian access.

My third point involves funding disbursements - a
situation that I think is really shocking for what is the
worst humanitarian crisis that the United Nations has
dealt with in recent years. Funding of 43 per cent or
60 per cent is simply not enough. I would therefore like
to urge other donors to rapidly disburse their funds to
the United Nations-led appeal.

If I may, I would also like to talk about the
economy. We heard a little bit about that, and what the
representative of the WFP said about the link between
food supplies and the stabilization of the currency is
obviously important, but I think that we want both
parties to be able to build on the revenue-sharing and
the salary-payment talks that have been started in
Amman. Neither side can be allowed to undermine the
economic elements of the Al-Hudaydah agreement. It
is key that this topic is not an add-on. From what we
heard today, it is obvious that it is a fundamental part of
being able to stabilize the situation. We therefore look
to progress to be made on those issues.

Finally, with regard to human rights, to echo what
Mr. Griffiths said about the reports - some of which
have come from Amnesty International - that the
Houthi Specialized Criminal Court has handed down
30 death sentences for political prisoners. We belong
to those States that condemn the death penalty in all
circumstances, but, in this particular case, given what
that might risk doing on the ground, I want to take
this opportunity to condemn Houthis - who are not
a legitimate Government - and urge them to revoke
those sentences immediately.

There are a number of actions that remain to be
taken - on the implementation the political process,
on unhindered food and humanitarian access, and
on tanker access, as mentioned by Mr. Lowcock. All
States Members of the United Nations with influence
need to use it, whether they are on or outside the
Council. We need an end to attacks on Saudi Arabia
and its neighbours. We need funding disbursements to
be done in full, as pledged. We need human rights to
be respected. I hope we can follow up on these areas in
private consultations.

