Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend my congratulations to
12-27935

Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, for his competent and skilful
management of the deliberations of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Ambassador of Togo, who steered the Council's
proceedings last month with great skill and efficiency.

The Security Council has just adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/20l2/8, on the situation
in my country. In that regard, I should like to make the
following comments.

My Government expresses its gratitude to the
countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council and, in
particular, to King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud of
fraternal Saudi Arabia, Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, as well as to the member States of the
Security Council, especially the permanent members,
and the donor community, for their efforts in helping us
overcome the hardships we are currently experiencing.
We would also like to express our gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his earnest
endeavours and good offices, as well as to his Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar and his team, in following up
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
implementation mechanism.

Since the signing of that initiative, my country
has experienced a number of positive developments,
including the establishment of a Government of
national reconciliation and a military and security
committee. Most important were the presidential
elections held on 21 February, which enjoyed a high
level of participation by the people of Yemen and
brought to office His Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour as President of the Republic of
Yemen.

The Government of national reconciliation
continues to face serious challenges that hinder the
implementation of its development and economic
programmes, including the suffocating economic crisis
stemming from our limited resources and the
stagnation in economic activity since 2011. The people
of Yemen still continue to suffer as a result of ongoing
shortages of electricity and water. In that regard, we
count on the international community - especially our
brothers from the countries of the Gulf Cooperation
Council - and look forward to the outcome of the
ministerial meeting of the Group of Friends of Yemen
that will be held in Riyadh on 23 May.
3
Over the past year, the unstable political situation
in Yemen and the terrorist attacks that we have
experienced have had a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation. According to United Nations
statistics, the lives of 8 million Yemeni people are in
jeopardy and they are in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. The number of refugees and internally
displaced persons - including from the governorates
of Abyan, Sadah, Lahij, Hajjah, Adan, Amran and
Taizz - has risen to 500,000. Those people, who are
experiencing a humanitarian crisis, are being hosted in
11 of our 22 governorates. In spite the efforts of the
Government to shelter and provide them with the
necessary services, our limited resources prevent us
from alleviating their suffering. In spite of the
hardships we face in our country, Yemen hosts almost
lmillion refugees from Somalia and the Horn of
Africa, who, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, continue to
flow into Yemen.

Yemen is a partner of the international
community in combating terrorism. We are also a
country that has been affected by that scourge. My
Government is committed to fighting terrorism as
much as we can. At the same time, however, we count
on the support of the international community to
confront that challenge.

