Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. At the outset,
I would like to express the Movement's appreciation to
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, for his
briefing to the Council.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firm in its
conviction of the urgent need for the international
community to act resolutely and collectively to fulfil
its longstanding commitment to, and responsibility
for, the realization of a two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a just solution to the
question of Palestine in all its aspects, on the basis
of international law and the terms of reference of the
peace process, including the resolutions of the Council.
The independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is long overdue. Its continued
postponement will only put that goal further out of
reach.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its view
that serious international action in a timely manner is
required. The window of opportunity for implementing
the two-State solution, based on the 4 June 1967
borders, is rapidly closing. The Movement recalls, in
that regard, that the application submitted by Palestine,
on 23 September 2011, for membership in the United
Nations is consistent with the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and independence. The
Movement looks forward to the Security Council's
assumption of its responsibility to take action in a
manner that recognizes the legitimate and historic
rights of the Palestinian people and contributes to the
peace efforts.

The Movement regrets that all efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including by
the Quartet, have been unable to achieve any progress
owing to the deliberate obstruction by Israel, the
occupying Power, its refusal to respect the parameters
of the peace process and its insistence on continuing to
change the facts on the ground, in total contradiction of
the two-State solution, the Charter ofthe United Nations
and international law. Those Israeli policies were
described by President Mahmoud Abbas of Palestine
during his visit to Egypt on 18 July as shutting the door
on the political process.

The Movement strongly condemns Israel's illegal
measures in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, particularly its construction
and expansion of settlements and the separation wall,
the confiscation of Palestinian land, the displacement
ofthe Palestinian civilian population, and the persistent
attempts to legitimize the illegal settlement activities,
as demonstrated recently by a report commissioned by
the Israeli Government, the so-called Levy Ccmmittee
report, which suggested that the West Bank was not
occupied territory and that the settlements were therefore
legal. The Movement stresses that those actions must be
ended, as they undermine the resumption of credible
negotiations and obstruct the achievement of a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In the light of the very difficult conditions on
the ground, the Non-Aligned Movement calls once
again for the implementation of the recommendations
made by Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, to the Security Council on 18 January
2012 on the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Specific measures are necessary
to address, in particular, the grave impact of Israel's
settlement policies on the Palestinian people and their
land, including the violent actions by Israeli settlers
against Palestinian property and Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, as well as provocations
and incitement, including against holy sites in occupied
East Jerusalem and the vandalizing of mosques and
churches.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
the Security Council to act, and demands that Israel,
the occupying Power, immediately cease all such
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and fully abide by
its legal obligations, including those under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Israel's blatant impunity and
disregard for the law cannot be tolerated.

The Movement remains concerned about the critical
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We call once
again for the full and immediate lifting of the illegal
Israeli blockade, which has now entered its sixth year, in
violation of resolution 1860 (2009), other relevant United
Nations resolutions and international humanitarian law,
which prohibits collective punishment of the civilian
population under occupation. Israel must promptly and
unconditionally open all its crossing points with Gaza
and end its continued obstruction of the freedom of
movement of persons and of the reconstruction efforts
in the Gaza Strip.

The Movement also takes this opportunity to
express its support for Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be sponsored by Egypt, and
hopes that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in
the interest of the legitimate national aspirations of
the Palestinian people. The Movement looks forward
to that achievement and to the holding of Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections.

Turning to Lebanon, the Movement condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanon's sovereignty
and calls on all parties concerned to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006), in order to end the current
fragility and avoid the resurgence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli measures to
impose its own jurisdiction and administration there,
are null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

I shall now speak in my national capacity. Egypt
would like to emphasize the importance we attach to
the work of United Nations agencies in support of the
Palestinian people, particularly through addressing
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, which is gravely impacted by Israeli policies in
general and its settlement policies in particular. In that
regard, Egypt is deeply concerned by the restrictions
that Israel, the occupying Power, continues to impose on
the work of the United Nations agencies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, as demonstrated recently by the
letter dated 10 July 2012 addressed to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, by the representative of
Israel. United Nations agencies working in the occupied
territory should not yield to pressure on the part of the
occupying Power to prevent them from fulfilling their
mandates to support the Palestinian people.

It is no surprise that Israel does not feel comfortable
with the work and the mere presence of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory.
An occupying Power that decides to demolish eight
villages in the territory it is occupying under the
pretext that the land of those villages will be used by
the occupying forces for training exercises, as was
ordered by the Israeli Defence Minister on 22 July,
is an occupying force that will use all measures at its
disposal to avoid being held accountable for its illegal
actions and to continue to enjoy impunity as it has
benefited from for decades.

One flagrant measure was the letter addressed by
the representative of Israel in Geneva to the President
of the Human Rights Council officially stating that
Israel had decided to suspend its relationship with that
Council and with the Office of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, both in Geneva and
in Jerusalem. Such actions should not be allowed to
pass without repercussions.

The Middle East has seen dramatic changes over
the past 18 months. The aspirations of the peoples of
many Arab countries for freedom, democracy and
social justice are on the rise. They are going to prevail.
The situation in Syria is no exception in that regard.
Egypt welcomes the attention given by the international
community to the developments in the region, including
the Syrian crisis, aimed at finding a settlement based
on the six-point plan, especially ending the violence,
protecting civilians and respecting Syria's unity and
territorial integrity. However, that should not be at the
expense of addressing the historic injustice that the
Palestinian people have endured for decades. It should
not divert attention from the Palestinian question,
which remains the principal source of instability in
the region. As many Arab countries chart their way
towards democracy and good governance, the promise
ofa peaceful and stable Middle East cannot be achieved
without finding a just and lasting peaceful settlement
that ensures the independence of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It is time for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities and work seriously
to achieve that objective.

