Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
grateful for the convening of this briefing and the
briefings provided by Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall and
Ms. Reena Ghelani.

At the outset, we want to acknowledge and support
the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
harmonizing efforts and forging strategic partnerships
to tackle cross-border threats and the root causes of
conflicts affecting the Central African subregion,
which, in many cases, is carried out under difficult
political and security conditions. We underscore the
consistent and systematic deployment of good offices
and the work of the Office to bring together and arrive
at agreement among various stakeholders to support
various peace processes. We also commend the support
UNOCA has provided in the holding of elections in four
countries of the subregion and its promotion of greater
participation by women in politics.

We would also like to highlight the political dialogue
and confidence-building measures that UNOCA has
been fostering among political and civil society actors
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in view of the
upcoming elections to be held in December and in line
with the political agreement of 31 December 2016. We
also acknowledge and express our gratitude to UNOCA
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs for the work they are undertaking in Cameroon
and the important role that they are both called upon
to play in order to prevent a further deterioration of
the humanitarian and security situation in the North-
Western and South-Western regions of the country and
to promote better respect for human rights.

We note with sorrow and concern the repeated
escalations ofviolence in that country and in much ofthe
subregion, which continues to claim lives. We condemn
the terrorism of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region
and of the so-called Lord's Resistance Army in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo. Political instability, institutional fragility,
extreme poverty and environmental degradation, which
have been exacerbated by climate change, continue to
produce forced displacement, humanitarian crises,
violent extremism and massive human rights violations,
including gender-based violence. In that connection,
we welcome UNOCA's participation in and support
to various conferences and workshops designed to
strengthen local capacities to address those challenges
and protect the most vulnerable groups through holistic
and consistent strategies that are in line with the
objective of building sustainable peace.

We emphasize the relevance of initiatives aimed
at investigating and dismantling the links between
terrorist groups and criminal organizations involved
in the illegal exploitation of natural resources and
poaching. We welcome the European Union's support
for those efforts, which are equally important in
protecting the environment.

We also stress the importance of promoting
greater participation by young people in the political
and economic life of their respective countries, in
accordance with the study carried out by UNOCA,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and UNESCO. We would like to recognize UNOCA's
efforts to foster adequate coordination with regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Cooperation
among those organizations should foster synergies to
achieve more effective execution of their respective
mandates, under the overarching objective of building
sustainable peace.

I conclude by stressing that the international
community must increase its support to those most
in need in the Central African subregion and to
efforts to address the root causes of conflicts and
humanitarian crises and guarantee free and safe access
for humanitarian and human rights agencies.

