Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes the initiative to
hold this open debate of the Security Council on the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. El Salvador endorses the
statement that was made by Ambassador Takasu in his
capacity as Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and pays tribute to his leadership of the
Commission.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
with the aim of creating a new peacebuilding
architecture in the United Nations system to help
countries emerging from conflict and moving from war
towards development, as was once the case of my
country. That vision was expressed by the heads of
State and Government at the 2005 World Summit.

El Salvador shares that vision and is grateful for
the honour of acting as Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Serving on the Commission enables us to
repay the aid that we received from the international
community at times of difficulty for my country. We
have made efforts to share the experiences of our own
peacebuilding process by sharing a comprehensive
Vision of what that process involves, including specific
topics such as demobilization and reintegration of
armed forces and the creation and functioning of the
national civilian police, among others.
Sharing experience likewise implies contributing
to the prevention of the resurgence of violence by
involving various players in the process and combining
efforts with regional organizations and friendly
countries, without forgetting the implementation of
strategies that promote sustainable development.
The Commission and the membership in general
have been strengthened by the work undertaken by the
Working Group on Lessons Learned, which we have
the honour to chair. This Group, as has been said, has
examined a broad spectrum of issues ranging from
elections and risk reduction in post-conflict situations
to local governance and decentralization, as well as
transitional justice, the situation of internally displaced
persons in the context of peacebuilding, the
strengthening of the fiscal capacity of States by
supporting their national budgets, matters related to the
environment, conflicts and peacebuilding, inter alia.
We have been able to review cross-cutting issues that
are fundamental for those processes. Among them, I
would add gender and peacebuilding through the
strengthening of the participation of women, as well as
the importance of regional approaches in
peacebuilding.

We feel it is important that the work of this
Working Group be strengthened in the future, bearing
in mind that it is a forum for dialogue and exchange of
experiences and best practices, which permits a broad
review of the various factors that affect peacebuilding
in post-conflict countries and, in particular, with a View
to helping on-the-ground initiatives in the countries
under consideration.

El Salvador supports strengthening the relation of
our Commission with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. We are pleased that
contribution pledges exceeded the expectations of $200
million. We align ourselves with other delegations in
advocating greater collaboration between the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as greater transparency and
accountability. We hope that the Peacebuilding Fund
will benefit national and regional projects that can
transform certain aspects of the realities on the ground
and strengthen the peacebuilding process. The fact that
there is no armed Violence in a particular context or
region should not preclude consideration for
transferring resources to a key sector for peace,
security and development.
El Salvador is aware of the importance of
equitable participation of the various regional groups
in the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, as
conflicts are not, unfortunately, the sole preserve of
any particular society. On the contrary, they are a
product of a series of internal and international factors
that come together to respond Violently, unfortunately,

to the unmet demands of various social and political
groups. From that perspective, to the extent that the
international community works together and assumes
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission, there will
be more opportunities for political dialogue and shared
experiences between post-conflict countries and the
United Nations system as a whole to make substantive
contributions to help people in conflict overcome their
differences by peaceful means, resorting to dialogue
and negotiation as a foundation for that national
understanding.

By way of conclusion, El Salvador calls on the
regional groups and the member countries of the
Peacebuilding Commission to consider, with an
inclusive perspective, the matter of equitable
participation in the Commission. Let us secure the best
options for overcoming a certain impasse that concerns
us at the moment and define in good faith the
composition of the Commission, since our true mission
is to help the countries in question on the ground.

