Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Through you, Sir, I should like to thank the President
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY),
Judge Claude Jorda. His briefing reveals the challenges
that must be met in order to improve the Tribunal's
functioning.

When the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia was established, international
experience in that field was rather scant. The lack of
precedents required its institutions, rules and practices
to adopt innovative solutions relating to the customary
procedures of international courts.

While the novelty of the establishment of the
Tribunal made it necessary to amend rules of procedure
and evidence on various occasions, we believe that the
Tribunal is doing excellent work that has made it a
vanguard institution and a very valuable benchmark for
the international community. Its wealth of experience
has been put to good use by the International Criminal
Court. Those who have worked to secure the prestige
that the Tribunal enjoys today - in essence, the
judges - deserve our highest recognition.
We have considered the report of the Expert
Group in document A/54/634, submitted to the Security
Council by the Secretary-General on 15 June. We have
also considered document A/54/850, which contains
the opinions of the Tribunals for Rwanda and
Yugoslavia on the 46 recommendations made by the
Expert Group, as well as last month's report of the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

These documents closely analyse the experience
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia over the course of more than five years of
work and make specific recommendations. They
demonstrate the various challenges that the Tribunal is
confronting, arising, inter alia, from the workload and
the shortfall in human resources and time required for
trial preparation and the prosecution of indictees,
resulting in lengthy periods of detention without trial.

It is our understanding that the analysis in such
documents must be carefully considered by the
Security Council. We support the idea put forward by
the President of the Council that a group of experts be
established to assess the various recommendations and
to make a proposal. We agree that the broadest and
most transparent dissemination of information must be
ensured in the process so that all States Members of the
United Nations, which will be financing the measures,
may be familiar with its development.

The report submitted by President Jorda last May
assesses the various options and makes the choices that
the judges consider to be most appropriate. These
basically consist in appointing a pool of 12 ad [item
judges, delegating certain competencies to senior
officers of the Trial Chambers during the pre-trial
period and adding two judges to those of the Appeals
Chamber, who would come from the Rwanda Tribunal.

My delegation can concur with those
recommendations, but wishes briefly to mention a few
points. We think that, despite the great merit of the
recommendations made by the judges of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, a Security Council group of experts should
assess all proposals that have been made, rejecting
none of them out of hand.

We consider that the appointment of ad [item
judges in addition to the permanent judges is a very
good option; because of its flexibility, it is used in
many national systems. But if it is decided to appoint
ad [item judges, we consider that guarantees regarding
a trial defence and being tried before the competent
judge suggest that these should be chosen by election
rather than by appointment by the Secretary-General,
especially as these would not be substitutes, but true
judges with full judicial powers. If such a decision is
taken, we should also review the limitations on their
powers set out in the proposed article 13 ter of the
statute.

