The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Kenzo
Oshima, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
exhaustive report on the humanitarian situation in
Angola. My country is also grateful to Mr. Erick de
Mul, Humanitarian Coordinator for Angola, for having
joined us.

Mexico appreciates the efforts of the United
Nations Office in Angola to restore peace, to provide
humanitarian assistance and to promote and protect
human rights as indispensable elements of the
rebuilding of that nation. In that context, my delegation
is ready to support the request of the Angolan
Government for the United Nations, in the event of an
acceleration in the peace process, to assist in the
implementation of a plan for demobilizing combatants
and resettling internally displaced persons and to
support Angola's electoral process.

My delegation also welcomes the presence among
us today of Mr. Georges Chikoti, Vice-Minister for
External Relations of Angola. His participation in this
meeting reflects the interest and concern that the
Government of Angola shares with the international
community over the extremely serious humanitarian
situation, by which we are all preoccupied. My country
notes with appreciation the decisions taken by the
Council of Ministers of the Republic of Angola on
5 February to improve the situation and hopes that they
will be implemented forthwith.

As Mr. Oshima pointed out, the humanitarian
situation in Angola is of the highest gravity and has
significantly deteriorated, increasing the number of
internally displaced persons. Therefore, Mexico
appeals to Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total
de Angola (UNITA) to stop its military activities
against the civilian population and to commit itself to
reinitiating a constructive dialogue with the
Government of Angola to achieve peace. Mexico also
appeals to the Government of Angola to fully
implement the law on norms for resettlement. It also
recommends to the Government of Angola and UNITA
that they negotiate the safe access of humanitarian
organizations to the most vulnerable groups of Angolan
society, particularly in the provinces of Bie, Huila,
Uige and Lunda Sul.

Mexico believes that in order to overcome
humanitarian problems, it is necessary to achieve peace
through negotiations between the parties to the conflict
and to respect the 1994 Lusaka Protocol, as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions. My delegation
recognizes the efforts undertaken by the Government
of Angola to improve the humanitarian situation in the
country and appeals that these efforts be maintained,
particularly in the areas of infrastructure rehabilitation,
which facilitates the provision of humanitarian
assistance, and of providing a safe environment for
humanitarian personnel. It encourages the Government
of Angola to increasingly coordinate the support of all
the political parties and civil society in these efforts.
Mexico urges Members States and non-governmental
organizations, national and international, to redouble
their support to the Government of Angola and to the
humanitarian efforts being made there by the United
Nations.

We cannot ignore that country's situation, and the
international community must unavoidably be engaged.
In my country's view, a peaceful resolution of the
conflict can make possible a just and lasting peace that
will allow the Angolan people to achieve national
reconciliation and create the conditions for their
development. Thus, Mexico commends the work done
by civil society, particularly by the Church, in
achieving these objectives.

I wish to conclude by asking Mr. Kenzo Oshima
about the activities in Angola of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
dealing with the internally displaced and about the
bases on which that work is being carried out.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

