Ms. Jaquez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the French presidency for convening this open debate,
as well as Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for presenting the
annual report on the subject (S/2017/821).

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report aimed at strengthening concrete action
towards the protection of girls, boys and adolescents
in armed conflicts, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2225 (2015). The best interests of children
must be protected by the Organization and each of its
Member States, and the agencies and sectors of its
system, under any circumstances. It is painful to have
to recall that fact and to be concerned by it, as it is not
the global status quo.

We condemn all activities that violate the right of
boys, girls and adolescents to well-being, including in
situations ofarmed conflicts, in which the basic rights of
children are specifically affected. The commemoration
of the tenth anniversary of the Paris Commitments
to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use
by armed forces or armed groups provides a good
opportunity to continue raising awareness of the
challenges that the United Nations and the international
community as a whole continue to face. In that regard,
we once again call on all States to comply with the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law, in particular because children are worthy not only
of general protection in armed conflicts, but also of
the special protection that recognizes their particularly
vulnerable situation in those situations.

We also strongly condemn violence towards and
sexual exploitation of children, and we welcome the
measures adopted by the United Nations to strengthen
its zero-tolerance policy aimed at preventing and
combating Violence and sexual abuse committed
by its own personnel and members of peacekeeping
operations, in which, unfortunately, minors have
been victimized.

Seventy-two countries, including Mexico, have
signed the Voluntary Compact between the Secretary-
General and States, which was presented at the high-
level meeting on the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse on 18 September. We call on the Security
Council to ensure the protection of children as a
central component of the mandates it designs for
peace operations. Similarly, Mexico supports the
Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative
aimed at addressing sexual violence in armed conflicts,
which is a proposal by the United Kingdom aimed
at strengthening the response of the international
community on the issue. We also reaffirm our support
for the United Nations Children, Not Soldiers campaign
and the achievement of its objectives.

However, despite those agreements and political
commitments, we must focus our attention, with a
heavy heart, on the increase in the radicalization,
recruitment and employment of minors by non-State
armed groups. The proliferation of criminal groups,
particularly terrorists, constitutes a prominent threat to
children and adolescents. That is why States must work
to generate and promote a comprehensive response to
violent extremism, while paying special attention to the
root causes of its proliferation.

The Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism is a good guide for the creation
of comprehensive measures to prevent, address and
combat the dissemination of that scourge among
vulnerable groups, including children. We agree with
the Secretary-General's call to respond to the threats
that prevent the strengthening of sustainable peace in
all its aspects, in full compliance with international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the rights
of refugees.

One of the priorities must be to implement
measures for the effective reintegration of children
previously associated with extremist groups, in order
to ensure their treatment as victims who deserve human
rights protection and psychological care, and not as
security threats subject to prosecution or detention
without the possibility of rehabilitation. As part of its
commitment to that agenda, Mexico stands with the
Global Partnership to End Violence against Children,
which represents a collective commitment for children.
It is also a member of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict. As a member of those groups
and in conjunction with them and the other Members
of the United Nations, Mexico will continue to fight
to prevent and alleviate the suffering of those who are
the present and the future of our societies, as it is our
obligation to transform adversities into opportunities
for all the children of the world.

