Mr. Ouch (Cambodia): First, may I welcome
you, Ms. Carolina Barco, Foreign Minister of
Colombia, and thank you for chairing this important
meeting. I also take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Wang Yingfan of China, for
conducting the presidency of the Council in an
outstanding manner in November.

I also wish to acknowledge the presence of the
Secretary-General and to thank him for his report,
which forms the basis of the Council's deliberations
today. We listened with great interest to the briefing
given today by Mr. Kenzo Oshima, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. I should like also to thank
Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger, Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), for
his briefing.

Today is Human Rights Day, and we should
remind ourselves that the protection of civilians is as
much a human rights concern as it is a humanitarian
issue.

We are facing troubled times. There is a serious
threat of war lingering in the air. The role of the
Security Council is and will continue to be very
important in avoiding war and in resolving the world's
problems in a peaceful manner.
Madam President, I am very grateful that you
have convened this open meeting, because the subject
being discussed is very important and affects all
Member States. It is therefore important that the
membership at large be heard on the important subject
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. This
issue should be the central focus of United Nations
operations and a key element in the establishment of
peacekeeping operations.

The involvement of the Security Council in the
issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict has been
continuous and is based on Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) and on the
letter of the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, document S/2001/6l4. We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, document S/2002/ 1300 of 26 November 2002.

This is the third report on this important subject,
and we equally acknowledge the excellent earlier
reports, the first issued published on 8 September 1999
(S/l999/957), and the second dated 30 March 2001
(S/2001/331). Those reports present the facts about the
realities confronted by millions of civilians around the
world, and they outlined some additional steps that
Member States could take to strengthen their own
capacity to protect civilians in armed conflict. The
stark picture of war and civil strife everywhere around
the globe has led the United Nations, the ICRC,
regional organizations and many other international
agencies increasingly to devote greater attention to
protecting civilians in armed conflict.

We agree with the Secretary-General, who, in his
report of 30 March 2001 on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, called for the establishment of a
culture of protection in which Governments and armed
groups would respect the recognized rules of
international humanitarian law, and in which Member
States and international organizations would display
the necessary commitment to ensure decisive and rapid
action in the face of crisis.

The presence of so many dignitaries today not
only reflects the importance of the subject under
discussion but also attests to the fact that the protection
of civilians is a complex problem, has many different
faces and has not been conclusively defined. It
involves diverse actors - international agencies and
civil society - and approaches. The protection of
civilians involves issues such as humanitarian access,
justice and reconciliation, forced displacement,
landmines, small arms, women and children in war and
other matters.

While we fully agree that, in conformity with its
mandate to provide peace and security in the world, the
Security Council has a central role to play, we should
also stress that the multidisciplinary nature of the
problem requires an inter-agency approach. I am
therefore grateful to note that the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee is effective and that the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
strengthening their cooperation.

In regard to the latest report of the Secretary-
General, permit me to address three issues highlighted
there. The first is the question of the rule of law, justice
and reconciliation. We have been reminded on many
occasions that, although during the First World War 95
per cent of the victims were soldiers, by contrast,
today, 95 per cent of the victims of conflicts are
civilians. As a country which has just recently emerged
from a prolonged period of civil strife and armed
conflict, including the period of the genocidal Khmer
Rouge regime in which more than two million people
perished, most of them civilians, I can speak from
experience about the misery and suffering of our
people over a prolonged period of time, and I can
affirm that we can find justice for our people only
when peace and stability prevail throughout our
country.

In regard to the rule of law and justice, it must be
applied fairly and universally to all countries, large or
small and rich or poor. In order to achieve that goal,
conflicting political interests must not be accorded
higher priority than providing justice and reconciliation
for the people. In the light of our bitter experience of
the past, Cambodia was one of the first countries in
Asia to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and we applaud its entry into
force last July. That was a step in the right direction
towards achieving the rule of law, justice and
reconciliation in post-conflict countries.

Secondly, we should like to touch on the issue of
humanitarian access. In this respect, an important point
to keep in mind is that we should not forget that the
protection of civilians is, first and foremost, the
responsibility of the sovereign Governments
concerned. The issue of humanitarian access, while
important, should not supersede the principle of
national sovereignty. This has been emphasized on
many occasions by many members of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Thirdly, the Secretary-General emphasizes the
issue of the separation of combatants from civilians.
We had a very bad experience during the 1980s, when
the Khmer Rouge, after being ousted from Cambodia,
hunkered down in border refugee camps, taking with
them large numbers of civilians under their so-called
protection. Therefore, I wish to emphasize once again
that if the international community is not in agreement
on the solution of a certain problem, it is difficult to
tackle such important issues as that of the separation of
civilians from combatants.

The report also identifies three emerging
challenges: sexual exploitation, illegal exploitation of
natural resources and terrorism. Those important issues
deserve our full attention.

Finally, Cambodia welcomes the adoption of the
aide-memoire by the Security Council last March,
prepared by the Secretary-General in close cooperation
with Council members. The aide-memoire provides a
blueprint for action for all of us in the important area
of protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is now
very important to put these principles into practice; in
that connection, today's meeting will provide a good
opportunity to have a preview of the roadmap for the
protection of civilians attached to the aide-memoire. I
welcome the holding of regional workshops, including
the regional workshop in Japan, which covers the
South-East Asian region. Such workshops will provide
practical tools to implement the aide-memoire.

