Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

Let me begin by thanking the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for
his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council this
morning. I would like to assure the High Representative
of our continued full support for his important work.

During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
line from Ivo Andrie's Letter from the Year 1920 that
Bosnia was a country of fear and hatred was often
quoted. However, since the end of the war, the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, supported by the international
community, not least the European Union, have been
on a journey to replace that fear and hatred with trust
and mutual respect. It is a journey to build a peaceful
and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina. And while
much has been achieved, it is ajourney that has not yet
reached its end.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's European Union
perspective remains central to its future. The President
ofthe European Commission, Mr. Jean-Claude Juncker,
in his state of the union speech in September, clearly
stated that the integration of the Western Balkans into
the Euroepan Union remains a top priority for the
EU. The Western Balkans region is a part of Europe,
and developments in the region will affect the rest
of the continent. European Union Foreign Ministers
reiterated the Union's firm commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's EU perspective when they met at the
Foreign Affairs Council only last month. However,
much work remains to be done.

While we welcome the initial implementation of
the reform agenda, the pace of reform has, worryingly,
slowed this year. It is crucial that authorities step up the
implementation of comprehensive reforms in order to
regain momentum and to get the reform agenda back
on track. Those efforts should focus on socioeconomic
development, fighting corruption and organized crime,
ensuring fundamental freedoms and electoral reforms.
In addition, it is necessary to invest in bridging cultural
and social differences, not least among children and
youth. Next year's elections must not be an excuse
for delaying key decisions. Election reform should be
approached in the spirit of consensus and dialogue.
Moreover, relevant rulings of the Constitutional Court
must be implemented swiftly in order to avoid a legal
vacuum after the elections next year.

It is important that efforts towards continued
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina be supported.
Sexual and gender-based violence committed during the
war needs to be addressed. Impunity threatens stability
and social cohesion, making reconciliation even

more difficult. In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
national action plan on women and peace and security
should be fully implemented.

Finally, we welcome today's unanimous adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017), which reviews the mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also acknowledge
the need for discussion on the reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We remain supportive of the idea of phasing out the
international presence when the situation on the ground
allows for it. With our partners in the European Union,
Sweden will continue to stand with the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as they work towards realizing
their European perspective and building a country of
prosperity, peace, stability and equality for all.

