I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the Special Coordinator for his work over the past five years, especially in pursuit of a solution to the Palestinian question. I also wish him all the best in his new post. Four years after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), there has been no noticeable progress in its implementation. The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory continues to deteriorate and the Middle East peace process is stalled. That situation is deeply worrisome. The relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the two-State solution, distilled from generations of wisdom and painstaking work, must be observed and implemented. China notes with concern the continuation and significant expansion of settlement activities. According to the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234), over the past four years, plans for more than 28,000 housing units have been approved, tenders have been announced for 12,000 units and the construction of approximately 6,000 units has started. We call on all the parties concerned to abide by United Nations resolutions, settle the final delineation of the Palestinian-Israeli borders through peaceful negotiations, refrain from unilateral actions that may exacerbate tensions, abandon the annexation plans and cease settlement activities. The past few months have seen increased demolitions of Palestinian houses and an escalation of violence against civilians. With their homes gone, we have seen hundreds of children forced into displacement. We urge the relevant authorities to immediately lift the blockade on Gaza, cease demolishing Palestinian houses and destroying Palestinian property and stop acts of violence against civilians. As close neighbours that cannot physically move away from each other, Palestine and Israel must adhere to the strategic option of peace talks and relaunch dialogue on an equal footing without delay. We welcome the initiative of President Abbas to convene an international peace conference early next year. We commend the two parties for restarting civil and security cooperation and resuming the transfer of tax revenues. At the international level, we must all remain impartial and objective, working in good faith to advance the Middle East peace process. Any solution to the Palestinian question must take into account the voices of the countries of the region, especially Palestine, accommodate the concerns of all parties and not be imposed on any party. Given the current context, the international community must place the economic and humanitarian impacts of the coronavirus disease on Palestine high on its agenda. We applaud the tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to improve the humanitarian situation in Palestine. General Assembly resolution 75/94, on the operations of UNRWA, was adopted with an overwhelming majority this month - an eloquent testimony to international recognition of the Agency's work. At a time when UNRWA is under tremendous financial pressure, the world needs to honour its commitments and actively provide financial contributions to help the Agency overcome the current difficulties. Since the start of this year, China has provided numerous shipments of personal protective equipment and other anti-epidemic supplies to Palestine, sent a team of health experts and made significant donations to UNRWA. Recently, anti-epidemic supplies were provided by the Chinese Government to UNRWA-affiliated health institutions, and health kits were provided through UNRWA to Palestinian refugees in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Earlier this month, the United Nations commemorated the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. For the eighth consecutive year, President Xi Jinping sent a message to the General Assembly on the annual observance, fully demonstrating China's firm commitment to, and support for, the just cause of the Palestinian people and its sincere wish for peaceful development in the Middle East. China is ready to continue working with the international community in its unwavering effort to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question at an early date.
