Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): The Government of
Georgia deeply regrets the termination of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) due
to the unconstructive position of the Russian
Government. The Mission has long played an
important role in bringing a level of security and
stability to the Abkhazia region of Georgia. The fact
that it is being terminated by virtue of a single
country's opposition is of great concern to my
Government and should weigh heavily on this
institution.

It is important to keep in mind that Russia's
rejection of this Mission is not an isolated act, but

rather a part of a larger strategy - one that began even
before Russia's invasion last summer. It seems
determined to roll back the international community's
presence in Georgia. Just last month, Russia also
vetoed the continuation of the mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

I would like to express my gratitude to the men
and women of UNOMIG for their hard work in
protecting the human rights of the remaining
population of the occupied region of Georgia. Their
good work has consistently been undermined by
Russian military forces and Moscow's proxy
administration on the ground. On behalf of my
Government, I would also like to thank those countries
friends of Georgia, in the Council and beyond, that
have worked hard to continue the Mission. We are
grateful for their determined efforts and for their
support of our sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
will continue to work with them to ensure security
throughout the country. The role of the European
Union monitoring mission in that respect is very
important.

The bottom line with respect to the termination of
UNOMIG is this: There will be fewer opportunities to
provide unbiased information on either the security
situation or human rights violations. The termination of
UNOMIG also means that it will be more difficult to
witness or document any build-up or movement of
Russian troops in the region. It also should be noted
that the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/254) of
18 May 2009 clearly confirmed that Russia is in
complete violation of resolution 1866 (2009). It is
evident that Russia does not wish to have any witnesses
who can confirm its disrespect and breach of
international obligations. Through that non-constructive
behaviour, Russia continues to breach the ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008, as well as the diplomatic
measures of 8 September 2008 moderated by the then
French presidency of the European Union.

The facts are clear. Russia is not honouring the
commitments it undertook under legally binding
international agreements. Russia has gone further into
self-imposed isolation on the fundamental issues of
respecting other countries' sovereignty and territorial
integrity, thus widening the gap between itself and the
rest of the world.

Today, 400,000 men, women and children - the
survivors of several waves of ethnic cleansing, those
whose right to return to their homes has been
stubbornly denied by Russia and its proxies - are

looking to the international community with hope.
They do not expect the international community to give
up on its efforts to restore a measure of justice. What
they expect are new and even more energetic efforts on
the part of the whole international community that
would eventually result in their dignified and secure
return to their homes.

