Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, which
will enable us to explore the critical situation
prevailing in Haiti. I warmly welcome the presence of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica and of the
Bahamas.

We are very much concerned at the gravity of the
situation in Haiti, with which Benin has very important
historical and blood ties. That situation calls for robust
measures to spare the Haitian people the predictable
consequences of a tragic confrontation by rival forces.
Not long ago, the international community undertook
major efforts to re-establish peace and constitutional
legality in Haiti. That was a fresh opportunity for the
country to enable democracy to take root and to
develop prosperity. Perhaps we did not address the
problem from the right direction, because Haiti has
again fallen into the abyss.

There is new urgency in Haiti. The security
situation is worrisome; the humanitarian situation has
completely deteriorated and requires concerted and
immediate action. Therefore, we must quickly stabilize
the situation in the country to avert the real risk that
Haiti will plunge into chaos. We urge all the parties
involved in the Haitian crisis to agree to commit
themselves to the path of dialogue and negotiation.

We welcome and support the initiatives taken by
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the
Organization of American States (OAS) and the
countries involved in the quest for a political and
peaceful solution to the Haitian crisis. We believe that
the quest for peace and the resumption of dialogue
must be carried out in the context of the existing
constitutional order. We are also pleased that the
Secretary-General has decided to appoint a special
advisor to follow the situation in Haiti.

The international community must support and
help the Haitian people to move definitively into a
virtuous cycle of growth. The Haitian people deserve
genuine prospects for growth, after 200 years of
independence, passed over by history and carrying the
heavy burden of instability and extreme poverty.

Our commitment to democracy and economic and
social development in Haiti must provide for and
facilitate the following actions: in the short-term,
facilitate emergency humanitarian assistance; restore
law and public order and the respect for basic
freedoms; establish the rule of law; create a national
republican army; professionalize the police; and
strengthen institutions.

But all of these efforts will be in vain if Haiti's
people do not share the values and principles to which
we refer today. Therefore, the Haitian authorities and
all those who aspire to undertake political
responsibilities in that country must fully embrace the
clear aspirations of the Haitian people and other
peoples of the region to be governed by law and to
build free, democratic and prosperous societies.

