Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, let me at
the outset congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month.

I would like to thank the members of the Council
that abstained in the voting on resolution 2428 (2018),
which included the representatives of Ethiopia and of
Equatorial Guinea. They are arguing that the resolution
is not helpful and will undermine peace. How does it
undermine peace? It is not the resolution itself, but
the adoption of a resolution at a time when the peace
process is making positive advances will actually now
tilt that balance for those parties that are negotiating.
The opposition will think that the Security Council is
on their side, so why should they continue to negotiate
peace? That is why this resolution is unfortunate.

But my delegation really considers this resolution
as an issue not between the Security Council and South
Sudan, but between the Council, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and the continent. We keep hearing in the Council from
time to time about a slap in the face. If there is a slap in
the face, I think that this resolution is a slap in the face
of those organizations that are trying to bring peace to
South Sudan and Khartoum even as we speak.

We would like to commend IGAD and the African
Union, and in particular President Omer Al-Bashir,
President Yoweri Museveni and the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed, for actually switching and
coming up with a different approach that appears to
be succeeding in bringing peace to South Sudan. The
resolution, as we have said, will not help, but IGAD and
South Sudan are still committed. We will seek peace
within the region, within IGAD and within the African
Union, and we hope that in the next few days there will
be more positive news in that regard.

Again, I would like to thank those members that
abstained, and we look forward to better news coming
from Khartoum and South Sudan in the near future.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
