Mr. Aziz (Pakistan): Resolution 2118 (2013),
adopted this evening, is a landmark in the Syrian
conflict. By re-uniting behind the common cause of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has demonstrated once again that it is effective and
responsive.

We thank Secretary of State John Kerry and Foreign
Minister Sergey Lavrov for taking a personal interest
and for persisting in efforts aimed at forging consensus
on a difficult issue. Sponsorship of the resolution by
all 15 member States is a clear manifestation that
the Security Council has assumed ownership of the
implementation of the decision taken by the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in The Hague earlier
today.

The issue of chemical weapons has long enjoyed
virtual consensus in the international community. Its
use has been universally condemned. The Chemical
Weapons Convention retains the primary responsibility
for the elimination of those dangerous weapons. The
Security Council decision today is meant to augment and
implement the OPCW decision. Non-implementation
could lead to serious consequences.

It is our earnest hope that the spirit of cooperation
and the newfound unity of the Council will be
maintained. This is just the first step. The Council has
to navigate difficult waters. Our focus should be on the
people of Syria; their suffering must end. Any action
that we take in this forum should keep the people of
Syria at the centre.

The elimination of chemical weapons in the
country is important, but it is not the remedy for all the
other problems plaguing that unfortunate country. The
killings have to stop; more than 100,000 people have
already lost their lives. A political solution remains the
only viable option. It is time to go back to Geneva.

Adopted in June 2012, the Geneva communique
(S/2012/523, annex) clearly delineates the process for
a transition acceptable to the Syrian people. It calls for
the establishment of a transitional authority with full
executive powers. The resolution adopted today also
outlines a similar process. All the ingredients for a
resolution of the conflict are already contained in the
Geneva communique. It is therefore imperative that it
be implemented in letter and spirit.

The announcement regarding the convening of the
"Geneva II" conference by mid-November is another
manifestation of the sense of urgency to initiate a
political process aimed at ending the conflict, achieving
national reconciliation and fulfilling the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. The road is not going
to be easy. There is no military solution to the situation
in Syria; arms only aggravate violence and suffering.

We have to move beyond differences on the
interpretation of the Geneva communique and pursue
the political process with unity of purpose. We urge
all sides in the Syrian conflict to fully utilize this
opportunity and work towards dialogue and diplomacy.
Although it is indeed already too late for over 100,000
Syrians, there is still time for millions whose safety and
security are at risk. That should remain foremost in our
minds.

