We welcome the personal participation in this video-teleconference meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. We are grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his presentation of the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/239) on the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Our thanks also go to the other briefer, Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar. In our view, the document presented by Mr. Ruiz Massieu reflects quite accurately and in detail the current state of affairs with regard to the realization of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Of course, the current global situation has complicated a lot of things for all countries and poses new challenges to the efforts of Governments to address people's needs. It is the most serious test of the ability of Governments across the globe to protect their populations and economies. In the case of Colombia this task is even more complicated: apart from fighting coronavirus disease, the Government also needs to deliver on the implementation of the final peace agreement. A lot has been done to make the long-awaited peace in the country possible, but there is also a long way ahead in order to guarantee its sustainability through ensuring that the needs and aspirations of all segments of society are met. Furthermore, the most efficient way to identify and address those needs is through inclusive, peaceful and constructive dialogue. Peace is acommon effort and responsibility, in which each national player has a part. We are encouraged by the popular appeals in Colombia in support of peace in line with the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire, including the announcement made by the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional. Today's challenging times are the moment for all Colombians to make an extra effort towards peace and dialogue. The United Nations presence in the country plays a significant role in helping Colombians verify the implementation of the final peace agreement, as supported by the Security Council and the Secretary-General. The Mission already verified the completion of arms cache extraction and the laying down of weapons in 2017, thus completing the first phase of its presence, and moved to the second phase, namely, verification of the implementation of Government programmes. There is a list of tasks to accomplish in order to build a solid foundation for lasting peace. The most pressing, of course, are the security guarantees for the population. We, as everyone, are very much concerned by the killings of former combatants and social leaders, as well as by the growing number of those who are forced to leave their homes owing to security concerns. All those incidents have to be investigated and the perpetrators must be brought to justice. Without a doubt, the population should see peace dividends in everyday life. This task highlights the need for gains in the political, socioeconomic and legal reintegration of former combatants, as well as for firm progress on agricultural programmes and reforms and the creation of employment opportunities. Obviously, such programmes will require proper financing. Due attention should be given to public discussion of the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. This central element of the final peace agreement should maintain its full independence. All attempts to influence it should be thoroughly investigated. We hope that all of these tasks are to be the focus of the national and newly elected local authorities and that the Mission will continue its efforts to assist Colombians in implementing the provisions of the final peace agreement.
