Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
his opening remarks at today's debate. I also listened
carefully to the briefings made by the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of
the representative of Oxfam.

Ukraine appreciates Uruguay's initiative to hold
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Ukraine continues to be fully committed to
improving the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In particular, we fully support the attention given by
the Council to the situation of women and children
affected by armed conflict - an issue concerning
which Ukraine has adopted specific political directives.

We highly appreciate the report of the Secretary-
General of June 2015 (S/2015/433) on the protection
of civilians and his report (S/2015/446) on the
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. As stated
in the reports, the reality on the ground continues to
be characterized by a frequent lack of willingness
on the part of the parties to armed conflict to fulfil
their obligations to respect and protect civilians in
accordance with humanitarian law, human rights and
the rights of refugees. We call upon all parties to armed
conflict to fully assume their obligations.

Recent events make today's debate even more
relevant. Only last Friday, the Security-Council held
an important meeting on the desperate humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.7505). That situation
requires the adoption of measures to protect civilians,
so as to save human lives. Ukraine fully shares the
serious concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his reports on the situations in the Central African
Republic, Darfur, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Iraq, Afghanistan, South Sudan, Libya, Mali
and other countries in which the civilian population, in
particular women and children, continue to be targets
of various forms of extreme violence, resulting in a
grave humanitarian crisis and enormous displacement
of the population.

In particular, we share the concern over the
ongoing attacks directed against health care personnel,
facilities and transport. We are also concerned about
the increased threats against journalists in situations
of armed conflict. We reaffirm our commitment to the
conclusions that were drawn on that issue in the debate
that took place last May at the initiative of Lithuania
(see S/PV.7450). We fully support resolution 2223
(2015), which was adopted as a result of that debate.

With regard to humanitarian assistance, the parties
to a conflict must do their utmost to ensure effective
and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including
cargo and materials. We continue to be very concerned
about the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. We must engage in greater
international cooperation in order to establish stricter
norms to protect civilians from the impact of explosive
weapons in such areas. The protection of civilians is
an obvious objective for the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations.

The success of a peacekeeping mission is often
determined by its ability to protect civilians. At the
same time, we recognize the need for fundamental
reform aimed at further strengthening peacekeeping
operations in order to respond to the evolving threats
and security challenges of today. We must ensure
that the missions have adequate resources and that
due priority is given to civilian protection activities.
The mandates should be realistic and not create false
expectations. In return, we hope that the missions can
ensure that those resources are utilized with maximum
effectiveness for the protection of civilians. The strict
application of a zero-tolerance policy with regard to
peacekeeping forces is another vital and necessary
element for the protection of civilians, particularly
women and children, in conflict situations.

Ukraine also wishes to emphasize the need to
provide peacekeeping missions with clear mandates
to protect civilians. The clarity of those mandates is
essential, but it is not enough. Three other key elements
must be considered. They are strong operational control
over peacekeeping mission activities, clear strategies
for the troops and good working relationships between
the peacekeeping missions and the humanitarian actors
on the ground.

During this debate on the protection of civilians,
I cannot remain silent on the issue of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine, which has claimed the
lives of thousands of innocent civilians in many towns
and cities in eastern Ukraine during the past two years.
I wish to express gratitude to the Secretary-General for
having highlighted the situation in the occupied areas
okaraine in his June report (S/2015/453). The findings
presented in that report with regard to the protection
of civilians show that Ukrainian civilians have faced
numerous challenges resulting from foreign military
aggression. The bombing of Volnovakha, Mariupol and
Kramatorsk by multiple-rocket-launch systems, known
as Grad, Smerch and Uragan, has killed and wounded
a great number of civilians, including children, thereby
demonstrating the heinous crimes carried out by
militants and irregular armed groups controlled by
the Russian Federation directed against the civilian
population. Given that those cities are far from the
conflict zone, we can conclude that civilians were being
deliberately bombed.

Those promoting the conflict are determined
to make the lives of ordinary people impossible and
to permanently block the activities of international
and Ukrainian humanitarian organizations based
on an illegal demand for the certification of those
organizations. At the same time, so-called Russian
humanitarian aid convoys are crossing the Ukrainian
border without the consent of, or inspection by, the
Ukrainian authorities and without coordination with
the International Committee of the Red Cross. While
the content of those convoys, essentially contraband
since they can't be inspected, is largely unknown, the
arrival of almost every convoy is followed immediately
by a new escalation of attacks by the separatists in the
region.

While the situation in the occupied territories
remains unstable, the Ukrainian Government is
working hard to alleviate the suffering of the people
affected; in particular, it has made every effort to
increase social and security guarantees for internally
displaced persons. The legislation on humanitarian
aid has been considerably simplified so as to allow
easier access to people in need. In the current difficult
circumstances, the Ukrainian Government is doing
everything possible to provide humanitarian assistance
to the civilian populations in the occupied regions of
Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as to internally displaced
persons. On 20 October 2014, the Parliament of Ukraine
adopted a law on the rights and freedoms of internally
displaced persons. At the same time, the Cabinet of
Ministers is working to implement the State programme
for the support, social adaptation and reintegration of
Ukrainian citizens who were forced to flee from the
temporarily occupied Ukrainian territory.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts
has become an increasingly complex challenge.
Nevertheless, that complexity cannot be allowed to
diminish in any way our collective efforts to effectively
address the current horrific state ofaffairs in my country.
Ukraine will continue to play a strong and active role
in that process. We also express the sincere hope that
those who have violated international humanitarian law
will be brought to justice.

In conclusion, I wish to express my profound
gratitude to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for its very fruitful
cooperation in helping to meet the immediate needs of
the internally displaced persons in Ukraine.

