Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
very informative briefing on recent developments
in Mali.

(spoke in French)

I take this opportunity to welcome the presence
among us of His Excellency Mr. Tieman Hubert
Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.

(spoke in English)

In the face of the upcoming renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), I would
like to focus my intervention around three issues:
the political process, the situation of women and the
MINUSMA mandate itself.

First, on the political process, the visit of Prime
Minister Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga to the northern
regions, including Kidal, the ongoing registration of
combatants, and progress in the implementation of the
road map are perceived as positive steps in the peace
process. The holding of inclusive, transparent and
credible elections will be crucial to securing the gains
achieved so far by the parties in the implementation
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. It will therefore be crucial to create conditions
for secure, peaceful and transparent elections. Efforts
in this area, however, should be intensified and, despite
the circumstances of the electoral process, the full
implementation of the provisions of the agreement
should be a top priority for the Malian authorities and
completed as soon as possible.

We commend the neighbouring countries, including
Algeria, for their support for the peace process in Mali
and their commitment to ensuring the stabilization
of that country and the Sahel region. However, the
international community should increase its efforts
to comprehensively address the crisis in the country.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate our support for
all necessary measures taken by the Security Council
against individuals and entities engaged in actions or
policies that threaten the implementation of the peace
agreement in Mali.

Secondly, women continue to be underrepresented
in the mechanisms for implementing and monitoring
the peace agreement. Only 3 per cent of members
of the mechanisms are women, which is a very low
indicator. Regarding sexual and gender-based violence,
according to UN-Women more than 1 in 10 females
between the ages of 15 and 49 in Mali have experienced
sexual violence. There is currently no national law in
Mali specifically addressing violence against women.
Furthermore, women and the girls who suffer sexual
and gender-based violence are often stigmatized
or even excluded by their communities. Taking the
aforementioned problems into account, strong language
on gender equality and women's rights, as well as
women's meaningful participation in the peace process,
should be maintained in the upcoming resolution
on Mali.

The discussion of the new MINUSMA mandate is
relevant to the current security situation in Mali. Poland
supports the proposal to revitalize the United Nations
presence in the north in order to ensure the effectiveness
and impact ofthe Mission, and to strengthen its presence
in the centre of Mali, where the situation is critical and
the number of civilian casualties is unprecedented.

We would also welcome a strengthened and
more active leadership role for MINUSMA in Mali's
peace process. There has been positive progress in
the implementation of key security provisions of the
peace agreement, but there remains much to be done
in such areas as security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, governance,
institutional reform, the fight against impunity, and
development. MINUSMA's good offices should be
used in a more extensive manner to promote the rapid
implementation of all the outstanding provisions of
the political agreement so as to ensure the inclusivity
of the peace process, including the promoton of the
engagement of non-signatory actors.

Last but not least, we see added value in the
continuation of MINUSMA support to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and Poland supports
that effort. However, the leadership of MINUSMA has
to ensure that this engagement would not negatively
impact the Mission's own capacity.

In conclusion, Poland commends the tireless efforts
of the men and women of MINUSMA in extremely
difficult circumstances, and looks forward to the
further extension of the MINUSMA mandate.

