Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I will
try to follow your five-minute rule, Sir. I apologize for
leaving the meeting briefly, but I believe it was
necessary - indeed, essential - for me to speak in the
General Assembly on the passing of President Franjo
Tudjman of Croatia.

I want to praise the United Kingdom for calling this
important meeting, and to say that I have just returned
from a trip to Mali, Angola, Namibia, South Africa,
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Rwanda, Uganda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Niger. I look forward to
discussing issues relating to the Congo in more detail at
tomorrow's meeting.

I should like to make a few brief observations in the
spirit of informality which the President has so correctly
imposed on us today. The number one problem that we
encountered on our trip - the number one problem that
Africa must deal with, among all the other problems that
we are here to discuss - is the question of the spread of
HIV/AIDS. I cannot stress enough how serious it is. The
Secretary-General has boldly and courageously been
headlining this issue for many years. Indeed, it was Kofi
Annan, personally, who asked me to take a look at this
issue a long time ago. I am grateful to him for making
that request.

 

I must say, here in the Security Council, that this is
not just a health issue: it is a security issue and it is an
economic issue. It is an issue that will not go away. In the
past 12 months, more than 10 times as many people have
died of AIDS in Africa as from all the wars in that great
continent. We cannot turn away from it; it is a legitimate
part of our discussions here in the Security Council.

It is the destigmatization of AIDS that needs to be
dealt with most vigorously. Of the 10 countries we visited,
I felt that only one - Uganda - was fully on board on
destigmatization. I am told that Senegal, too, has done an
excellent job. Every other country we visited acknowledged
the problem and had programmes to deal with it. Indeed,
President Mbeki was wearing the AIDS ribbon when I met
with him. We are concerned about this issue, and I hope to
address it further next month when the United States holds
the presidency of the Council.

I should like to refer to the wars of Africa. I will
reserve comment about the Democratic Republic of the
Congo until tomorrow. On Burundi, we are delighted that
President Mandela is taking over the effort. I had an
extremely good talk with him on this issue, and I think he
will make a real difference. On Angola, we, like
Ambassador Qin Huasun, look forward to working closely
with Ambassador Fowler in the sanctions Committee. For
our part, the United States is going to redouble its efforts
on sanctions, and we look forward to learning more from
Ambassador Fowler about how the United States can better
contribute to this effort.

In closing, let me say that, as the Secretary-General
said, much more attention is required in the Security
Council on Africa. I share his view that it should be
effective. I strongly endorse the proposal made by
Ambassador Qin Huasun, on behalf of the People's
Republic of China, that the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity spend more time consulting
the Security Council.

Finally, I should like to say a word about the
American presidency next month. As we announced in a
speech in Pretoria, the United States will use the
opportunity provided by the American presidency next
month - the first month of the new millennium - to
emphasize Africa. Our tentative intention is to build on this
important meeting today and on the meeting tomorrow, and
to hold, particularly in the latter part of January, an intense
series of public and private Security Council meetings that
will focus heavily on the problems of the area - those that
I have just mentioned, as well as the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, an issue which I look forward to addressing
further tomorrow. I hope that high-level representatives
from capitals will join us for those discussions next
month, and that they will involve real achievements, not
just talk.

Thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
meeting.

