Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia had to abstain in the voting on
resolution 2466 (2019), on the final extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), just as it was forced
to do last year (see S/PV.8226). We would like to
explain the motives for our decision so that no one has
any doubt about our full support for the stabilization
process in Haiti.

Just a week ago, the Security Council discussed the
situation in the country (see S/PV.8502). At that time,
despite the concern about the tensions in the country
on the eve of elections, most members of the Security
Council shared the Security-General's assessment that
the Government and the Haitian National Police would
be able to assume full responsibility for security in the
country by October. However, to our confusion, the
authors of the MINUJUSTH resolution have for two
years now pursued a hard line, expanding the application
of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to
the entire mandate, including human rights monitoring.
We continue to fail to understand how the human rights
situation in a country where an armed conflict has
long been over presents a threat to international peace
and security.

There is another reason for our being unable
to support resolution 2466 (2019), namely, the
comprehensive and integrated performance policy
framework that the penholder has entrusted the
Secretary-General to apply to the Mission in Haiti. Let
us recall that work on this policy framework has not
yet been concluded, and that if it is finalized before
the drawdown of the peacekeeping presence in Haiti,
then, according to the proper procedures, the policy
framework must be discussed by States Members of
the United Nations in relevant platforms before it can
be applied.

The fact that Council members have divergent views
is not unusual. However, we are disappointed that the
American penholder has blatantly ignored the concerns
of other members of the Council. Consensus could
have been achieved. To that end, we proposed specific,
balanced options on this matter, but unfortunately they
were ignored. Such an approach gives rise to serious
concern as we begin discussions on a special political
mission to replace the peacekeeping presence in the
country. Our disagreement today can hardly help to
strengthen the consensus in the Council that Port-au-
Prince is requesting.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, I would like to
conclude my explanation of our abstention on resolution
2466 (2019) with words of support for the people and
the Government of Haiti, who in six months will have
the opportunity to take full national ownership of the
fate of their country, its stability and its development.
Russia will continue to work to ensure that the outcome
of the Council's efforts will be a true stabilization
of the situation in Haiti and the strengthening of its
sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

