Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening and presiding over today's meeting.
I am also grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and
frank assessments.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Venezuela and
Uzbekistan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.

In December 2016, less than a month ago, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), on
the illegal Israeli settlements, a resolution sponsored
by Malaysia, together with New Zealand, Senegal and
Venezuela. After more than three decades of inaction
on the part of the Council, which have led to Israel's
relentless and systematic settlement expansion in
complete disregard for international law and the views
of an overwhelming majority of the international
community, the Council finally decided to take action
to preserve the possibility of a two-State solution. The
delay in that action has come at a great cost to peace
and the idea of a two-State solution.

Over the decades, the illegal settlements and the
settler population have multiplied, undermining and
fragmenting the contiguity and territorial integrity of
a potential Palestinian State, including East Jerusalem.
They have also physically threatened the Viability and
prospects for the physical realization of a two-State
solution on a basis of the pre-l967 borders. We have
seen how settlement expansion has led to the demolition
of Palestinian homes, the forced displacement of
Palestinian families, increasing violence on the part
of settlers, and discriminatory policies, as well as to
the denial to the Palestinians of their development,
infrastructure and access to natural resources. The
strong support that we received from Council members
and the international community for resolution 2334
(2016) reflected a realization of the urgency and
importance of reversing the negative trends that
threaten peace and the viability of a two-State solution.

In view of Israel's worrying and aggressive response
to the resolution, Malaysia urges the international
community and the Council to remain firm and not
give in to threats, intimidation and pressure, while
upholding international law, international human
rights standards and the various relevant United
Nations resolutions. In the next few months, the parties
involved and the international community should focus
on implementing resolution 2334 (2016), including the
provisions relating to settlements and acts of violence
and incitement against civilians. We expect to see a
written report every three months from the Secretary-
General on the resolution's implementation.

The international community must not remain a
bystander as the situation on the ground worsens. In
that regard, Malaysia welcomed the holding two days
ago of the Paris Middle East Peace Conference. We
will continue to support France's efforts to mobilize
the international community and its commitment to a
two-State solution. We seek to create an environment
conducive to pushing the parties towards a resumption
of the peace process.

In conclusion, Malaysia would like to reiterate
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
conflict by ending the repressive military occupation
of Palestine. That prolonged occupation has created
and sustained the settlement enterprise and has spread
further despair, frustration and insecurity in the region
and beyond. As we begin 2017, which marks 70 years
of Israel's illegal occupation of Palestine, we must
redouble our efforts to end the longest occupation in
modern history. Malaysia remains committed to playing
a constructive role in realizing a two-State solution. We
reiterate our long-standing support for the Palestinian
people's inalienable right to self-determination and
to a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Palestine-Israel conflict.

