Mr. Donigi (Papua New Guinea): I wish to join
others who have spoken before me in thanking you, Mr.
President, and the members of the Security Council for
making it possible for non-members to address the
Council in respect of the events unfolding in East Timor
since the publication of the results of the ballot last
weekend.

What I am about to say is a result of heart-breaking
efforts to come to terms with what has happened in the
past week in East Timor. There are many people of East
Timor who are of Melanesian race and stock, like the
people of my country and others of the South Pacific. We
have much in common in terms of customs and traditions,
even though, over the centuries of contact with foreign
colonizers and outside influence, theirs may have evolved
in a different direction than ours. We also have in
common another, more recent, element and factor. The
people of East Timor are Christian. Papua New Guinea is
likewise a Christian country. Some 45 per cent of the
people of my country follow the Catholic faith, while the
balance is split between the other Christian
denominations. The Christian community in Papua New
Guinea is part of the Melanesian Council of Churches,
which is spread across the Melanesian countries of the
South Pacific. It is also part of the greater Pacific Council
of Churches. The churches are a very influential part of
the civil society of Papua New Guinea, for which reason
the Government cannot but heed and take into account
their concerns.

Modern technology provides an easier and faster
medium for information dissemination. The information
can be educational and jovial, as well as distressing.
Yesterday, I received a distressing e-mail, which was
directed through contacts from a priest in Indonesia. It
said:

"Communications in East Timor are cut Our
confreres from Dili, including the provincial, are

 

heading towards" - he mentioned the name of a
place in East Timor - "or some other centre in the
Indonesian part of Timor Our schools have been
burnt The rest of the Salesians are in the mountains
with the people they talk about 20,000 people killed

. several diocesan priests have been killed the
sister assisting Bishop Belo has been killed Six
Canossan sisters seem to have been killed We must
do something to help them."

I can add that the province which I come from in

Papua New Guinea is also a predominantly Catholic
province of the Diocesan Order. Many leaders in both the
public and the private sectors of Papua New Guinea are
products of Diocesan education. The Salesian Order of the
Catholic Church is also very active in Papua New Guinea
in the educational field.

Secondly, the leaders of East Timor also made
overtures to the peoples of the South Pacific before the
vote, expressing their desire to be part of the community of
nations forming part of the South Pacific. Since the vote
was overwhelmingly in support of the people's desire to be
an independent nation, the people and the Government of
Papua New Guinea respect that democratic decision. Papua
New Guinea will seriously consider at an appropriate time
any application by an independent East Timor for
membership of the South Pacific Forum.

It is against this background that I am appealing on
behalf of the Government and people of Papua New
Guinea, through you, Sir, to the Government of Indonesia
to review its position in respect to the maintenance of peace
and security in East Timor. It is clear from reports and
pictures now circulating in the print and other media that
the military is either encouraging the militia or, in some
cases, directly involved in these atrocities. Under the
circumstances, there is only one course of action open. My
Government believes strongly that the Government of
Indonesia must now invite outside assistance into East
Timor to address the situation. It must immediately conduct
a phased withdrawal of all its forces in East Timor in
tandem with the deployment of Security Council-approved
peacekeeping forces.

This morning, we heard that General Wiranto was
reported to concede that outside assistance is appropriate
under the circumstances. We applaud this change of attitude
and hope that he can facilitate a phased withdrawal of all
military personnel from East Timor within a brief and
reasonable period of time.

We believe strongly that the atrocities which have
been committed must not go unpunished. The people who
perpetrated the crimes against humanity must be held to
account for their actions. The world would like to see
evidence that Indonesia is a civilized society. The rule of
law must therefore prevail. This cannot be done without
the full support and cooperation of the Government and
the chain of command in the Indonesian military.
Through you, Sir, we call on the Indonesian Government
to provide an undertaking that this will be done.

Last but not least, East Timor, as we are all aware,
is a Non-Self-Governing Territory. The United Nations
cannot stand by and watch hopelessly as its wards, people
with whom the United Nations has a special relationship,
find themselves without a protector. There must be some
urgent sense of duty. The United Nations, through the
Security Council - which, with exemplary conduct, at
times in the face of extreme difficulties, organized,
managed and oversaw the ballot - must be congratulated
for its actions thus far. But it must now sharpen its
diplomatic skills and proceed with all due haste to the
next phases so as to guarantee the freedom to the
remaining people of East Timor for which they so
fearlessly and freely expressed their desire through their
vote before the world at large on 30 August. Otherwise,
the world will come to know and be convinced that the
Charter of the United Nations contains words which are
of use and relevance only to those who have the ability to
muster behind the barrel of a gun.

