Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process for
his briefing. As that briefing underlined, the response
of the international community has not matched the
urgency of addressing the grave situation created by the
growing violence in the region. The tide of turmoil and
conflict, far from receding, has been rising with even
greater force and unpredictability. As a consequence,
millions of people are having to endure unimaginable
suffering, caught up in a vortex of violence now
largely being driven by the divergent interests and
priorities of embattled Governments and regional and
external Powers.

It will be difficult to resolve the series of conflicts
and crises afflicting the Middle East and to reverse
the rise of terrorism and extremism unless a just and
durable solution is found to the Arab-Israeli conflict
in the Holy Land. The brutal and prolonged occupation
of Palestine and the denial of self-determination and
statehood for the Palestinian people is the epicentre
and a key source of the conflicts that now consume the
entire region. The violence within the Israeli occupied
territories will not remain insulated from the conflict
raging across Israel's imposed frontiers.

Pakistan rejects the recently announced Israeli plan
to construct 300 new settlement units in the West Bank.
With every new settlement plan the Israeli Government
is systematically sabotaging the possibility of the two-
State solution - the only viable option for durable peace
and one that has been accepted by the parties, as well
as by the international community. But impunity is not
limited just to settlements. As Amnesty International
pointed out last month, there is also no accountability
for extrajudicial killings by occupation forces.

We appreciate last week's Security Council meeting
in the Arria Formula format on the issue of Israeli
settlements. Yet what is needed now is to follow up the
talk with action. The inability of the Council and major
Powers to halt the expansion of Israeli settlements
and enforce the two-State solution has encouraged
the Israeli leadership to entrench its obduracy and
intransigence. The Council must categorically reject
and condemn Israeli moves to create a fait accompli
to defeat the two-State solution. Indeed, the occupying
Power should recognize that its political identity would
not survive in a one-State alternative. It would only
reinforce its character as an apartheid State.
Pakistan remains committed to supporting the
Palestinian people in their legitimate struggle for their
right to self-determination and statehood. We firmly
believe that the creation of an independent, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine, based on pre-1967 borders
and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is an essential
prerequisite to sustainable peace in the Middle East.

The grim situation in Syria represents the sum of
our tragedies: foreign interference, State repression,
terrorism, and ethnic and religious divisions. The
Syrian conflict, epitomized today by Aleppo, has
caused human suffering and a refugee crisis on a scale
that is unprecedented since the end of the Second World
War. Syria's domestic divisions are now inextricably
intertwined with the complex and competing interests
and alliances of regional and major Powers.

The challenge the world confronts in Syria is
multifaceted. That challenge is to defeat Da'esh and
other terrorist organizations; to restore the rights of
all of Syria's people, minorities and majorities, while
preserving the country's territorial integrity; and
to ensure that the sources of terrorism and violence
in Syria do not spread to its neighbours and beyond.
Pakistan commends the patient and heroic efforts
of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and urges all
concerned parties, including the regional States and
major Powers, to work together with the Special Envoy
to untangle the vicious web of violence and suffering
in Syria.

In Iraq, a diverse coalition is finally imposing
military reversals on Da'esh. It is hoped that it will
soon be ejected from Mosul. The world welcomes
the progressive demolition of the self-styled Islamic
State. Its various terrorist manifestations within and
outside the region will also have to be contained more
vigorously. Military success against Da'esh will also
need to be accompanied by credible political measures
to reconcile the ethnic and denominational differences
within Iraq and the associated rivalries among
regional Powers that have prevented the restoration
of peace and stability in the country since the 2003
foreign intervention.

The conflict in Yemen has also created devastating
chaos and human suffering. The intensity and impact
of that conflict has been exacerbated by external
factors. The realization of peace in Yemen must be
based on the restoration of international legitimacy
and the reconciliation of the political, religious and
tribal differences within the country. We hope that the
ceasefire that is expected to go into effect in a few hours
time will be a harbinger of mutual accommodation,
leading to enduring change.

Finally, Pakistan has a vital stake in the solution of
the multiple conflicts that afflict the Middle East today.
We will work with sincerity and purpose to help in any
effort to resolve such crises and re-establish peace and
security in that central part of the Islamic world.

