Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to express appreciation for the comprehensive
briefings on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals delivered by
President Carmel Agius, President President Theodor
Meron and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Theodor Meron on
the renewal of his mandate as President of the Residual
Mechanism and Mr. Brammertz on his appointment as
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.

As current Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, I congratulate my predecessor,
Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet, and his entire team
for their excellent work leadingh the Informal Working
Group over the past two years. I also appreciate the
ongoing support of the Office of Legal Affairs and the
United Nations Secretariat in fulfilling this task.

I wish to express Uruguay's firm commitment to
the work of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Residual Mechanism.
My country recognizes their important contribution
to international justice in situations of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of genocide, as
well as their contribution to national reconciliation
in the countries concerned. We note with satisfaction
the progress achieved in the judicial activities of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and
we welcome the forecast that these activities will be
concluded by the end of 2017.

We welcome the fact that since the arrest of Ratko
Mladic' and Goran Hadzie in 2011, no other fugitives
have been accused by the Tribunal of grave violations
of international humanitarian law. We take note of the
pending challenges of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia in carrying out their completion
strategies and the difficulties encountered along the
way. The problem of staff retention, especially of
middle- and high-level officials, was clearly described
by President Agius, and his call for attention should be
heard. Impediments to effective cooperation have also
been highlighted by the President and Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Political obstacles, technical difficulties, the
lack of a regional legal framework are some of the
reasons behind the situation. Faced with this, we must
immediately open dialogue to find possible solutions,
in particular in relation to the lack of information on
arrest warrants, as noted in the report (S/2016/454, annex I). We also note Prosecutor Brammertz's
statement concerning the lack of information on the
disappeared, which represents for their families one of
the main problems to be solved.

Uruguay recognizes the importance of making
progress in identifying human remains and understands
that it is not just an obligation to the victims' families,
but that it also serves as a vital step towards national
reconciliation. This conviction is based on my own
country's recent experience. We went through the
processes of truth, justice, recognition and reparations
in order to move along the path to national reconciliation.

In regard to the Residual Mechanism, Uruguay is
pleased to note that the forecast timeline of its legal
activities are the same as those provided in the previous
report of November 2015 (S/2015/883, annex I) with a
few provisos in the latest report (S/2016/453, annex I).
That means that, without prejudice to the Tribunal's
particular manner of operating or the unforeseen or
extraordinary events that may arise to affect it, there is
a timeline that remains in effect, which we interpret to
be a positive sign.

We recognize and value the important work of the
Mechanism in supporting and protecting witnesses,
in sentence enforcement and in monitoring the cases
that have been forwarded by the ICTY and the ICTR
to national jurisdictions. We take note of the priority
that the Mechanism is giving to the search for and
prosecution of the eight persons indicted by the ICTR
who remain fugitives, as well as the importance of the
cooperation of States to achieving those ends and to
enforcing sentences, to having access to documents and
files and to reaching witnesses. We therefore take note
of the appeal to the international community to reflect
on measures that could be taken to encourage States to
cooperate.
We would make a similar appeal with respect to
the problems posed by the reintegration of released or
acquitted persons and to the dialogue the Mechanism
is undertaking with the States that have indicated their
willingness to receive one or more of those persons. In
that regard, we welcome and especially appreciate the
efforts and the arrangements made by the President of
the Mechanism.

Finally, we would like to express our full readiness
to consider any new and updated proposal that the
authorities of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the Mechanism consider
to be of interest in the search for a solution to those
and other problems. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Criminal Tribunals, we are
committed to making every effort to achieve that end.

