Mr. Wilkie used the following title for the interview:
"Now Mattis Admits There Was No Evidence Assad
Used Poison Gas on His People." That was said by the
American Defence Secretary, not the Syrian Defence
Minister. What a harmonious Administration!

On 10 December 2012, some six years ago, we
submitted a formal letter to the Council (S/2012/917),
before the operators of terrorist groups claimed, for the
first time, that sarin gas was used in Khan Al-Assal
on 19 March 2013. We informed the Council that the
United States, the United Kingdom and France had
launched a campaign of allegations claiming that the
Syrian Government may have used chemical weapons.
Back then, we warned that such allegations would
encourage Governments that sponsor terrorists to
provide chemical weapons to armed terrorist groups
and then claim that the Syrian Government had used
such weapons. What happened in the past few years
in Khan Al-Assal, Ghouta, Kafr Zita, Lataminah, Tal
Minis, Khan Shaykhun and many other villages and
towns in Syria confirms unequivocally what we had
warned of five to six years ago, and during all these
six years.

The United States, the United Kingdom and France
have been extremely eager to hold one meeting after
another based on fabricated information. That is part
of the deep crisis that we are witnessing. They want
to involve other Council members in that crisis. Since
2013, those three countries have created a big elephant
oflies and deceit in the Security Council. That elephant
is living in the Chamber today and is stomping on the
credibility of the Council with its huge feet. It seems
that these countries called for the holding of today's
meeting to support terrorists and to obstruct the
agreement reached about Douma.

However, those countries were a bit late because the
terrorists had hoped this meeting would be held before
they were forced to reach an agreement with the Syrian
State to leave their strongholds and hand over their
weapons. These countries were late in fulfilling their
promises to the terrorists. It would have been better not
to repeat their nasty story and not to rely on false reports
from mercenaries - so-called White Helmets, founded
by British intelligence officer James Le Mesurier. He is
British, but his name is French. What proves that these
countries were lying is that the residents of Douma left
the city safely - 170,000 civilians left the city safely.
Those terrorists chose to reach an agreement with the
Syrian State as a last resort for them and their families.
Many buses are transferring them and their families
to the city of Jarabulus, after they refused to settle
their affairs and chose to go there. However, the vast
majority of residents chose to stay in their houses and
resort to the Syrian State.

It has been proven that the allegations of certain
States, including some States members of the Council,
on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in eastern
Ghouta were lies, just as we saw in Aleppo and other
places. As it turned out, terrorist group warehouses
were full of medication and food, monopolized by their
elements who sold some of those items to civilians at
exorbitant prices. At this point, I must ask: Did the three
countries call for this meeting in order to legitimize
the Israeli aggression that occurred this morning or to
impede the implementation of the agreement reached
with their terrorist tools?

In this context, I must thank the delegation of the
Russian Federation for recognizing the true nature
of what these countries were preparing for, and aptly
called for the meeting to be held under the agenda item
"Threats to international peace and security". That is
the correct agenda item.

We have conveyed to the Security Council,
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and what used to be called the
Joint Investigative Mechanism 145 letters, the latest
on 1 April 2018. I thank the Permanent Representative
of Kazakhstan for pointing out that the Council
members do not read and that the Council does not
respond to those letters. The letters contain accurate
information. They indicate that armed terrorist groups
possess toxic chemical substances, notably chlorine
and sarin. We have warned time and again that those
groups were preparing to commit crimes involving
chemical weapons against innocent Syrians, and were
working with the White Helmets to fabricate evidence,
photograph locations and film Hollywood-like scenes
with everything staged in order to blame the Syrian
Government and influence public opinion against Syria
and its allies. Those countries call for the holding of
meetings such as this in order to create a pretext that
would justify any military aggression against Syria.

It seems that the directors of that terrorist scene
failed to perfect their web of lies. We note that in each
of those theatrical scenes on the alleged use of chemical
weapons by the Syrian Government, the substances
never seem to affect the armed elements, but only
women and children. These chemical weapons seem
to discriminate against women and children and do
not affect armed men. It suffices to wash away these
chemicals with water in front of the camera. Water
appears to heal everything. Rescue workers never need
to wear protective masks. The Syrian Arab Army does
not use these substances because it does not possess
them to begin with. The Americans destroyed them on
the vessel MV Cape Ray in the Mediterranean. So, the
Syrian Arab Army uses these substances, which it does
not possess, only when it is making military progress.
How strange that is!

This vehement campaign lacks the minimum
standards of credibility. It relies on fabricated
information on social media by elements of armed
terrorist groups and their operators. I announce from
this table that the Syrian Government is fully prepared
to facilitate an OPCW fact-finding mission to Douma,
where the incident is alleged to have occurred, as soon
as possible to investigate and verify these allegations.
We endorse the Russian proposal to hear a briefing
on the fact-finding mission's report after its visit to
Al-Raqqa. We welcome this visit as soon as possible.

I hope that this offer does not suffer the same fate
as the first offer we made to former Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon after the Khan Al-Assal incident of
chemical substance use in March 2013. At that time,
we asked the Secretary-General to provide assistance
to the Syrian Government in immediately investigating
what happened in the town of Khan Al-Assal. It took
the United Nations four months and 11 days to send
Mr. Sellstrom, as Council members recall. Yes, it
took the United Nations four months and 11 days.
That is how the United Nations interpreted the term
"immediately" - four months and 11 days. When
Mr. Sellstrom arrived in Damascus to investigate what
had happened in Khan Al-Assal, terrorists in Ghouta
were instructed to use chemical substances again.
Mr. Sellstrom therefore left Khan Al-Assal and moved
to Ghouta. Council members should be aware that since
March 2013, investigations into what happened in Khan
Al-Assal have not taken place.

Today, we directly accuse Washington, DC, Paris,
London, Riyadh, Doha and Ankara ofproviding Da'esh,
Al-Nusra Front, Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman
and scores of other affiliated terrorist groups with
toxic chemical substances to be used against Syrian
civilians. We accuse them of inciting those massacres
and of fabricating evidence to falsely blame the Syrian
Government for the use of toxic chemical substances in
order to prepare the ground for an aggression against
my country, just as the United States and the United
Kingdom did in Iraq in 2003.

Yes, we say to the United States, the United Kingdom
and France that, in Syria and Iraq, we eliminated the vast
majority of Da'esh elements within three years - not
within 30 years, as President Obama has said. Those
States have plans to justify undermining the stability
of the region. Yes, we say to Saudi Arabia today that
we cut off its terrorist tentacles - the gangs of Jaysh
Al-Islam - in eastern Ghouta. Yes, we say to Qatar and
Turkey that we cut off their terrorist tentacles - the
gangs of the Al-Nusra Front and F aylaq al-Rahman - in
eastern Ghouta. I say to all those who sent moderate,
armed, genetically modified opposition fighters to our
land that we eliminated these toxic exports. We call
on those exporters to bear the consequences of their
actions, as some surviving elements will return to their
original countries.
The issue is very simple. Let me just say that on
our borders with Turkey and in the separation zone
in the Golan with Israel, there are tens of thousands
of good, moderate terrorists with their light weapons,
long beards, black banners and white helmets. Whoever
wants to adopt them should submit an application to
their operators. They are ready to go to Europe and the
West as refugees.

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic stresses
once again that it does not possess chemical weapons
of any type, including chlorine. We condemn anew the
use of chemical weapons at anytime, anywhere and
in any circumstances. My country, Syria, reaffirms
its readiness to cooperate fully with the OPCW in
fulfilling its commitments under the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
their Destruction.

The Russian Centre for Reconciliation in Syria
announced today that Russian military experts have
carried out investigations in Douma and confirmed that
they have found no sign of the use of chemical weapons
there. While treating the sick in the hospitals of Douma,
Russian doctors have proven that these patients have
not been subjected to any chemical substance. What
we were seeing there was nothing but Hollywood-
style scenes.

