Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like first of all to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ngongi for their respective
briefings.

The Security Council has held two public
meetings this month on the question of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This is clear evidence that the
Security Council and the parties concerned attach great
importance to the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Ngongi for the efforts he has made over the past
two years at the head of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) to advance the peace process in
that country.

In June I took part in the Council's mission to
Central Africa and was a witness to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as to the
poverty in Ituri and Bunia. As a result, I understand
better the difficult circumstances in which Mr. Ngongi
has been working and the contributions he has made to
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I wish also to express my congratulations to
Mr. Ngongi, because, as he was leaving, the
Transitional Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was established. I believe that this
represents the best possible culmination of his two
years in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish
him every success in his new capacity.

I wish also to express my appreciation to the
European Union-led Interim Emergency Multinational
Force for its efforts to stabilize the situation in Bunia.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been an ongoing source of concern for
China. We are pleased to note that in the past several
months significant progress has been made in the peace
process in that country. In early April, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
parties concerned reached agreement on transitional
arrangements. President Kabila was later sworn in as
the head of the Transitional Government. On 30 June
the Transitional Government was formally established,
and yesterday four Vice-Presidents were sworn in.

All of these events are testimony to the fact that
the various parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have gradually moved onto the path of political
reconciliation, peace and national unity. We have
always believed that the fundamental resolution of the
question of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
depends on the efforts of the Congolese people
themselves. We sincerely hope that the various parties
in that country will proceed on the basis of the long-
term and fundamental interests of the people and that
they will seek common ground while putting aside their
differences and working in a spirit of national
reconciliation and mutual understanding. We hope that
they will implement the agreements in good faith so as
to promote the peace process.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a vast
territory and a wealth of natural resources. We
sincerely hope that the various parties in that country
will put aside past differences and work jointly, in a
harmonious and cooperative manner, to bring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into a new era of
peace, stability, prosperity and development.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is at a crucial stage. The international
community must increase its political, economic and
financial contributions to it so that the Transitional
Government can receive the necessary support.

China supports the idea that, as a result of the
latest development, the mandate and size of MONUC
should be adjusted. We support the adoption by the
Council of a draft resolution on this issue at an early
date. We hope that an expanded and modified MONUC
will make further positive contributions to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the recently concluded second summit of the
African Union, the African States reached a broad
consensus on the integration of the African Union and
the prevention and settlement of regional conflicts in
Africa. They also put forward many practical measures.
These will help to create a sound external environment
for the settlement of conflict in Africa, including that
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We are convinced that, with the strong support of
the international community and joint efforts on the
part of the African countries and peoples, conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Africa at
large will be resolved fully and at an early date. The
Chinese Government has always fully promoted the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We have contributed military observers,
military engineers and medical teams to MONUC, and
we have also participated in the international
committee in support of the transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I wish to reiterate
here that China, will, as always, work with all the
parties concerned to play a constructive role in the
political resolution of the issue of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

