Mr. Berger (Germany): Let me begin by
welcoming Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, and Mr. Ivan Mrkic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, to the Council. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing and
comprehensive report (S/2012/818), which gives reason
for cautious optimism.

First and foremost, we welcome the fact that the
European Union-led dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo has finally resumed at the highest political
level. That is an essential step forward and we fully
support the efforts of High Representative Baroness
Ashton as facilitator.

As pointed out by Ms. Ashton and Secretary Clinton
during their recent visit to Belgrade and Pristina, the
common goal needs to be the normalization of relations
between both countries. Such normalization, with good-
neighbourly relations as a result, is paramount if both
Serbia and Kosovo are to advance towards ultimately
becoming European Union members with full rights
and obligations.

We commend the willingness of the leaders on both
sides to invest their political capital in that process.
That capital will soon need to translate into concrete
and tangible results on the ground, starting with the
operation of the first border posts in the framework
of the integrated border management by December, as
agreed by the two Prime Ministers at their most recent
meeting on 7 November.

My country also welcomes the steps taken by
both sides to finally implement the agreement on the
representation of Kosovo in regional organizations. We
welcome the participation of the Serbian and Kosovar
delegations in numerous regional conferences over
the past few weeks. That dynamic needs to continue,
with Kosovo's effective representation in the Regional
Cooperation Council being the next important step.

We also support Kosovo's further integration into
the international community. We therefore welcome
the recent Board decision of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development to admit Kosovo as
a member. However, the implementation of agreements
concluded months ago will not be sufficient. A crucial
issue that would and should be addressed urgently
as part of the dialogue is the continued existence of
parallel Serbian State structures in northern Kosovo.

Regarding the areas of security, the judiciary and
municipal administration, there is persistent violation
of resolution 1244 (1999), which constitutes a constant
threat to stability. A positive step would be the
establishment of a multi-ethnic police unit by Pristina
with a clear mandate to improve the protection of
Serbian Orthodox religious sites. Both sides should also
seriously consider the proposed liaison arrangements in
their respective capitals. That could obviously facilitate
future discussions and provide important practical
support to citizens of the other country.

Any solution to those controversial issues will
need to be understood and accepted by the people in
Serbia and Kosovo. We therefore encourage political
leaders in both countries to reach out to their respective
constituencies in order to prepare them for the difficult
decisions and painful compromises ahead. That is
particularly relevant with regard to northern Kosovo.
The newly established Mitrovica North administrative
office can play a positive role in Pristina's outreach
towards the Serb communities in that regard. We
therefore condemn the reported cases of intimidation
and threats against the staff.
Ultimately, both sides need to understand that
further progress lies in their national interest. It will
free resources that are now tied up in dealing with the
ongoing conflict and allow both countries to advance
on their path towards European Union (EU) integration.

My second point is on the security situation in
Kosovo, which has remained calm, despite occasional
security incidents in the north. We fully support the
approach of Mr. Zarif to urge the perpetrators of such
acts to refrain from violence and to engage in a peaceful
dialogue with all relevant stakeholders.

We also join him in strongly condemning
recurring attacks by Kosovo Serbian actors against
the international presence on the ground, including the
reported attack on 7 September against the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo police.

The EU remains committed to further supporting
Kosovo's law enforcement authorities. The extension
of the EULEX mandate until June 2014 will allow the
mission to continue its capacity-building efforts in the
rule of law sector and to support the Kosovo authorities
in the prosecution of war crimes, organized crime and
corruption.

In that context, we specifically welcome progress
made by the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force
by, inter alia, ensuring Montenegro's support and
cooperation in the ongoing investigations. We call on
all partners to respect the Task Force's restraint in
commenting publicly on its findings while investigations
are still ongoing. We concur with the Secretary-
General's analysis that publishing confidential
testimony would jeopardize further investigations and
ultimately put the lives of witnesses at risk.

We also condemn all statements questioning the
impartiality of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. Such statements only serve to
undermine the mandate and authority of that institution.
The judgments and decisions of an independent
judiciary cannot be rated on their ability to please all
parties involved.

To conclude, let me reiterate our strong support for
the commitment of both parties to seriously engage in
the EU-led dialogue. Progress in the dialogue process
will serve as a catalyst for Serbia's and Kosovo's
European aspirations - aspirations that Germany
unequivocally supports.

