Ms. ngu (Nigeria): Allow me, Mr. President, to
convey the very warm congratulations of my
delegation to you on your assumption of the Presidency
of the Council and to assure you of our unalloyed
support. We are also grateful to Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
for his second report pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), which outlines the important progress made in
the ongoing investigations in Libya.

Nigeria remains firmly committed to the fight
against impunity and is supportive of the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) aimed at ensuring
that impunity is addressed decisively, wherever it
occurs. We believe that the fight against impunity is the
collective responsibility of States, the ICC and relevant
stakeholders. It is imperative, therefore, for States to
cooperate to ensure the realization of that objective. In
that connection, we welcome the ICC's ongoing
contact with the Libyan authorities. Of equal
significance is the pledge by the National Transitional
Council to cooperate with the Court to ensure justice
for victims in Libya.

The work of the ICC is absolutely central to the
restoration of stability of Libya, a nation not only in
transition but one in search of healing. The systematic
and widespread violations of human rights orchestrated
by the former regime have no doubt left not only open
veins but also physical and emotional scars in Libya.
However, an objective, well managed investigation and
prosecution will not only restore confidence to
segments of Libya but should lead to national
reconciliation, a crucial ingredient in national healing.

We are deeply concerned that the escape of the
indictees from Libya could have significant security
and political implications for neighbouring States in
West Africa, especially Niger and Mali. Indeed, the
countries of the Sahel region have already expressed
great apprehension about the illegal movement of small
arms and light weapons within the region. We cannot
afford to see the Sahel region or neighbouring
countries turn into bases from which subversive
activities could be launched, maintained or sustained
against the people of Libya and the region.

We note with satisfaction the cooperation
extended to the ICC by States and regional and

international organizations, pursuant to paragraph 5 of
resolution l970(2011), which has contributed in no
small measure to the positive results achieved thus far
in the investigations of the cases in Libya. We stress
the need for continued cooperation with the Court, as
that will help expedite completion of the current
investigations. We encourage the ICC to be relentless
in its collaboration with the United Nations
Commission of Inquiry and the African Commission
for Human and People's Rights in their work and to
ensure that gender crimes and attacks on foreign
nationals and black African migrants are appropriately
addressed in their investigations.

We believe that, in the light of recent and
evolving developments in Libya, the ICC and the
Libyan authorities must work closely to develop ways
and means of advancing the ongoing investigations
with a view to providing justice to Libya's victims.

