Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank our briefers, Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock.
We are grateful to UNICEF Executive Director
Henrietta Fore for her worrisome assessment and to the
Permanent Representative of Peru for organizing the
important visit by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2140 (2014). We welcome the progress
made by the United Nations team under Mr. Griffiths
in inducing the Yemeni parties to implement the
agreements reached in Stockholm. We have also
noted the professionalism of Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard's efforts.

The launch of the first phase of the redeployment
of armed forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa is a crucial step in implementing the
broader plan for disengaging the opposing parties. We
understand that this is only a beginning. The bulk of the
work still lies ahead. However, it is now already clear
that those initial results were made possible only thanks
to the delicate diplomatic efforts of the United Nations
and the help of external actors, based on a respectful
attitude to all the parties and focused on compromise
and a professional understanding of the concerns of
all involved. The strategic goal - launching a fully
fledged political process in order to discuss all the
political parameters of a comprehensive solution - is
unchanged. We believe that a window of opportunity
is opening for implementing other aspects of the
Stockholm Agreement, including the exchange of
prisoners and de-escalation in Taiz and other regions.

We believe that the further deployment of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
will help to normalize the city and stabilize the situation
in Yemen as a whole, and we urge all the parties to work
together to achieve that. The impartial mediation of the
United Nations is crucial, but it can succeed only if it
is founded on the good faith of the parties and their
desire to stabilize the situation in their own country.
What is absolutely essential is ensuring that everything
possible is done to avoid any provocative steps that
could threaten the prospects for a peaceful settlement
and that certainly would not advance the United
Nations efforts. The task of consolidating the efforts of
the external actors and the parties to the conflict based
on a platform of achieving a lasting solution has never
been as urgent as it is today.

We call on the members of the Security Council
to continue their collective efforts to put the conflict
back on the political track, establish a comprehensive
ceasefire and provide the Yemeni people with the help
they need. It will be crucial to work consistently with
all the parties and influential stakeholders. Russia
will continue to provide support to the United Nations
mediation efforts to resolve the differences in Yemen.

As Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore's reports
showed - and, by the way, we greatly appreciate the
courageous and selfless work of the United Nations
humanitarian actors in Yemen and other crisis
areas - the humanitarian situation in the country is
still harrowing. We have been sadly forced to conclude
that the country is in the grip of a serious humanitarian
crisis that has brought the civilian population
incalculable suffering. The country's infrastructure has
been destroyed. It is difficult to grasp the fact that in the
twenty-first century, as a result of this senseless war, the
people of Yemen, including women and children, are
starving, without essential medicines or social services
and in need of one kind of basic assistance or another.

Itisonlythankstothe selflessefforts ofhumanitarian
workers that a humanitarian collapse has been averted
in the country. The priority job right now is providing
Yemenis with emergency humanitarian assistance, and
Russia will continue to contribute to helping them.
We do that consistently. We want to emphasize that
humanitarian assistance coming to Yemen from abroad
must be provided to the country's entire population,
without discrimination and regardless of who controls
which territory. That is crucial not only to solving the
humanitarian problems but also with regard to future
national reconciliation issues. But we can all see clearly
that resolving the humanitarian crisis is no panacea.
The solution lies exclusively in the political arena.
And, needless to say, we place great hopes in the United
Nations mediation and diplomatic efforts and those of
Mr. Griffiths, to whom we will extend active help in
that regard.

We call on the parties to the conflict in Yemen to
show restraint and ensure unhindered humanitarian
access to every area of the country. The main thing is
cooperating actively with the United Nations mediation
efforts and supporting them rather than making them
harder. We urge everyone to immediately refrain from
the indiscriminate use of force and from damaging the
country's oil infrastructure. But before assigning blame
there must be a professional and objective investigation.

In the circumstances, Russia's proposal for
launching a process in the Persian Gulf for developing a
package of security and confidence-building measures
has become especially relevant and could help not only
to stabilize that part of the world but also to resolve
various new as well as protracted crisis situations,
including the conflict in Yemen. We believe it is
essential to ensure that all the countries of the region
participate in this, including the Persian Gulf States
and Iran. Positive assistance in advancing this process
and an immediate, urgent de-escalation of the situation
in this part of the world are needed. Only joint efforts
aimed at cooperation rather than confrontation can lead
to the establishment of comprehensive and indivisible
security in the Middle East.

