Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his useful briefing, as
well as his active and personal involvement together
with his African Union (AU) Commission counterpart
Ismail Chergui in the review process of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We thank both the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the AU Commission for the special
report (S/2018/530), which certainly provides us with
an analysis of the conflict, highlighting the current
security situation and conflict-drivers in Darfur,
the political and humanitarian situation, as well as
the development needs critical for avoiding a relapse
into conflict.

We have all said time and again that the overall
security situation in Darfur remains generally stable.
Intercommunal violence has decreased significantly
and there has been a continuous improvement in
humanitarian access across Darfur. That has also been
confirmed by the report on the joint strategic review
of the African Union and the United Nations. The visit
of the AU Peace and Security Council also resulted in
similar observations. That is why the Chairperson of the
AU Commission and the Secretary-General are arguing
that improvements in the overall security situation in
Darfur have created the conditions for UNAMID to
prepare its exit after over 10 years in the Sudan.

Of course, the root causes of the conflict in
Darfur remain largely unaddressed, but UNAMID no
longer represents the appropriate tool to address those
remaining challenges. The strategic review clearly
states that the situation in Darfur can be characterized
no longer as an armed conflict between Government
forces and non-State actors, but as lawlessness and
criminality, aggravated by a protracted humanitarian
crisis, problems related to human rights and the lack
of development. In that context, the transition from
peacekeeping to sustaining peace and the role of the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, highlighted by the strategic review, is indeed
very appropriate.

We believe that there is certainly a need for a
paradigm shift in our approach to dealing with the Darfur
situation. The Sudanese Government has demonstrated
its political will to sustainably address the challenges
in the region. It has also exerted many efforts to address
the challenges the Sudan as a whole is facing. What
is expected from the international community is to
intensify efforts in assisting the Government's efforts
and to help in relieving the suffering of the people
of Darfur.

The American engagement with the Sudan is a case
in point, and we are seeing how it has contributed to
developments not only in Darfur, but also in other issues
of peace and security. But engagement is not the only
solution. The Sudan needs immediate and substantial
financial support, and I take this opportunity to thank
Sweden for taking the lead in changing the approach
in that regard. I hope that will be emulated by other
partners as well.

The Government is exerting efforts to find a
durable solution to the high number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), without which sustainable
peace in Darfur cannot be ensured. I am sure we all
appreciate the fact that the challenges with regard to
IDPs, particularly that of land and providing basic
services, are huge and will not be addressed by the
efforts of the Government alone. It requires significant
assistance from the international community, which, so
far, has been very meagre, save for modest assistance
from a very few countries.

The Government is also trying to fill the void that
could be created by the closure of some of UNAMID's
team sites by putting in place law enforcement and
rule of law institutions, such as courts and police
stations, that address issues related to the security of
the communities. Unfortunately, those efforts have
been similarly constrained by the lack of capacity
and resources. The weapons-collection campaign
has contributed considerably to the mitigation of
intercommunal violence. That is an effort worth
supporting, given its immediate impact on the return
of IDPs and their long-term implications for stability
in Darfur.

The enormous gains registered in Darfur can
be ensured only through sustained financing for the
development efforts of the Government. That is why
we are asking for a change of approach from the
international community towards the Sudan. As the
report on the joint strategic review rightly observes,

"We have invested too much in Darfur over the last
decade and a halfto risk it backsliding into conflict
due to a lack of resources" (5/2018/530, para. 70).

It is only through investment in recovery and
peacebuilding efforts that we can avert the possibility
of conflict relapse in Darfur. We hope that the request
from the President of the Republic of the Sudan,
expressing his interest in the Sudan's being declared
eligible to receive funds from the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, will be accepted. The AU Peace
and Security Council has also supported that request,
and since members of the Peace and Security Council
are coming to New York next month, we hope that
they will engage the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission on the matter.
The other important aspect that needs a paradigm
shift is the approach to the Darfur peace process. We
see no reason for the Council not to have a unified
position on Abdul Wahid and his group. He is totally
uninterested in any peace process. We have been
briefed for quite some time, and have regrettably failed
to take any action in that regard. The bottom line is
that he should not be allowed to hold the peace process
hostage. He should face the appropriate measures for
his destructive role.

Although the remaining rebel groups have also
not shown any interest in ensuring peace in Darfur,
it is a public secret that those groups are engaged in
criminal activity in Libya and South Sudan, amassing
huge resources. The lack of commitment on the part
of the rebel groups definitely emanates from that fact
and appropriate pressure must be applied in order to
change their calculations. Otherwise, those groups will
pose a problem not only to the Sudan, but to the entire
region and the larger international community as well.
They should not be allowed to benefit from their illegal
activities in Libya and South Sudan, using the Darfur
peace process as a pretext. If they continue in their
refusal to meaningfully participate in the peace process,
the Council should deal with them as transnational
organized criminal groups, and not as Darfuri rebels.

Finally, we support a whole-of-system approach
to Darfur, as jointly recommended by the Secretary-
General and the AU Commission Chairperson, as well
as to peacekeeping activities in the most precarious
areas where the protection of civilians, humanitarian
support and mediation of local conflict remain
necessities to further the peace process, while also
investing substantively in peacebuilding, recovery
and development all over Darfur to further the peace
process there. We also support the redefined priorities
of UNAMID, based on that whole-of-system approach.
We hope that it will be taken into account in renewing
the mandate of UNAMID.

Finally, we support the extension of the mandate of
the Mission for another 12 months, and we look forward
to engaging constructively in the upcoming negotiations.

