The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of the Russian Federation. We are grateful to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh Annadif for his briefing about the situation in Mali and the work of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). As we see it, in the current circumstances, the Security Council must continue to focus on the situation in the country. We remain very concerned about the situation in Mali after the coup d'etat of 18 August. We are in favour of creating conditions for the speediest possible resumption of the national dialogue to develop mechanisms to return the country to constitutional order. We have taken note of the decisions made by the interim authorities in this regard, including the transition charter and the appointments of the President and the Prime Minister. The formation of a ministerial Cabinet is also a step in the right direction. We welcome the discharge from custody of former Prime Minister Boubou Cisse and other high-ranking officials arrested on 18 August. We expect that the terms of the transition period - 18 months - will be strictly ry ' upheld, to be followed by general elections. 'str!Prospects for stabilization in Mali also depend on whether the new authorities and other political forces will scrupulously follow the Algiers Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that this will be subject to constructive dialogue with signatory groups. Security and governance reforms should continue, and the interests of all peoples of the country, especially in its northern territories, must be duly taken into accounted. Terrorists, who, judging by their increased attacks, feel increasingly comfortable, must not be given an opportunity to benefit from the current predicaments. Militants' improvised explosive devices are impacting civilians more and more often, as was the case in September, when a bus and an ambulance were attacked. Especially alarming is the situation in Mopti, which is the arena of recurrent attacks on military patrols and convoys. Violent inter-ethnic and intercommunal clashes continue in the centre of the country. In general, Mali has suffered an increase in assaults and abductions, an upsurge of delinquency, racketeering and robberies, and rising numbers of human rights violations. The humanitarian situation is also of great concern. The coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) has exacerbated the need for food assistance. Schools remain closed and medical facilities are overburdened. This calls for an urgent reaction on the part of humanitarian agencies. We support the efforts of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the area of political mediation for Mali. We highly commend the role of ECOWAS and its Special Envoy for Mali, Mr. Goodluck Jonathan. We call on the Malian authorities to closely engage with colleagues in the region. We welcome the fact that steps aimed at the restoration of constitutional rule have led to the lifting of ECOWAS restrictions for Mali. We must be mindful that the situation in Mali is a key factor for regional security. We expect that the Malian armed forces will continue to fully participate in the operations of Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and that decisions to galvanize counter-terrorist action, made at the regional summit in Nouakchott, will be put into effect. Bamako and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) must by all means pursue their close cooperation and coordinated activities. Peacekeepers must proceed with the efficient implementation of their mandate in Mali's northern and central regions. We welcome the assistance of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, through MINUSMA, and its help in countering COVID-19. Atthe same time, we stress that the main responsibility for the protection of civilians, the restoration of control over the northern territories and the resolution of socioeconomic and other problems, is incumbent on the Malians themselves. In conclusion, we express our appreciation to Special Representative Annadif for his effective leadership of the Mission. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
