Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We, too, would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. lessen-Petersen, for his
interesting and comprehensive introduction to the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We would like to commend him for the work that he is
doing as head of that Mission. I would also like to
welcome the presence today of Mr. Covic', President of
the Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and
of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.

Spain also fully supports the statement to be
made later by the representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
regarding the level of implementation of the standards
for Kosovo, as well as of the need to make a concerted
effort to make more resolute progress in their
implementation. It is clear that UNMIK's fundamental
task must be to make progress in the eight areas, with
priority actions being taken with regard to each of
them.

We welcome the fact that the general election of
23 October in Kosovo was peaceful, although we regret
that the Kosovo Serbs did not participate. Now that the
new Kosovo Government is about to be constituted, we
consider it vital that the focus be on the
implementation of the standards, on which a great deal
remains to be done. We are particularly concerned
about the limited progress in key areas, such as the
return of displaced persons and refugees and efforts at
reconciliation, as well as in the area of security and
freedom of movement for the members of minority
groups.

It is alarming that - in particular as a result of
the violent events of last March - the number of
forced displacements in 2004 is higher than the number
of those able to return to their homes, in spite of the
effort to rebuild homes and schools following those
incidents. There is therefore a need for a more
ambitious policy to encourage return, which would
clearly include offering an attractive and credible
future to the Serbs and other members of minorities in
a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

With regard to security, we hope that the local
crime prevention councils will contribute to meeting
the legitimate concerns of the members of the various
minorities. Likewise, KFOR, to which Spain is an
active contributor, will continue to play an essential
role in the maintenance of security. But security can be
sustainable in the long term only if the Provisional
Institutions develop a broad programme that reaches
out to the Serbs of Kosovo and the members of other
minorities - one that is reflected in concrete advances,
including measures for the employment of members of
the minorities in the public administration at various
levels. At the same time, it would be appropriate to
consider the transfer of certain competencies to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government -
something that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General might see fit to do when the time is
right.

As the Secretary-General has indicated, this
process should be accompanied by related
responsibility and accountability on the part of the
Provisional Institutions, and closer monitoring,
including, if necessary, the imposition of sanctions by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In
the event of such a development, the transfer of
competencies related to security should be carried out
with the greatest care, and the Special Representative
should retain supreme control over all the police forces
of Kosovo.

Furthermore, we consider it essential that the
direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade be
resumed and strengthened, against the backdrop of the
assessment of the implementation of standards to be
carried out by the Council in mid-2005, which could,
in turn, lead to a process of determining the statutory
future of Kosovo. It is of paramount importance that
the two capitals remain in constant contact.

Finally, I would like to refer to the importance of
the economic and social aspects, with regard to which
the European Union is playing a very important role.
Economic development, which must be based on an
appropriate legal framework, is fundamental if
progress is to be sustained in the other areas and
stability and confidence generated among the various
components of the Kosovo population.

Spain supports the establishment of an integrated
strategy to move forward in implementing the
standards for Kosovo, with a view to the assessment
that will be conducted in mid-2005. The objective in
this regard remains that of a multi-ethnic, democratic
Kosovo based on the rule of law and steadily integrated
in European structures.

