Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, and your country on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month.
We also thank you very much for convening this open
debate today.

Let me at the outset reiterate the importance
that Botswana attaches to the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. It is for this reason that, as a member
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), we are proud of the role we play in contributing
to a peaceful world order. Our belief is that, the role
of regional or subregional organizations in promoting
peace and security is closely linked to the larger role
played by the Council in discharging its mandate.
While we believe in the supremacy of the Security
Council in discharging its mandate, as provided for in
Article 24 of the Charter United Nations, we believe
that regional and subregional organizations constitute
an important building block in addressing issues of
conflict prevention, mediation and management at the
regional level.

The rising number of conflicts and peacebuilding
missions across the world has put a lot of pressure on
the Council's ability to deploy resources in every corner
of the globe where they are required. Furthermore, the
cost of managing and maintaining peace very often
depends on regional dynamics and sensitivities that can
better be addressed by local institutions, which have a
better understanding of the culture and language of the
region.

Article 24 of the United Nations Charter confers
on the Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations not only relieves the
burden of the Council in dispensing its primary
responsibility, but also helps cultivate a culture of peace
and security, which the Council is mandated to do.
The strain of implementing various Security Council
mandates necessitated an increased role for Member
States' contribution to An Agenda for Peace (S/24111),
accompanied by a rise in the role of regional and
subregional organizations. This partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations has become the ultimate instruction
manual for resolving complex emergencies through
conflict management and peacekeeping.

However, the price of peace should never be
considered too much to pay when evaluation is
conducted regarding the necessary response and
enforcement action required following the outbreak
of conflict. Maintaining the context and support of
the United Nations in regional initiatives contributes
greatly to the transformation of the character of such
missions. United Nations regional and subregional
cooperation also ensures that impediments related to
limited resources, capacity constraints, and political
and economic fragilities relating to some situations
and environments are easily overcome. My delegation
therefore cannot overemphasize the importance of the
provision of training and logistical and material support
to the military, police and civil personnel on an ongoing
basis in order to prepare for the eventual success of
deployments and peacekeeping operations.

Cooperation between the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations should therefore be
sustained and strengthened, not only as a source
of prevention, but also for purposes of reinforcing
the platform for post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconstruction. In this context, my delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts and progress made closer to home
surrounding the implementation of the commitments
under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

