Ms. Plowmen (Netherlands): I thank France for
putting the protection of civilians on the agenda of the
Security Council. This extremely important topic is
at the heart of the work of the United Nations. While
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
with the statement by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of
Civilians, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

In his report (S/2016/447) on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Secretary-General
presents us with a shocking truth, that is, more than
ever before, warring parties are targeting civilians, and
too many perpetrators are still getting away with it.
The international community cannot let such crimes go
unpunished. It must provide justice to the victims, and
it must issue a credible warning to those considering
Violence against civilians: war crimes will be punished.
That is why the recent conviction of Hissene Habre for
crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture by
the Special Tribunal in Senegal is such an important
step. That is also why the Netherlands fully supports
the legal institutions in The Hague and elsewhere that
help achieve justice.

The report confirms our worst fears about
conflict-related sexual violence. Women and girls
are particularly vulnerable, especially when they are
displaced and seek refuge in another country. They
can fall victim to human trafficking, abuse and forced
prostitution. That includes women and girls in Europe.
I fully support the Secretary-General's call to redouble
our efforts to prevent conflict-related sexual Violence
and take action to stop it.

That is no easy task. In South Sudan, for instance,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is fulfilling an almost impossible duty. A small number
of troops and police are having to protect around
200,000 displaced persons at designated sites near
UNMISS bases. During a visit to Malakal less than two
years ago, I had an opportunity to witness at first hand
the challenges that peacekeepers were up against. I saw
that people faced the greatest dangers, including sexual
violence, when they had to move around - when
searching for water, food and firewood, for example.
But UNMISS was already struggling to secure the
designated site, mainly due to limited capacity. The
mandate to protect civilians was translated into
physically securing the area, even though the biggst
threats to people's safety were just outside that area.

The tragic incident at Malakal in February 2016
proves once again the need for proactive actions by
peacekeepers, based on prudent intelligence. We look
forward to the outcomes of the special investigation by
the United Nations. Those responsible for making fatal
mistakes should be held accountable.

United Nations missions around the world face
similar dilemmas, namely, how to give civilians
sufficient freedom of movement while at the same
time offering sufficient protection. Although the
protection of civilians is part and parcel of mandates,
peacekeepers often have to make do with very limited
resources. Partly as a result of that, the protection of
civilians risks becoming merely protection of sites - a
necessary but clearly insufficient condition for keeping
people safe and secure.

The gap between principle and practice is still too
wide. I want to suggest four ways of closing that gap.

First, we have to be realistic. Blanket mandates
to protect civilians are often neither credible nor
achievable. All too often, expectations fail to match
a mission's capabilities. A protection-of-civilians
strategy and a specific plan of action should be in
place after a mandate is adopted and before the mission
is deployed. Furthermore, they should be updated
regularly. The strategy should include close cooperation
with actors on the ground, because that is the only
way to protect civilians, both inside designated areas
and beyond. It means working with partners - often
non-governmental partners - that provide basic
services. And it meansjoining forces with organizations
that promote reconciliation and dialogue.

Secondly, implementation is key. The Security
Council's Informal Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians should meet on a more regular basis to
discuss specific missions. It should proactively advise
the Council and offer proposals to improve protection.
The Expert Group needs to be regularly briefed by
protection-of-civilians advisers working on missions.

Thirdly, we also need a stronger link between
the actors on the ground and the actors in New York.
The Security Council should adopt a new system
for more regular and more transparent briefings by
troop-contributing countries and non-governmental
organizations. Those briefings should take place well
in advance of mandate renewals.

Fourthly, the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians deserve our full support. They constitute a
political commitment by troop- and police-contributing
countries to better train and equip their peacekeepers,
to avoid caveats on protection-of-civilians mandates
and to hold accountable those who do not carry
out their mandate as they should. On 11 May the
Netherlands held a high-level event, which resulted
in 20 countries joining the original 9 countries that
had endorsed the Kigali Principles. I am pleased that
today several countries expressed their support for the
Kigali Principles.

Along with Rwanda and United States Africa
Command, the Netherlands is going to organize a
training centred on the protection of civilians, with
special attention to preventing and addressing sexual
abuse and exploitation. We support the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy when it comes to such
horrendous practices.

As a partner for peace, justice and development,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands wants to contribute
to further improving peacekeeping missions. That
is a major reason for which we are a candidate for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the
2017-2018 term.

Let us not forget that, in the end, peacekeeping
missions are about all those vulnerable men, women
and children in conflict situations who depend on us,
the United Nations, for their protection. Their concern
should be the Council's main concern.
