Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome
you to the Security Council, Sir, and Iwould like to
warmly welcome as well the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and to thank her for her
briefing. I would like to record our thanks here also to
Mr. Nigel Fisher for his leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) as interim
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

We welcome Haiti's progress since our most
recent debate on Haiti (see S/PV.6936) in assuming
responsibility for its own security and in fostering an
environment that can attract sustainable development.
We recognize the important contribution that
MINUSTAH is making. We welcome the transfer of
responsibility for security in some regions to the Haitian
National Police, in line with the core objectives of the
2013-2016 consolidation plan. We note the advances
made in Haitian National Police promotion, vetting and
training, and we would like to see continued progress
in that area.

We are pleased to see Haiti building partnerships
for sustainable economic development and taking an
increasing role in regional forums. That is crucial,
because economic investment will create the basis for
Haiti's future stability.

Notwithstanding the progress that continues to
be made, we remain concerned that delays in crucial
political and democratic processes are holding back
the country's development and stability. The continued
delay in the holding of planned elections and the
negative impact that could have on the ability of the
political institutions to function is of particular concern.
We call on the Government of Haiti to broker a political
agreement that would allow elections to be held this
year. Elections are Vital to establishing political
stability and to building the trust and confidence of
the Haitian people, the international community and
potential investors.

An attractive investment climate will be
strengthened by Haiti's ability to police itself. We
welcome the progress made by the Haitian National
Police towards reaching the target of 15,000 active
police officers by 2015, but further efforts are
required to build their institutional and operational
capabilities. As highlighted by the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/493), increased recruitment must be
accompanied by improvements in strategic planning,
administration, internal affairs and training. For the
Haitian National Police to be effective, there must also
be reform of the justice sector, to create an independent
and impartial judiciary at the regional and national
levels.

MINUSTAH should focus its resources and efforts
on supporting the Government of Haiti in meeting
its obligations to improve the political and security
situation in the country. That means getting the
configuration of troops and police right. Therefore,
while we recognize the positive results of the additional
work undertaken by the Mission's engineering teams
in supporting quick-impact projects, including road
repair, well drilling, draining and canal cleaning, water
distribution and the erection of prefabricated units, we
believe that those tasks should now be handed over to
others - where possible, the local private sector. Where
national actors do not yet have the capacity to take on
those tasks, all elements of the United Nations system
in Haiti need to work together to build that capacity.

We believe that MINUSTAH's continued presence
in Haiti remains necessary for now. However, we
support the reconfiguration of resources set out in the
consolidation plan for 2013-2016, and are encouraged
to see that the withdrawal of military peacekeepers
has not been detrimental to the security situation
in the areas that have been vacated. We support the
recommendation to continue, as the situation allows, a
balanced withdrawal of troops. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's decision to explore the option of a
transition to a smaller, more focused assistance mission
by 2016, and look forward to hearing more about his
proposal. Any significant change to the Mission's
configuration should come with credible benchmarks
to ensure that the Haitian Government has the support
and capacity to shoulder increasing responsibility.

The United Nations presence in Haiti must
adapt to the changing circumstances and challenges.
Challenges will continue, but will be increasingly
related to governance and economic development. The
nature of the United Nations presence should adjust
accordingly, shifting the balance from peacekeeping
to development assistance. The Secretary-General's
report and its recommendations provide a good basis
for that transition.

MINUSTAH has made some progress over the
past 12 months, and we thank all those who have
contributed. Looking forward, efforts should focus on
further improving the security situation and helping to
break the political deadlock, building the conditions for
stability, development and growth. MINUSTAH must
ensure that the burden of progress is shared with the
Government and other partners, and, where appropriate,
transferred to them. In June, the United Kingdom
opened its first Embassy in Port-au-Prince since 1966,
a Visible symbol to the Government of Haiti of British
support for it on the road to the stability and prosperity
that it and its people sorely need and deserve.

