Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting
and for inviting Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
whose presence we welcome. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2004/117) and
to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for its
comprehensive and able presentation this morning.

The representative of Ireland will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate, and we fully associate ourselves with that
statement.
The report of the Secretary-General attests once
more to the remarkable achievements of the people of
Timor-Leste in building a peaceful and democratic
society. They have been supported in their endeavour
by Kamalesh Sharma, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and by all the staff of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), to whom we owe great thanks. Because
of their excellent and dedicated work, Timor-Leste is
today generally considered to be a remarkable success
story of the United Nations system.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that further assistance on the part of the
international community will be essential to
consolidate and build upon the achievements of the
past 18 months and to tackle the remaining challenges
in Timor-Leste. As the report rightly points out, the
young institutions of this country still require United
Nations support in a limited consolidation phase to
assist in the further strengthening of Timor-Leste's
judicial and security apparatuses. We therefore support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend
UNMISET for a further year in a reduced size and with
a modified mandate.

As Ambassador Negroponte pointed out in our
last meeting on this item, on 15 October 2003, the
international community should remain engaged in
ensuring the establishment of security and stability in
East Timor after May. And while we share the view
that there is a need for a continued international
security component, Germany is quite flexible with
regard to the adequate means.

Bearing in mind that the security threats - which
the Secretary-General outlined in his report - are
mostly of an internal dimension, we believe that the
proposal submitted by Australia for an emergency
security response indeed deserves consideration and
would be well suited to meet the likely security
challenges ahead. Such a force would have the
particular expertise required for police work and would
visibly reaffirm the international community's
commitment to Timor-Leste. It would thus have the
same psychological effect as a military force but might
be more adequate than a military component in the
already advanced state of nation-building in Timor-
Leste.

On the other hand, we take note of the Secretary-
General's recommendation that a security component,
comprising some 310 military personnel, be deployed
to provide protection for 42 military liaison officers, to
maintain a reassuring presence in the border regions
and to provide a quick-reaction capability if required.
We also take note of the fact that the Government of
Timor-Leste has expressed a clear preference for an
even larger military component.

From our point of view, it is now of paramount
importance to maintain the unity of the Security
Council that has been contributing so much to the
success in Timor-Leste. We must not jeopardize what
has been achieved with so much effort and dedication.
Germany is therefore prepared to join a consensus
along the lines suggested by the Secretary-General -
including with regard to the military component - if
the Security Council can agree on a continued
peacekeeping force element in Timor-Leste. Otherwise,
perhaps a compromise could be found by adding a
number of armed international police forces, provided
countries are willing to contribute in that regard, and
reducing the suggested number of envisaged military
personnel.

The international community is now in the
favourable position that in any event, only a
substantially diminished United Nations presence will
be required after 20 May 2004. The question of
whether such international security assistance will be
provided by armed police or by an armed military
component seems to me more of a technical than of a
political nature. And I am confident that this issue will
not prevent us from finding a consensual solution that
is practical, efficient and adequate.

