Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes to express its sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting at
this particular time, when conflicts are tearing apart the
African continent.

The subject of the peaceful settlement of conflicts is
an important topic that is of particular concern for the
Security Council. The Council encourages all the Member
States of the United Nations to resort to peaceful means
of settling conflicts, in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

As our meeting today is being held to discuss the
ongoing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my delegation wishes to express its serious
concern that, due to the great number of parties involved,
this continuing conflict poses a threat not only to the
peace, security and stability of the Great Lakes region,
but also to the entire African continent. My delegation
also wishes to express its concern over the very serious
humanitarian repercussions that the conflict has had on
the civilian population throughout the country. Hundreds
of thousands of persons have been displaced and are
living under the most appalling health conditions because
the absence of security has made access to their territories
by humanitarian agencies almost impossible.

Our delegation wishes to affirm that the settlement
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will not be achieved through military means. A permanent
solution can become a reality only through negotiation
among all the parties involved. We would like to support
all the diplomatic initiatives aimed at finding and reaching
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In particular, we
would like to welcome the initiative proposed by the
Secretary-General in the course of the twentieth
Conference of Heads of State of Africa and France, held
in Paris from 26 to 28 November 1998. The aim of that
initiative is to achieve a settlement of the conflict and to
reach an agreement on an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire. We believe that the States of that region can
play a very important role in encouraging the parties to
the conflict to sign a ceasefire agreement, in response to
the Secretary-General's initiative, as a first step towards
the peaceful settlement of the conflict.

The solution to the problems of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must stem from a process of
national reconciliation that includes all parties, that is
acceptable to all the Congolese and that leads to free and
fair elections as soon as possible.

 

We appreciate the important role assumed by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in this respect. We
hope that its efforts will be crowned with success and that
it will be able to convince all the parties to the conflict to
reach a ceasefire agreement as a first step towards reaching
a peaceful settlement of the conflict, thereby ending the
hostilities and bringing about security and stability in these
African States in order to avoid the possible harmful
consequences of the war's continuing for a long time
without a solution.

Furthermore, our delegation would like once again to
reaffirm the importance of respecting the territorial
integrity, political stability and national sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the principle
of non-interference by other countries in its internal affairs.

Our delegation would also like to support the idea of
holding an international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region - at the
appropriate time and under the aegis of the United Nations
and the OAU - in order to put an end to such conflicts in
the region and to enable the countries of the region to
devote their resources to development.
In conclusion, our delegation wishes to support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his consultations with
the OAU and all the parties concerned with the aim of
finding a peaceful and permanent settlement to the conflict.

