Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

The conflict in Syria is now in its eighth year. That is
longer than the Second World War. President Al-Assad
is responsible for one of the worst and most enduring
humanitarian disasters of our time. From the beginning
of the crisis, we have witnessed terrible violations and
violence and a flagrant lack of respect for international
law, in particular by Syrian Government forces. We
must also never forget the atrocities committed by
Da'esh. As the Secretary-General stated yesterday, we
have witnessed

"systematic violations of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
law tout court - in utter disregard for the letter
and the spirit of the United Nations Charter".

Indeed, there are numerous and flagrant violations of
Security Council resolutions, international protocols
and conventions
Chemical weapons have been used repeatedly in
Syria. The Joint Investigative Mechanism concluded
that the Syrian authorities were responsible for four
chemical-weapons attacks, and Da'esh for two. The use
of such weapons is abhorrent, intolerable, a war crime
and a crime against humanity. That is why, as has been
noted here before, the international community banned
their use in the international armed conflict more than a
century ago. Subsequent developments have confirmed
the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons as a
norm of customary international law. We will spare
no effort to end the use and proliferation of chemical
weapons by State or non-State actors anywhere in the
world. Those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable; there can be no further impunity.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
to act in response to threats to international peace and
security. It is our joint responsibility to uphold the
prohibition on the use of chemical weapons in armed
conflict. It is our common legal and moral duty to
defend the non-proliferation regimes that we have
established and confirmed. That is best done through
true multilateralism and broad international consensus.
In that regard, we welcome the deployment of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapon's
Fact-finding Mission to Syria and we look forward to
its findings.

It is regrettable that the Council was unable to come
together and agree on a timely, clear and unified response
to the repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
regret that Russia, again this week, blocked the Council
from setting up a truly impartial and independent
attribution mechanism. That has contributed to the
situation in which we find ourselves now. The use of
chemical weapons is a serious violation of international
law and it constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. Deterrence and prevention of their use
is the concern of the entire international community.
We therefore share the rage and anger and are appalled
by the repeated use of such weapons in Syria. It is
necessary to rid Syria of chemical weapons once and
for all, and hold those responsible accountable. At
the same time, as the Secretary-General said in his
statement yesterday, there is an obligation, particularly
when dealing with matters of peace and security, to act
consistently with the Charter of the United Nations, and
international law in general.

We are at a dangerous moment. We call for restraint
and for avoiding any acts that could escalate, or further
fuel, tensions. We need to avoid the situation spiralling
out of control. Over the past few days, we have tried to
ensure that all peaceful means to respond are exhausted.
We worked tirelessly so that no stone was left unturned
in efforts to find a way for the Council to shoulder its
responsibility in accordance with the Charter. We have
shared a proposal with Council members to achieve
that objective by inviting the Secretary-General to
come back to the Council with a proposal. In order to
be successful, diplomacy needs to be backed by clear
demands. The Secretary-General called on the Council
to take action, but regrettably the Council could not
unite. It was indeed a missed opportunity, but we stand
ready to continue those efforts.

In the light of all that has now happened, it is more
critical than ever to avoid an escalation and revert to
the track of diplomacy for a political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015). We reiterate our total
support for the United Nations-led political process,
which urgently needs to be reinvigorated, as well as
the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) for the
cessation of hostilities. Humanitarian access can wait
no longer. A sustainable political solution is the only
way to end the suffering of the Syrian people. Let us
all then rally around that objective. Let us redouble
our efforts and put an end to the long, brutal and
meaningless conflict once and for all.

