Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement.

We are meeting today to address the threats to
international peace and security that have arisen as a
result of the situation in Syria, six days after the latest
chemical-weapons carnage, on 7 April in Douma.

For seven years, the situation in Syria has without a
doubt constituted a grave threat to international peace
and security as defined in the Charter of the United
Nations. The Security Council itself characterized
this as such unanimously on 27 September 2013,
when resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted in the wake
of the appalling chemical-weapons attacks that had
taken place in eastern Ghouta. The world then learned
for the first time and with horror of the symptoms of
large-scale chemical-weapons-related deaths in Syria.

To counter those who are seeking to sow confusion,
going so far as to accuse the Syrian people of having
gassed themselves; those who are suggesting conspiracy
theories; those who are endeavouring methodically to
destroy our mechanisms for action on chemical weapons
in Syria, we must come back to simple facts. Yes, the
Syrian crisis represents a threat to international peace
and security. This threat is related to the repeated,
organized and systematic use of chemical weapons by
the Bashar Al-Assad regime, which once again reached
new levels of horror with the two attacks perpetrated in
Douma on 7 April last. Those attacks claimed the lives
of at least several dozen people and wounded hundreds
of others. Many of the injured will continue to suffer
throughout their lives from the serious respiratory and
neurological aftereffects of the chemicals used.

There is no doubt once again as to the responsibility
of Damascus for this attack. The facts collected on the
ground, the symptoms of the victims, the complexity of
handling of the substances used, and the determination
of the regime's forces to subjugate the last pockets of
resistance in Douma as expeditiously as possible and
using every means at their disposal, all point to this.

This is a well-known and documented modus
operandi, given that an independent mechanism, created
at the initiative of the Security Council, had already
established at least four times since 2015 that chemical
weapons had been used by the Damascus regime in
Sarmin, Talmenes, Qmenas and Khan Shaykun - an
investigative mechanism that a permanent member of
the Security Council decided last November to force
into silence.

The chemical-weapons policy of the Bashar
Al-Assad regime is among the most serious violations
of all the norms that guarantee our collective security.
It is first and foremost a violation of all international
obligations relating to the prohibition of chemical
weapons under the Chemical Weapons Convention, to
which Syria is a party.

Secondly, it constitutes a violation of the very
foundations of international humanitarian law,
namely, the principles of distinction, precaution
and proportionality.

Thirdly, it constitutes a breach of successive
Security Council resolutions: resolutions 2118 (2013),
2209 (2015) and 2235 (2015) and therefore a breach of
the obligations incumbent upon Syria under the Charter
of the United Nations.

Lastly, the use of chemical weapons against
civilians, which was banned in 1925 under the Geneva
Protocol, constitutes a war crime under the Statute of
the International Criminal Court.

The Secretary-General in August 2013 called the
use of chemical weapons a crime against humanity. That
chemical war is a tool to accelerate a deliberate policy of
submission by terror, which, in seven years, has caused
the deaths of 400,000 people, the deliberate destruction
of civilian and health infrastructure in entire regions, a
massive exodus of refugees and displaced persons and
has fuelled international terrorism. This frightening
picture is that of one of the most blatant threats to
international peace and security in the contemporary
era. It is also the record of those who, against all odds,
continue to support it.

Iwill once again have to state the obvious: ifSyria has
continued to use toxic substances for military purposes,
it is because it has retained the capacity to use and
manufacture them, in contravention of its international
commitments, of the guarantees provided by Russia
in the framework of the 2013 Russian-American
agreement and of Security Council resolutions.

It has already been several years since the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) informed us of the major remaining doubts
about the sincerity of Syria's initial declaration to the
organization in 2013. Many of the OPCW's questions
and requests for documents have gone unanswered.
Syria has never provided a satisfactory explanation for
the inspectors' discovery of substances and capabilities
that Syria had never declared. We saw those capabilities
again in action on 7 April, used to kill as many civilians
as possible and terrorize the survivors to consolidate
the definitive takeover of Douma by the Syrian regime.

Beyond Syria, the prevailing impunity since 2013
affects the entire chemical non-proliferation regime,
and with it the entire security system that we have
collectively built since the Second World War. It is
that collective security legacy, built to protect future
generations from the outbreaks of violence in the two
global conflicts, that the members of the Security
Council have been mandated to protect. To allow the
normalization of the use of chemical weapons without
reacting is to let the genie out of the bottle. That would
be a terrible setback to international order, for which
we would all pay the price.

The Security Council, to which the Charter of the
United Nations entrusts the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of the entire international community, is
therefore more than justified in meeting today. It is more
than justified for the Council to note, once again, the
violation of international law and its own resolutions,
and the persistence of a proven threat to international
peace and security. It is more than justified to urgently
re-establish a mechanism for attributing responsibility
for chemical attacks - that opportunity was given to the
Council in vain, once again, on Tuesday (see S/PV.8228)
with the American draft resolution (S/2018/32l).

The Council is more thanjustified in doing what it
has committed itselfto do, that is, to take measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. But in
the face of the mass atrocities committed in Syria, the
Council's action has been paralysed for several years
by successive Russian vetoes. Russia vetoed 12 draft
resolutions on Syria, including six on the chemical
issue alone. Those vetoes had no other objective than to
protect the Syrian authorities - to guarantee a regime
of impunity, in defiance of all international standards.
To allow the indefensible, Russia has deliberately
chosen to sacrifice the ability of the Council to act, the
most important tool of our collective security. We had
proof of that again last Tuesday.

On 7 April, Douma joined Ypres, Halabja and
Khan Shaykhun in the litany of chemical massacres. I
solemnly say that, in deciding to once again use chemical
weapons, the regime reached a point of no return on
7 April. France will assume its responsibility to put an
end to an intolerable threat to our collective security
and to finally ensure respect for international law and
the measures taken for years by the Security Council.

A chemical attack like that of Douma, which
consists in gassing the last inhabitants of a besieged
enclave - even when it is about to fall, even when the
last fighters are negotiating their surrender - is the
height of cynicism. That is where we are after seven
years of the regime's war against its people. This is the
situation to which the world must provide a firm, united
and resolute response. That is our responsibility today.

It will also be essential to combat impunity for
those responsible for the use of such weapons and,
more broadly, for those who are responsible for the
most serious crimes committed in Syria. France is
fully committed to that endeavour. That is the purpose
of the International Partnership against Impunity for
the Use of Chemical Weapons, which we initiated last
January. We will also continue to support and assist all
international mechanisms in their work to investigate
the most serious crimes committed against civilians
in Syria.

In addition to the chemical issue, continuing
violations of international humanitarian law must cease
without delay. We ourselves demanded it by unanimously
adopting resolution 2401 (2018) - thwarted the day
after its adoption by the resumption of bombardments
by the regime with the active support of its allies,
including those within the Council who had subscribed
to the truce. Resolution 2401 (2018) has lost none of
its relevance, quite the contrary - full and unhindered
humanitarian access to help populations in distress must
be implemented throughout the territory. It is essential
and urgent that humanitarian convoys can reach eastern
Ghouta safely and that civilians fleeing hostilities or in
need of medical treatment can be protected.

Finally, we can only sustainably resolve the Syrian
crisis within the framework ofa political solution and on
the basis of the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015). Only under those conditions can put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people, eradicate terrorism
and work together for the stability of the Middle East.
We have been calling for a political solution for seven
years. May those who join us today in their concern
about the consequences of the Syrian crisis finally
force the regime to accept negotiations under the aegis
of the United Nations.

We cannot allow the most fundamental values and
standards of humanity, such as those emanating from the
Charter of the United Nations, be thwarted and flouted
in front of our eyes without reacting. Those values
and standards must be defended and protected. That
is the reason behind our commitment - to restore the
complete ban on chemical weapons set in stone within
international conventions, and thereby consolidate
the rule of law. It is the responsibility of those who
believe, like France, in effective multilateralism led by
a respected United Nations.

We must stop the Syrian chemical escalation.
We cannot allow a country to simultaneously defy
the Council and international law. The ability of
Damascus to violate all our norms constitutes a threat
to international security. Let us put an end to it.

