Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): There has been
express need for holding open discussions on the role of
the Council in the prevention of armed conflicts. Several
considerations have made this expedient. We appreciate
the initiative taken in this regard by Slovenia and the wise
leadership provided by you, Mr. President.

We thank the Secretary-General for the very
important statement he made yesterday as we commenced
this debate. His statement contains a number of specific
suggestions which should receive the Council's attention,
in particular the one relating to the expert working group
on early warning.

The political, humanitarian and economic
imperatives of conflict prevention do not require
elaboration in this forum. I shall limit my observations to
a few suggestions and some interrogations.

First, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is also mandated to ensure prompt and
effective action. There is considerable international public
opinion behind the demand that the Council be proactive
and play an avant-garde role in matters of international
peace and security. It is expected that the Council's role
should be visible before a situation develops into a crisis;
before hostile campaigns degenerate into armed conflicts;
before a carnage has taken place; before a war has broken

 

out. It should be there in the true realization of its
responsibility.

The role of the regional organizations is recognized in
the Charter. In recent years, these organizations have played
a critically important role in preventing or containing armed
conflicts. But then, the Council has been criticized for
subcontracting its peace and security mission. We believe
that such a perception requires our serious attention in the
context of our debate today. We must examine the benefits
of formulating appropriate mechanisms and elaborate policy
guidelines for the involvement and intervention of the
regional organizations. They must, of course, be specific to
a given situation.

In this context, we encourage the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in pursuing preventive action. While such
traditional instruments as good offices, mediation and
conciliation may be tried as the case may be, we would
support more vigorous actions by the Secretary-General.

Secondly, the question of sovereignty is one with
which the Council will be increasingly confronted. For us,
the question would be how to balance between the
principles of political independence, sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of States and the humanitarian and legal
imperatives of maintaining international peace and security.
The two imperatives are not necessarily contradictory. The
Charter, in my reading, tends to treat them as
complementary. The task before us would be to find out the
parameters of this complementarity.

There is a difference of opinion on how to address
intrastate conflict which the Charter does not seem to have
envisaged. What should the United Nations do with a State
in civil war, a country plunged into intractable ethnic strife,
a failed State? The preventive measures prescribed in
Chapter VI are subject to the consent of the parties
involved. What happens when the parties remain
determined to fight out their claims or control? What
happens when the leaders in a given State fail their people?
When they violate the provisions of humanitarian law?
When they disregard the recommendations of the Council?

In this context, I wonder if we should not rethink the
way the question of peace and security is addressed. The
responsibility of actors within States has to be determined
and necessary redress should be available. The United
Nations cannot keep a peace that does not exist, as the
Secretary-General said. The international community cannot
be expected to pay for wars of attrition fought in total
disregard for law and civilized norms. A global consensus
should be reached on the evolving concepts and
mechanisms to address these complex situations.

Thirdly, on the question of uniformity and
consistency in practice, the protection of the Security
Council should be available equally to all. To be credible,
the Council must be guided by a consistent approach in
addressing all conflicts. To be effective, it should work on
both current and potential threats to peace. To be true to
its purposes and functions, it should use all the power and
authority conferred upon it by the Member States.

Fourthly, on the question of delayed action, the
Secretary-Generals exasperation in quoting from Hamlet
is understandable. The Council has been discredited in
world public opinion in this regard. The United Nations
rapid-deployment capacity should be enhanced. The
Council should employ all the instruments and measures
available and adopt newer and innovative strategies within
the purview of the Charter provisions. The credibility of
the Council must not be further compromised by its
failure to act promptly, effectively and consistently. The
impediments to the proper functioning of the Council
should be identified, analysed and debated.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General has proposed the
institution of a culture of prevention. A comprehensive
approach to the prevention of conflicts may be taken
through the implementation of the Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace. Success will depend on the United
Nations system-wide integration of the Programme of
Action and national implementation, as well as on the
active participation of civil society and the media.
Bangladesh believes that international peace and security
can best be strengthened not by the actions of States
alone, but through the inculcation of a culture of peace
and non-violence in every human being and in every
sphere of our activity. We regard the culture of peace as
an effective expedient to minimize and prevent violence
and conflict in the present-day world. My delegation
strongly recommends that the culture of peace be given
due consideration in the context of conflict prevention.

Finally, with respect to the role of the Council in
relation to those of other major organs, it is often said
that the United Nations success is more pronounced in the
economic and social areas than in the field of peace and
security. The Council's primary responsibility
notwithstanding, its role should be seen within the broad
framework of the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, in which specific roles are assigned to each of
the principal organs. Their contribution should converge

 

on the goal of the common progress of mankind in a world
of peace.

The multiplicity of crises and conflicts across the
world in the past decades reveals a different reality. We are
far from achieving our objective of building the foundation
of sustainable peace. The role of the Council in conflict
prevention in the medium- and long-term perspective should
also be seen in this broad framework.

The human and the material price of wars should
serve as pointers in our policy decisions. In today's world
the narrow national-interest-centric approach to crises and
conflicts is certainly anachronistic. We cannot adopt the
policies of the nineteenth century in today's globalized and
interdependent world.

In conclusion, I would say that giving priority to
dispute resolution and conflict prevention goes to the heart
of equipping the United Nations for taking its rightful place
as the pre-eminent cooperative security institution in the
post-cold-war era.

