Mr. Quinlan: At the outset, on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum member States, I would like to
extend our condolences to the Government and the
people of Haiti and to the families and colleagues of
those United Nations personnel who lost their lives in
this catastrophe. The Pacific region, of course, is only
too well aware of the devastating impacts wrought by
natural disasters and of the importance of a quick
coordinated response from Member States, regional
organizations and the United Nations, and I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the rapid response
of the United Nations. Pacific countries are ready to
help where we can, and my own country, Australia, has
already begun to respond.

I am speaking today on behalf of the member
States of the Pacific Islands Forum. The Secretary-
General of the Forum, The Honourable Mr. Tuiloma
Neroni Slade, is also present with me.

As members know, the Pacific is a very large,
dispersed geographical region that encompasses some
of the world's smallest and most vulnerable nations.
The Pacific Islands Forum is the region's pre-eminent
intergovernmental organization. It makes a powerful
contribution to the peace and security of its own
region, and, hence, we welcome this opportunity today
to contribute to the Council's consideration of this
issue. We would particularly like to thank China for its
role in today's initiative.
Mr. President, you rightly note in your concept
paper (S/2010/9) that while the United Nations Charter
places primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international security on the Security Council, it also
deliberately recognizes that regional organizations
may, in appropriate circumstances, take action to
maintain and support peace and security among their
member States. In fact, that has inevitably become an
important complementary part of the international
architecture for peace and security. Where Member
States are able to step up to solve their own problems,
they clearly should do so. The United Nations role is at
the apex, and it must be, but Member States and their
organizations clearly have a role in helping themselves
to prevent crises, just as much as in responding to
them. Better systems for early conflict resolution and
better early warning mechanisms on emerging crises
can often be more alert and more robust at a regional
level. A strong organic relationship with the United
Nations at the regional level and with New York is
therefore essential in our regional and global
architecture.

Since its formation in 1971, the Pacific Islands
Forum has worked to develop strong collective
responses to regional issues and to promote good
governance and democratic principles among its
members. In pursuit of those principles, the Forum has
developed a significant framework for addressing
violent conflict, civil unrest and political crises that
may threaten regional peace and security, including the
1997 Aitutaki Declaration and the 2000 Biketawa
Declaration.

In the Biketawa Declaration, Forum leaders
specifically committed their countries to promoting
good governance, individual freedoms and democratic
processes and institutions and recognized their
responsibility to assist their own member States in
times of crisis. They have accepted a clear collective
responsibility in doing this. Consistent with the
principles elaborated in those Declarations, the Forum
has developed an impressive record of taking action to
address threats to regional peace and security,
including in Bougainville, Solomon Islands and Fiji.

The Bougainville peace process was an
illustration of successful cooperation between the
United Nations and the Forum, with the Council-
endorsed Peace Monitoring Group working alongside
the United Nations Observer Mission in partnership,
and with the Papua New Guinea Government and other
Governments in the region to bring peace and stability
to Bougainville following nearly 10 years of conflict.

The Forum's Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands has played a critical role in
supporting the stabilization and reconstruction of
Solomon Islands after a very debilitating ethnic
conflict in the late 19905 and throughout the early
20005. The mission remains in place today.

In Fiji, the Forum has been unwavering in its
commitment to the primacy of democratic principles
and has sought to work constructively with all parties
for the restoration of democratic institutions after the
coup. In that regard, the Forum particularly welcomes
the Security Council's principled call for an early
return to democracy in Fiji.

Of course, the Forum has also begun to address
non-traditional security challenges, as it must. Climate
change represents an existential threat for a number of
Forum members. This is not threat for the future: it is a
threat to them today. On 3 June last year, the General
Assembly adopted by consensus its historic resolution
63/281, on the link between climate change and
security. That resolution invited all relevant organs of
the United Nations, including this one, to intensify our
efforts in considering and addressing climate change,
including its possible security implications.

The subsequent report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/350) has further underlined the urgent need for
an effective global, regional and national effort to
mitigate and adapt to climate change as the best way to
minimize its impacts, including its serious security-
related consequences. This remains a compelling
initiative. The Pacific islands and the Pacific Islands
Forum stand ready to work with the Security Council
to address all of these challenges.

