Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me also thank
our three briefers for their informative and useful
briefings today.

Let me start by reiterating our full support for United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
which is carrying out its work in increasingly difficult
circumstances. Since February, security incidents have
resulted in the deaths of four peacekeepers. We express
our profound condolences to their families for their
loss. It is essential that attacks against peacekeepers
be investigated and those responsible be brought to
justice. In that regard, we appreciate the cooperation
of the Central African Republic authorities to ensure
accountability for those attacks.

In the light ofthe fragile advances made over the past
two years, we are deeply worried about the deterioration
in the security situation in recent months. That has
been marked by persistent violence by armed groups,
including in Bangui, and we strongly condemn attacks
carried out against civilians, humanitarian personnel
and peacekeepers. We are also deeply concerned about
the erosion of trust among communities, as well as the
sectarian rhetoric that seeks to divide societies and
incite religious and ethnic hatred. Attempts by armed
groups - not least of which the Front populaire pour
la renaissance de la Centrafrique - and political
actors to fan division and discord for political ends
is reckless and worrisome. We are also concerned
about the high number of documented incidents of
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law. Impunity for acts of
Violence against civilians, including sexual and gender-
based violence, cannot be tolerated. Strong national
leadership and communication are imperative at this
juncture. The efforts of the Government to ensure
national unity continue to have our support. It is
essential that the Government, Parliament and armed
groups all demonstrate their commitment to national
reconciliation and engage in dialogue.

We strongly support the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic
and welcome the conclusion of the second round of
consultations. We hope that the African Union will
continue to prioritize advancing the initiative. As it
does so, it should fully use its mediation capacity, with
the active support from the United Nations, and ensure
the implementation of the Libreville road map.
We encourage countries in the region to step up
coordinated efforts in support for the endeavours
of the Government of the Central African Republic
towards peace and stability. Those includes support
for the African Initiative as well as efforts to address
cross-border challenges, such as transhumance-related
violence. The Government's steps to reactivate bilateral
joint commissions with a number of neighbouring
countries is a welcome step in that direction. An
inclusive peace is a credible and sustainable peace. It is
crucial that all segments of society - not least women
and youth - be engaged in the political process, and
that key stakeholders, in addition to armed groups,
be included. In parallel to the political process, it
is necessary to enhance national reconciliation and
transitional justice efforts so as to lay the ground for
sustainable peace and stability. The dire humanitarian
situation in the country has been further exacerbated
by clashes among armed groups and attacks against
civilians. We urge all armed groups to fully commit
to dialogue and cease all forms of violence. Efforts to
respond to the needs of more than half the population
now in need of humanitarian assistance must be
stepped up.

We welcome the letter of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/463) in May on recommendations on the
type of support MINUSCA could provide for the
progressive deployment of units of the Central African
armed forces - trained or certified by the European
Union (EU) Training Mission. It is important to ensure
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU
Training Mission, in particular if MINUSCA is to
provide enhanced planning and technical assistance to
the Central African armed forces. The Central African
authorities must ensure that the members of the Central
African Armed Forces are ethnically representative,
geographically balance and financially supported and
that they adhere to the rule of law and human rights
standards. Furthermore, the deployment of armed
forces is merely one part of the re-establishment of State
authority throughout the country. It must be quickly
followed by the provision of basic services in line
with the National Strategy for the Restoration of State
Authority. That requires not only sustained support
from the international community but, crucially,
political will and a sense of national ownership from
the Central African authorities.

