Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I endorse the words of welcome addressed to
you, Mr. President. We are very happy to see you here,
and are very pleased at the constant attention you
devote to the work of the Security Council.

As the President requested, we will not repeat the
substance of our positions on the items discussed by
the Security Council in August. I wish only to say that
characteristics of Colombia's presidency of the
Security Council were clarity in the organization of our
work, a highly rational style, and persistence in
working to attain the goals that had been set.

It was not possible, of course, to attain those
goals on all the issues that were before the Council.
Ambassador Wang Yingfan has just mentioned one
example of where the Security Council was unable to
reach a decision. But in most cases, as I said, the
August presidency succeeded in obtaining results.

We are pleased also to note that all meetings of
the Security Council, both formal meetings and
consultations, had sensible, well-thought-out agendas
setting out specific issues, not general or theoretical
considerations. That is of particular importance to my
delegation; we have constantly argued in favour of
such an approach to the Council's activities. We would
not like the Council to duplicate debates held in the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council or
other bodies. We are grateful that, as President,
Colombia drew a clear line between the competencies
of the Security Council and those of other
intergovernmental bodies of the United Nations.

A very good example of this is the statement that
the Council has just issued on small arms. In July of
this year, hardly a month ago, a conference was held on
this problem, and it adopted a final document. It
seemed that it would be very difficult for the Security
Council not to repeat what had already been done at
that conference. Nevertheless, the statement that we
issued today has a specific nature that is unique to the
Security Council. It does not duplicate the decisions of
the General Assembly. It defines ways that the Security
Council can in the future contribute to addressing this
problem in accordance with its mandate and without
impinging on the competence of other bodies. The
substantial discussions on the problem of small arms
and light weapons - discussions which you presided
over, Sir - contributed greatly to this outcome.

I will limit myself to these remarks. In
conclusion, once again I would like to congratulate and
sincerely thank the entire Colombian delegation,
Ambassador Valdivieso and yourself, Mr. Minister, for
the attention you have given to the work of the Security
Council in August. This has contributed greatly to the
successful outcome of our work.

