Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are also most pleased to thank the
representative of France for his outstanding leadership
of the Council last month.

The holding of this open meeting shows the
extraordinary importance that the international
community attaches to the crisis in international
relations at this critical turning point. We are convinced
that the enormous challenges we face require that the
international community engage in dialogue and
consultation in order to spare the world a war whose
negative repercussions would be long-lasting and
geographically widespread.

It is crucial that we be guided by the principles of
the United Nations Charter, which we all consider as
the ultimate guideposts for sparing the world the agony
and tragedy of war. The Charter guarantees that force
shall be used only as a last resort, after all other
options have been exhausted. The reports delivered by
Mr. Hans Blix and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei regarding
the inspections in Iraq convince us that continuing the
inspections and strengthening their effectiveness can,
in fact, achieve the objectives laid down in resolution
1441 (2002).

My country would like to reaffirm the
conclusions of the Arab Summit held in Beirut last
March, relating to the need to implement resolutions of
international legality, including respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of both Iraq and
Kuwait, and to settle the issue of prisoners of war and
missing persons.

We are convinced that Iraq is continuing to
cooperate fully with the United Nations inspectors in
settling the crisis in a peaceful manner, which prepares
the way for the lifting of sanctions. This has been
shown by Iraq's genuine will to cooperate with the
inspectors and by the strong and encouraging measures
undertaken by that country.

Thus, we share the views of several delegations
that options other than war must be found. We support
approaches based on the peaceful settlement of
disputes through the United Nations. We see no
justification for the Security Council to adopt an
additional resolution, and we request that the inspectors
be given the time they need to complete their mission.

Our conviction is based on our unshakeable faith
in shared humanitarian values. Let us reject violence
and destruction and build a world in which a culture of
peace will reign. Let us give peace a chance, and let us
provide the children of Iraq a childhood their memories
of which will not be ones of carnage and destruction,
shelters and orphans.

