Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. Minister, and the presidency of Nigeria for
convening this open debate to address the challenges
and opportunities of security sector reform. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
report before us (S/2013/480).

The establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is central to laying
the foundations of peace and sustainable development.
Security sector reform ultimately plays a fundamental
role in strengthening the rule of law at the national level.
It is therefore a key component of the peace process, in
which we highlight the role played by the Peacebuilding
Commission by including security sector reform
programmes for countries on its agenda. Moreover,
the Peacebuilding Fund, to which Chile contributes
regularly, has resources that can be used in security
sector reform or police training programmes. The
number of Security Council mandates that incorporate
this issue increased from 14 in 2008 to 37 in 2012,
confirming that security sector reform has been fully
integrated into peacekeeping, conflict prevention and
development.

International cooperation is particularly relevant
in ensuring that security sector reform processes can
effectively and efficiently achieve its goals. There are
numerous examples of collaboration with the United
Nations and bilateral cooperation on security sector
reform processes. We note that countries that were
previously recipients of cooperation are now able to
share their experiences and cooperate with others
facing similar challenges. With regard to bilateral
cooperation, since 1996 my country has run technical
assistance programmes between our police and the
National Police of Haiti, through which between 30 and
60 Haitian officers are trained every year.

Nonetheless, without detracting from the role of
international cooperation, it is the responsibility of
each State to guarantee security on its territory, and
every State has the sovereign right and responsibility
to determine its own national approach and national
priorities with respect to security sector reform. This
requires political will on the part of all parties involved
in order to make progress in the establishment or
strengthening of security institutions and mechanisms,
and sufficient resources for implementation must be
guaranteed.

Security sector reform processes must be consensual
and inclusive, ensuring the participation of civil society,
especially of women, both in policy discussion and
formulation, and in the subsequent implementation.
In this sense, the establishment of quotas for minority
groups in security institutions promises to be a useful
tool for ensuring the legitimacy of new institutions
among populations. Such processes, in addition to being
transparent, inclusive and participatory, should also be
subject to the control and supervision of democratic
institutions so as to ensure that they function in full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Security sector reform initiatives must also
provide for accountability, avoid impunity and thereby
promote national reconciliation processes, favouring
the reconstitution of the social fabric. In this regard,
we believe that all such reform processes should
incorporate expedited access to national courts and
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with
the principle of complementarity. We underscore the
central role of the General Assembly in developing the
approach of the United Nations in this area.

At the same time, the importance of coherent and
integrated planning and implementation, including
general guidelines, civilian capacity-building and
strengthened mechanisms for coordination and
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In this regard, we recognize the
work of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force and its specialized units, both in the field and
at Headquarters, and of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In this context, we underscore the importance of the
United Nations security sector reform guidelines and
policies, the human rights due diligence policy, and the
comprehensive technical background notes on security
sector reform.

I conclude by affirming that my country agrees
with the presidential statement of 12 October 2011 that

"the establishment of an effective, professional
and accountable security sector is at the
cornerstone peace and sustainable development"
(S/PRST/2011/19).

