Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for providing my delegation the
opportunity to participate in this open debate.

The Netherlands fully supports the statement
made this morning by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the European Union (EU), including his
appreciation for the introduction provided by Under-
Secretary-General Gue'henno and his warm words of
welcome for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Eide. In the light of our
substantial contribution, both militarily and in the field
of development, we would like to make a few
additional remarks on Afghan leadership and the role
of the international community.

Almost every week, think tanks and non-
governmental organizations produce reports about
Afghanistan and the recommended course of action for
the international community. Those reports sometimes
overlook the fact that the primary responsibility for
improving the destiny of the Afghan people indeed lies
with the Government of President Karzai.

We praise the great efforts the Government of
Afghanistan has made to bring stability and
development to its people. For instance, this month the
Afghan Government will be putting the finishing
touches to the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy. In our view, all international actors should, to
the greatest extent possible, bring their aid efforts into
line with the framework of that Afghan-led Strategy.
Increasingly, Afghans will need to supply the sheet
music for the many voices of the international choir.

Afghan ownership also means Afghan leadership.
Afghan authorities will increasingly have to provide
public services themselves. The Afghan Army will
have to provide security on its own, while the police
maintain public order. Afghans will also have to
seriously fight corruption and the drug trade, both of
which are undermining the State. We also look forward
to progress in the area of transitional justice. None of
those changes will happen overnight. For our part, we
will support them wherever we can.

As far as the difficult situation in southern
Afghanistan is concerned, we believe that the
Government of Afghanistan needs to secure an
enduring political settlement. That will require an
effective stabilization programme that supports
outreach efforts to reconcile Afghan communities and
disenfranchised groups and bring them into the
political process. Ordinary Afghans have to be shown
that progress is being made on the issues that affect
their daily lives. To support that process, the Afghan
Army and the International Security Assistance Force
will need to maintain sufficient military pressure on the
insurgency.

Let me also say a few words about the
international community. The comprehensive report
(S/2008/159) of the Secretary-General issued on
6 March rightly underscores the synergy in objectives
between the United Nations, NATO, the EU and
bilateral donors. We hope that the new resolution on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will build on that by further strengthening
the centrality of the United Nations. To be more
precise, as long as Afghan institutions need
international support to deal with development and
governance, the United Nations needs to take a lead
role in coordinating international efforts.

We welcome the high priority that Mr. Guehenno
has attached to cooperation between the United
Nations and NATO in Afghanistan, symbolized by the
presence of the Secretary-General at the upcoming
meeting to be held in Bucharest. We also welcome the
consideration of expanding UNAMA's presence in the
country. Asking the United Nations to take the lead
means that we, the international community, must be
prepared to give the United Nations the authority to
direct international efforts and that all other actors
need to be willing to be coordinated. We are very much
looking forward to Ambassador Eide taking up his
functions as the new Special Representative for

Afghanistan. We trust he will play a pivotal role in
better coordinating reconstruction and development
programmes on the ground.

Our goal should be to put our national
hobbyhorses out to pasture and replace them with a
strong multilateral engagement led by the United
Nations. The provincial reconstruction team - a
provincial military base used as a platform for aid
efforts for lack of an alternative - was, for instance,
always intended to be a temporary solution. The
Taliban and the drug traffickers are, however, not
confined by provincial borders. Nor indeed are poverty
and illiteracy. Thus, one of the provincial
reconstruction teams' main duties should be to make
themselves redundant as quickly as possible, so that
UNAMA, the United Nations funds and programmes
and, last but not least, the Afghan local governments
can take on their role. Against this background, we
would like to encourage the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to pursue as a matter of urgency a
strengthened role for the United Nations in all of the
country, and especially in the troubled south.

