Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

I would like to warmly thank the President of the
Togolese Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faure
Gnassingbe, for his initiative in organizing this
important debate. The report of the mission sent by the
Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
African Union, to assess the impact of the Libyan crisis
on the Sahel region (see S/2012/42), confirms an
alarming situation. The countries of the Sahel region
are facing a situation of chronic poverty, an imminent
humanitarian crisis and serious security problems,
which predated the Libyan crisis but were exacerbated
by it.

The acts of terrorist groups like Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram in West Africa, as
well as other armed groups and the multitude of illicit
traffickers, are transnational issues that concern all
States of the region and that threaten considerable
destabilization on a regional and even international
level. The report of the United Nations assessment
mission on piracy and other criminal activities in the
Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45) points to a similar
conclusion. A considerable effort will be required in
the sharing of intelligence, the updating of legal
frameworks, the building of the capacity needed to
allow States to fulfil their sovereign functions and the
fight against bad governance and corruption. The
meeting of 10 African heads of State in Cotonou on
18 February to discuss security in the Sahel region
should be commended as an important step in this
direction.

In the short term, a concerted security response,
as initiated by some of the States of the subregion,
notably through the pooling of resources, could truly
make a difference and should be supported by the
international community. Given the transnational
nature of organized crime and terrorist networks,
border control and Governments' presence in their
countries' most remote regions are two essential
elements, which should be at the heart of strategies and
operations, at the national, regional and multilateral
levels, in order to avoid the security vacuum being
filled by criminal and terrorist organizations.

Since it is obvious that security represents part of
the solution, any sustainable stabilization of the region
will need to be based on a parallel socio-economic
development of the countries of the region, with
particular emphasis on vocational training and job
creation for young people. In that spirit, Luxembourg
has provided substantial support over the past decades
to the States of the Sahel and West Africa, notably
Senegal, Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Cape
Verde. We intend to continue those partnerships in the
future.

We fully share the opinion of the Secretary-
General concerning the need to strengthen international
cooperation in support of the region and the need to
improve its coherence and coordination. The strategy
for the Sahel that the European Union recently adopted
is grounded in such an integrated approach.

In order to strengthen the dynamic that has been
generated, we trust that the new leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States, whom I
would like to congratulate on their election, will give
priority to the renewal of its regional action plan on
illicit drug trafficking and organized crime, so that all
countries affected by the scourge of drug trafficking
and organized crime may benefit from it and
participate in the West Africa Coast Initiative, in
partnership with the United Nations system and
INTERPOL. With its intimate knowledge of West
Africa, we would in particular encourage the United
Nations Office for West Africa to continue its efforts to
bring together the activities of the United Nations
system and establish links with major ongoing
regional, subregional and national initiatives.

The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
has a role to play in that regard. In the context of the
Guinea configuration, which I have the honour to chair,
important progress has been made in the area of the
reform of the judiciary and the security and defence
sectors. Similarly, the recent charges made by the panel
of judges investigating the violence of 28 September
2009 confirm the strong will of the Government of
Guinea to make progress in the fight against impunity.
We very much hope that Guinea will soon be able to
contribute actively to the West Africa Coast Initiative
and to the fight against the scourge of transnational
organized crime.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
Council's continuous work for a better integration of
efforts to fight transnational organized crime in the
Sahel region and West Africa, and to address its impact
on peace, stability and security.
Luxembourg is firmly convinced that it is
important to address the dimensions of peace and
security, of development and human rights in a
comprehensive manner, paying equal attention to each
of them.
