Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. I commend him and his team for
their skill and dedication in taking the Committee and
its work forward. I also take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the unflagging commitment of
the Group of Experts and their unstinting support for,
and cooperation with, the Committee in furthering the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Malaysia reaffirms its view that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of
weapons ofmass destruction. We continue to believe that
the establishment of effective precautionary measures
and systems to address potential nuclear, chemical or
biological proliferation is a collective responsibilty
incumbent upon all Member States, which must take the
lead in that regard. In that connection, we are pleased
to note that the Committee has recorded an increase
with respect to measures taken by Member States to
comply with the provisions of the resolution. We are
also pleased to note that, of 17 non-reporting States,
three began to report in 2015 as a result of the close and
sustained engagement by the Committee and its Chair.
We believe that that is a positive development, and we
encourage the Committee to continue its engagement
with the remaining States, with a view to achieving
universal coverage.

We share the concern highlighted by the Chair
in his briefing that the current 1540 regime does not
adequately provide for measures to address allegations
of the possession of weapons of mass destruction and
related technologies by non-State actors, particularly
terrorists and violent armed extremist groups. We
believe that the threat posed by such groups is real. A
renewed focus in that direction is therefore needed if
the 1540 regime is to remain relevant and effective. In
our view, the possibility of factoring in the work of the
Committee in the work and activities of the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Council is worth considering.
The difficulty in matching implementation assistance
requests with possible providers is another issued that
the Chair has highlighted. Given the limitations and
varying capacities of registered providers, we would
welcome collaborative approaches with stakeholders in
order to effectively and efficiently address shortcomings
of the present system.

Malaysia commends the Committee for its
ongoing engagement and cooperation with the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the
Biological Weapons Convention Implementation
Support Unit. Additionally, we welcome and support
the Committee's outreach to the World Customs
Organization, INTERPOL and the Financial Action
Task Force on Money Laundering. In our view, such
positive engagement and collaboration creates a better
understanding among all concerned and, in time, it will
lead to more effective and meaningful implementation
of the resolution.

In that context, Malaysia also welcomes the recently
held fourth Weisbaden Industry Process Conference
on Private Sector Engagement in Strategic Trade
Controls on the theme "Recommendations for effective
approaches to implement resolution 1540 (2004)", held
on 19 and 20 November in Germany. Moving forward,
we believe scope exists to further expand such cross-
sectoral engagement, including with parliamentarians
and academia, among others.

On the comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), Malaysia
will continue to lend its support and work alongside
other Committee members and the Group of Experts
to implement the review's work plan. We look forward
to the upcoming consultations with Member States,
and hope that such engagement can produce potential
synergies in approaches on activities to guide the
review in the coming year.

From 15 to 16 June, Malaysia, in its capacity
as current Chair of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), organized the seventh
ASEAN Regional Forum inter-sessional meeting on
non-proliferation and disarmament. The meeting
succeeded in raising the profile ofthe 1540 regime and its
effective implementation, as well as raising awareness
on the work of the Committee and the Group of Experts
in that regard. Among other outcomes, participants
reaffirmed their commitment to complement and
strengthen the international non-proliferation
architecture at the regional and subregional levels.
We commend the Committee's Group of Experts for
playing an instrumental role in ensuring the meeting's
success.

In conclusion, Malaysia firmly believes that the
full and effective implementation of resolution of
1540 at the national, regional and international levels
remains a fundamental bulwark against the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
Its effectiveness is also contingent to some extent on
progress being made in other international policymaking
processes. In that regard, the disappointing outcome of
the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons should
not hinder progress in the effective implementation
of the 1540 regime and, more generally, on capacity-
building efforts in the area of WMD-threat reduction.

