Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and Ms. Ursula Mueller for her comprehensive briefing.
We express gratitude for the important work done by
her Office to alleviate human suffering in Syria. We
also welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Russian Federation.

Peru is following with concern the humanitarian
crisis that is still looming over large areas of the Syrian
territory and that is setting the stage for extremism. In
the current situation, we are alarmed by the persistent
violence in north-western Syria and its impact on the
people, which is exacerbated by ongoing extensive
damage to civilian infrastructure, including hospitals
and schools.

We deplore the new reports of fatalities in the south
of Idlib, including of women and children, and the fact
that this is a breach of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, as well as mandates
specific to the Council on the Syrian conflict. That
must cease, as it undermines the trust required to build
sustainable peace in the country.

We also note with regret the consequences of this
escalation in terms of thousands of new internally
displaced persons, who require urgent assistance to
survive. We commend the professionalism and sense of
duty demonstrated by the United Nations personnel and
other agencies deployed in Syria to meet their needs.
We also underscore the moral and legal imperative of
guaranteeing their safety and providing them with the
facilities and access required for their work.

In that vein, we hope that the necessary permits will
be granted to the United Nations for further provision
of assistance to the inhabitants of Rukban camp as a
palliative measure until the countries directly involved
in this situation can reach a definitive solution that will
enable those people to return to their homes safely and
with dignity, especially given that 95 per cent of them
have expressed their desire to leave the camp and return
to their places of origin.

We also underscore the huge challenge of meeting
the critical needs of over 73,000 people in Al-Hol
camp, and the importance of continuing to mobilize the
international community to support them. To that end,
we deem it essential to continue to work on measures to
provide a better climate of understanding, in particular
with regard to the sensitive issues of identifying
missing persons, the recovery of their remains, the
release of detainees and the identification of missing
persons. We hope that new and better developments
in those crucial matters will help in the coming weeks
and months to promote the required de-escalation to
overcome the humanitarian disaster that continues to
affect the country.

Given the intensification of violence in recent
weeks and its devastating consequences on civilians,
we must remember the urgency of moving towards a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). In
that sense, we hope that the constitutional committee
can soon be established and that all Syrian parties,
especially the Government, will constructively commit
to its objectives.

