Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Mr. President, when I came to
see you for the bilaterals, I told you one thing. I said,
"Please keep the flag flying." You have been doing so
admirably well. Thank you for doing so, and I hope you
will continue to keep the flag flying for the rest of your
mandate.

My delegation would first of all like to congratulate
the Government and the people of Sierra Leone as a
whole on their relentless efforts to achieve peace.

The signing of the Lorne Peace Agreement by the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) represents an important milestone in
our collective quest for peace in Sierra Leone. This event
provides the Sierra Leonean people a unique opportunity
to turn a new page in their history, to a chapter of peace
after nine years of senseless war. The people of Sierra
Leone have undergone untold suffering. Peace in that
country is long overdue.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) also deserves
special commendation. We therefore thank all the
countries that contribute troops to ECOMOG for their
steadfast commitment to restoring relative safety and
security to Sierra Leone by putting to an end the carnage
that we all witnessed for so long.

The ceasefire agreement is holding, but the security
situation is extremely fragile. Everything should be done
to make sure that it holds permanently. The international
community must therefore continue to show its solidarity
with the Government and the people of Sierra Leone in
these trying moments. It cannot be gainsaid, however, that
the people of Sierra Leone bear the ultimate responsibility
for ensuring peace in their war-ravaged country. We must
build on these positive developments. We should not let
this opportunity slip away. This is why it is extremely
important for the leader of the RUF to return to Freetown,
as agreed in Lome. There is no room for tergiversation.

My delegation welcomes the commitment
demonstrated by the Government of Sierra Leone in its

 

efforts to implement the Lorne Peace Agreement. In the
minds of most Sierra Leoneans, peace is paramount. But
what is peace without justice?

This is why, in our view, every effort should be made
to address violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. There is the need for a delicate balance
under the circumstances. Like most delegations, we are
concerned about the blanket amnesty granted to the RUF.
While this may not foster justice, we understand the
circumstances under which it was granted. We also share
the disclaimer entered by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on this issue.

Let us be very clear about one thing: the people of
Sierra Leone have played their part. The rest of the
international community should also play its part by
pursuing and bringing to justice those accused of war
crimes. In this context, we welcome the establishment of
the national forum for human rights and the adoption of the
Human Rights Manifesto, which contains commitments for
immediate and sustained promotion and protection of
human rights. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission to
be established pursuant to the Agreement could go a long
way towards creating the environment for reconciliation.
We hope that that Commission will be established as soon
as possible.

While we are considering enhancing the strength of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL), very important and challenging tasks lie
ahead. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants is crucial to the peace process. We
understand that some 4,000 rebels are assembled in Makeni,
waiting to be disarrned. We should act swiftly to ensure
that the disarmament centres are opened quickly and that
disarmament work commences. Durable peace would be
unattainable if there were no successful disarmament of the
ex-combatants. In a region awash with small arms, the need
to act swiftly cannot be overemphasized.

Let me now turn to the humanitarian situation. The
humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone is a real catastrophe.
With the opening of roads that were hitherto closed and
general improvements in the level of access to those in
need, the number of people needing immediate and urgent
assistance has increased significantly. We thank all those
States and organizations that have been providing
assistance. However, a lot more remains to be done. We
therefore appeal for more assistance.

The victims of the war, in particular those who have
suffered maiming and mutilation, require special
assistance. The special needs of children and women
should also be given top priority. We welcome the
leading role being played by the United Nations
Children's Fund in this regard in cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

We understand that over 2,000 children were
abducted by the RUF. Although some few hundred of
them have been released, which we welcome, we urge it
to release all the remaining abductees in its custody.

The challenges with which Sierra Leone is
confronted are enormous and diverse. A comprehensive
political strategy and assistance programme is required.
We therefore agree with the Secretary-General that a
strategic framework for Sierra Leone will be necessary. In
this context, we welcome the establishment of the steering
group headed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

The assistance that the United Nations can provide
to Sierra Leone is crucial for the consolidation of peace
in that country. For this reason, we support the draft
resolution before us. We know that the level of
deployment of UNOMSIL needs to be further
strengthened, and we therefore look forward to the
Secretary-General's proposals for a concept of operations.
Work on this should be expedited, as time is of the
essence.

ECOMOG, too, needs to be beefed up.
Arrangements for the sharing of responsibilities between
the United Nations and ECOWAS need to be expedited.
It is imperative that we put on the ground a credible and
neutral force as soon as possible to carry out urgent tasks
and prevent a relapse into fighting.

It must be pointed out from the outset that
ECOMOG has material and logistics problems. We thank
all those States, in particular the United Kingdom and the
United States of America, for their vital support. Much
more is still needed. We encourage all those who can do
so to continue to provide assistance to ECOMOG so that
it can pursue the noble tasks of restoring peace to Sierra
Leone, and restoring to Sierra Leone its past glory as a
centre for learning and the training and development of
great minds, erasing the gruesome image of a killing
field.

 

