The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

On the occasion of the adoption of resolution 1044
(1996) on 31 January 1996, my delegation clearly stated its
position concerning terrorism, which Chile condemns and
repudiates. We also expressed our strongest rejection of the
attempted assassination of President Hosni Mubarak of
Egypt. At this time we wish to reiterate what we stated on
that occasion.

On 11 March 1996 we received the Secretary-
General's report contained in document S/ 1996/ 179. After
that, the Security Council undertook a long process of
consultations and negotiations. Today we have adopted a
new resolution on this subject, which stems from Sudan's
non-compliance with resolution 1044 (1996), which we
regret.

Chile listened carefully to the African members of the
Security Council to find guidance with respect to the path
we should follow. In that respect, we gave special
consideration in the Security Council to the option of
regional action, as well as to the views of the countries of
the region in question, and in particular, to the views of the
Organization of African Unity and its Secretary-General.

We have also been guided at all times - especially
now, when it has fallen to me to assume the delicate task
of President of the Security Council - by the need to
follow a procedure and a treatment of this question that
would be fair and transparent and in which the Security
Council would have all available background information
and evidence. The Sudan and all Governments wishing to
express their views on this subject were offered our full
cooperation, including the possibility of holding an open
debate of the Security Council, which was not requested
by any country.

The draft that became today's resolution gave rise to
considerable discussion of the measures to be adopted,
and, as we have said on various occasions, Chile, in
principle, has doubts as to the effectiveness of using
sanctions. We are convinced that economic sanctions
disproportionately affect the innocent and the weak rather
than the leaders responsible for the reprehensible acts for
which we impugn the countries.

In this case, the great challenge that the Security
Council still has ahead is how to apply sanctions that are
effective and, at the same time, human. This is not being
achieved with our current practices. Sanctions regimes
must be increasingly aimed at the leaders who are
politically responsible, and not at the common people. In
the quest for international peace and security the Security
Council cannot forget its humanitarian responsibility.

In this particular case, we are using diplomatic
sanctions which, while they exert a considerable degree
of pressure, cannot be equated with economic sanctions.

Together with this, we must also say that we are
deeply concerned over the statements of neighbouring
countries about the activities of the Sudan in their
territories. They are the countries of the region; they share
borders and should, in theory, be brotherly countries. We
are also concerned over the information that terrorist
groups could be operating in their territories.

The Security Council will continue to follow
developments related to the implementation of this new
resolution. The terrorism of a few, or of many, cannot
leave us indifferent. The Security Council must know
how to act when it determines that it is occurring.

We appeal to the Government of the Sudan to do
everything within its power to comply with the resolution
adopted today. We sincerely hope that in that way this
item can be removed from the agenda of the Security
Council.
 

For all these reasons, we voted in favour of the
resolution.

I new resume my function as the President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers. The Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item

on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.20 pJn.
