Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): At the outset, let me
thank Malaysia for organizing today's open debate and
express my appreciation for the work and dedication
of today's briefers, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Ms. Yoka Brandt and Ms. Eunice
Apio, not only for their presentations but also for the
work they are doing on behalf of children in the most
challenging situations imaginable. Slovakia wishes
to align itself with the statement made earlier by the
representative of the European Union. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which we proudly
co-sponsored; it is designed to strengthen efforts to
address the abduction of children and to reaffirm
measures for the protection of children in armed
conflict.

Not long ago, in March, we gathered here in the
Security Council Chamber to seek to put an end to what
has unfortunately become a daily reality for millions of
children in conflict-affected areas (see S/PV.7410). Less
than three months later, we are back here discussing the
issue again. One could, of course, ask whether twice in
three months is not too often. Unfortunately, it is not.
As stated in the Secretary-General's recently published
report on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409),

"There were unprecedented challenges in 2014
with regard to the protection of tens of millions
of children growing up in situations affected
by conflict Mass abductions of civilians,
including children, have become an increasingly
prevalent feature of conflict in many situations
The abduction of children had primarily been a
precursor to other violations, such as killing and
maiming, recruitment and use, or sexual violence".

That is the unfortunate reality, 10 years after the
Security Council adopted its resolution 1612 (2005),
on children and armed conflict, and now the topic has
become a regular item on the Council agenda.

Allow me to point out another area of concern:
terrorism and violent extremism. That threat to
children has at least three dimensions. First, children
have become deliberate targets, often subjected to
extreme violence ranging from sexual abuse and forced
marriage to kidnappings and brutal killings. Secondly,
they have become weapons, made to fight alongside
armed groups and at times used as human bombs.
Twenty-seven suicide attacks were reported in the first
five months of this year, and it is an even more tragic
fact that women and children carried out three quarters
of those attacks. Thirdly, many children have become
trapped in the web of terrorist narratives. It is the
younger generation that most actively uses the Internet
and social networks. At the same time, it is the Internet
and social media that serve to spread such narratives
and lure young people into the ranks of terrorists and
violent extremists.

Our response must be strong, targeted and
comprehensive. We must continuously focus on children
and teenagers. We must approach them at a very early
stage in a manner with which they are familiar and using
language they understand - and they most certainly do
not understand the language of bureaucracy, especially
not that of international bureaucracy. We must give
them genuine prospects for their future and banish the
false dreams of terrorist propaganda, which very often
turn into nightmares.

I would like to point out four areas on which to
concentrate in order to improve the situation of children
in armed conflict. The first is peacekeeping and child
protection. Let me highlight the critical importance of
providing military, police and civilian peacekeepers
with adequate pre-deployment and in-mission
training on mission-specific child-protection issues.
Priority should be given to combating all types and
forms of sexual Violence committed against children.
The inclusion of child protection in the training of
peacekeepers, the mandates of crisis-management
operations, standard operating procedures and rules of
engagement should be mandatory for all uniformed and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.

The second area is the restoration of justice and
security. That is akey aspect ofpost-conflictrecovery and
peacebuilding. Countries in post-conflict development
must, with the help of the international community, take
concrete steps to address the restoration of justice and
security, and demonstrate their commitment to the rule
of law and to the vital democratic principle of civilian

control of the armed and security forces. Among many
other factors, properly tailored security-sector reforms
affect the safety and security of children and youth. In
its resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
the Security Council expressed the clear conviction that
"the protection of children in armed conflict should be
an important aspect of any comprehensive strategy to
resolve conflict and build peace".

The third area is the establishment of child-
protection units in national security forces. We must
go far beyond a zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in such forces. Units should be
trained how to address child and youth issues in the
traumatic post-conflict period.

The fourth area is education and communication. In
order to raise young people who are resistant to extremist
ideologies, we should handle our communication
strategies better and implement "educate-to-tolerate"
curricula so as to form a generation that will view
social diversity as a natural environment to live in.

