Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, we would
like to congratulate the delegation of Malaysia on its
presidency of the Security Council during the month
of June, and to thank it for convening this meeting. We
must acknowledge the heavy work load in the Council's
agenda, which sometimes puts unbearable pressure
on small delegations, as is the case of our own. The
situation does not pertain specifically to the Malaysian
presidency. In fact, the heavy workload is a structural
feature of Security Council work matters. Additionally,
the Council is faced by increasing conflict situations
around the world which are imposing very heavy work
schedules upon it.

In terms of work for the month of June, African
and the Middle East issues were central in the Security
Council discussions and deliberations. On the African
issues, we had the occasion to hold a dialogue with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central African Region, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily.
Mr. Bathily was candid in pointing out the very worrying
situation in the region, and above all, the activities of
the Lord's Resistance Army, its criminal deeds and the
actions being taken for its demise. Mr. Bathily portayed
the situation prevailing in the Central African Republic
as a ray of hope with the completion of the Bangui
Forum, which the country's broad political spectrum
joined for the first time in many years. According to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the efforts of regional and international mediators have
been instrumental in laying the ground for the gradual
solution of the crisis, with a fundamental benchmark in
the holding of elections in October 2015.

Still in the Central African region, the situation
in Burundi has become a source of great concern to
the Security Council. The holding of elections and its
consequences in and around Burundi, as well as the
stance adopted by regional stakeholders, has had a
great impact in the proceedings of the Security Council
during the month, with divisions surfacing among
Council members on how to best to assist Burundi.
However, great concerns remain, and the situation in
Burundi will surely be at the centre of the Council's
agenda for the next month, we hope, and not for the
worst reasons.

Tangible progress seems to be occurring in Cote
d'Ivoire and Mali. It is our expectation that both
countries are on the right track towards lasting peace.
Darfur remains very problematic, with little or no
progress at all towards the establishment of a more
peaceful environment. In Cote d'Ivoire, a volatile
situation seems to be emerging, and the Security
Council adopted resolution 2226 (2015) extending the
United Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire mandate in
preparation for the Mission's drawdown if, as we hope,
the elections to be held in October are successful and
the security situation has stabilized. The resolution
transmits some sense of optimism that things in Cote
d'Ivoire might work out and the country may enter a
phase of sustained peace and stability.

Concerning Mali, the Council took stock of
recent developments with the signing of the peace
agreement by all parties. The resolution adopted by the
Council, extending the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, entrusts the Mission with fundamental tasks, inter
alia, to deploy efforts to ensure the implementation of
the peace agreement, the monitoring of the ceasefire
and support for the return of the State authority to the
north of the country. Now it is high time to mobilize all
efforts in order to make things succeed in Mali.

Darfur was a most complex and divisive issue during
the work of the month. The adoption of a resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur was quite an achievement
in such a divisive atmosphere, especially taking into
account the exit strategy established for the Mission, as
strongly requested by the Sudanese authorities and its
linkage to a set of benchmarks to be met. Most likely,
Darfur will remain a fixed item in the Council's work
for some time despite the bold desire to end the mission
in Darfur.

The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa, chaired by Angola, held
a meeting during the month of June related to the
electorial processes in various African countries
during the biennium. The meeting included the Special
Representatives in West and Central Africa, who
attended via video teleconference and briefed members
on country-specific situations related to electoral
processes and conflict situations that might arise from
them due to the non-compliance of many political
actors with the constitutional rules and the election
results. Even so, they are considered by international
observation teams to be just and fair. The Permanent
Observer of the African Union, who also took part in
the meeting, outlined the African Union position on
the prevention of post-election-related conflicts, and
noted the responsibility of every individual State to
respect the African Union electoral framework and its
constitutional order.

The Council gave extensive consideration to the
situation in the Middle East, with particular emphasis on
the conflicts in Syria, Yemen and Palestine. However,
contrary to the moderate optimism that we assigned to
certain evolving situations in Africa, no solutions to
these conflicts are in sight. On the contrary, the Middle
East conflicts seem to lead to an abyss. The growing
terrorist threat in the region constitutes an extremely
dangerous development, with evil contours that only a
wise collective effort can contain and eradicate. The
Security Council, if it acted in a united manner and
really focused in the search for solutions to the most
intractable conflicts, could represent this collective
effort and embody the wisdom necessary to put an
end to bloodshed and to the immense human suffering
imposed upon the peoples of the region.
Some of the debates and briefings held during
the month were important moment in the Council's
work. The debate on children and armed conflict,
and the briefings on peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and on subsidiary bodies, were relevant contributions
to deepening the thematic agenda of the Security
Council. In particular, the debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.7466), a central theme of
the Malaysian presidency, was a remarkable success
with the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which
added abduction to the framework of international
law and as a criterion for listing parties in the annex
of the Secretary-General's annual reports on children
and armed conflict. In addition, the debate added a
dimension to the Working Group's efforts to keep the
issue at the forefront of the Security Council's agenda.
The briefings on peacekeeping and peacebuilding were
important contributions to the debate on the review
of peacekeeping and on peacebuilding architecture to
which we must add a review of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security.

We have received a letter from the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group regarding
the selection and appointment of the next Secretary-
General in 2016. As Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, we will try to work with Member States
to find ways for the practical implementation of the
proposals contained in the ACT letter.

Finally, we would like to refer to the semi-annual
briefings by the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and related committees at a time when the
fight against terrorism has become a real international
emergency. Conscious of the danger that terrorism
represents, the issue enjoys the unanimous support
of Council members, and the meeting reflected that
reality (see S/PV.7463).

International criminal justice was part of the
monthly agenda with debates on the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and for the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court briefed the Council on
the issue of Darfur and the case of President Al-Bashir
of the Sudan. Also noted was the need to review
Council referrals to the Court since the present system
undermines the Tribunal's prestige and authority and
creates unsolvable problems with stakeholders as
distinct as the African Union and the International
Criminal Court.

