The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdi
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/804, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its previous
resolutions and the statements of its President
concerning the situation in Somalia, in particular
resolution 1558 (2004) of 17 August 2004 and the
statement by its President (S/PRST/2004/24)
dated 14 July 2004.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council commends the recent
progress made at the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference in Nairobi, including
the establishment of the Transitional Federal
Parliament of Somalia and the subsequent
election of the Speaker of the Parliament and
Transitional President, which are important steps
towards the re-establishment of peace and
stability in Somalia.

"The Security Council, underscoring the
importance of consolidating the gains made so
far, looks forward to the formation, in the near
future, of a Transitional Federal Government
inside Somalia, capable of beginning
reconciliation and reconstruction in a spirit of
consensus and dialogue with all the Somali
parties.

"The Security Council, in this regard,
encourages the Transitional Federal Parliament
and the President to take further steps to select a
Prime Minister and an efficient and effective
Cabinet, and to develop a preliminary programme
of action and timetable for the transitional period.
The Council urges the transitional federal
institutions to involve women fully in post-
conflict reconciliation and reconstruction. The
Council also notes the ongoing discussion to
outline possible coordination mechanisms
between the transitional federal government and
the international community.

"The Security Council commends member
States of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), in particular the
Government of Kenya, as well as other countries
and organizations for constructively supporting
the Somali national reconciliation process for the
past two years, and encourages them to continue
their efforts in support of the cause of peace in
Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes and
expresses its support for the commitment of the
African Union to assist the transitional process in
Somalia, in particular through planning for a
peace support mission to Somalia, including
options for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and encourages the international
donor community to contribute to these efforts.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
efforts of the United Nations Political Office, the
United Nations country team, the Somalia Aid
Coordination Body, the European Union, the
IGAD Partners Forum, the League of Arab States
and others engaged in developing a peace-
the

building framework leading to the formation of a
rapid assistance package and calls on the
international community to support this package,
as well as emergency rehabilitation and economic
development programmes, as security returns to
Somalia.

"The Security Council shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that, 'at this stage of
progress in the Somali peace process, there will
likely be a call for an expanded peace-building
role and presence for the United Nations, in order
that it may assist the Somali parties in
implementing their agreement. At the same time,
it is clear that any enhanced role for the
Organization in Somalia must be incremental, and
should be based on the outcome of discussions
with the new government.' The Security Council
looks forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations in this regard.

"The Security Council urges the Somali
leaders to create a favourable environment for the
future transitional federal government by making
determined efforts to bring about improvements
in the security situation on the ground and
reiterates that those who persist on the path of
confrontation and conflict will be held
accountable. The Council will continue to
monitor the situation closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

