Mr. Al-Douri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to wish you every
success. I should like, through you, to thank the
Ambassador of Tunisia, Said Ben Mustapha, for a job
well done as President of the Council last month, and
also to extend my thanks to you for your quick
response to the request to consider this important and
serious issue, which deals with the very essence of the
work of the Council - the maintenance of
international peace and security.

My delegation, despite the fact that we are very
doubtful as to the possibility of finding a just solution
to this very serious problem, hopes that today's
discussions of the issue will lead to an end to the
continuous and unjust aggression to which the unarmed
brotherly Arab Palestinian people are facing on their
land and in their homes.

We have previously dealt with this issue - not so
long ago. The Council held formal and informal
consultations, but, regrettably, we did not reach any
results. This is because of the insistence of one
country - the United States of America - on
maintaining the status quo, under many flimsy pretexts
and excuses.

That State provides the occupying Zionist entity
with the means of force that enable it to exercise daily
its aggressive policies against the Palestinian people. It
also continues to direct threats against many other Arab
countries.

The failure of the Council to deter the aggressor
was, and still is, one of the principal reasons for the
continuation of the Palestinian bloodshed and the
increase in the number of martyrs, among them
Palestinian youths and children. All of this takes place
in full view of the international community, which
seems incapable of taking any measures to halt this
aggression and to put an end to the occupation.

Is it not strange that a notorious terrorist with a
long history of bloodshed, who is directly responsible
for shedding Palestinian blood, should preside over the
Zionist entity? Indeed, this has led to the unmasking of
the ugly face of Zionism. This person, who carried out
the Sabra and Shatila massacres, is the same person
who desecrated the Temple Mount on 28 September,
leading to the wave of violence against the
Palestinians, which has not yet stopped.

This terrorist started his work, as an official in the
Zionist entity, by escalating the aggression through the
taking of measures to dissect the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. He has exercised his hobbies in a most
arrogant manner: political assassinations, the
imposition of sieges and the blocking of access to food
and medicine by Palestinian villages and cities, thus
violating the principles of the Geneva Conventions and
of international humanitarian law.
This outrageous situation and these irresponsible,
criminal measures make it imperative for the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities under the Charter
and to take decisive measures aimed at halting this
unceasing aggression against the unarmed Palestinian
people, who have nothing but stones.

My delegation has clarifled its position with
respect to this issue on more than one occasion. In the
Security Council meeting held on 4 October 2000, we
clearly pointed out that the question is not how to force
the Palestinians into an unbalanced round of
negotiations with the occupying Power, because the
negotiations will definitely not restore their rights.

But one must consider the essence of the problem
in order to find the appropriate solutions. The problem
began when a British citizen by the name of Balfour
promised, in 1917, another British citizen, by the name
of Rothschild, that he would set up a national
homeland for him and for other extremists in Palestine.
Thus the prince gave to others what he did not own.

The question essentially concerns the military
occupation of Palestinian land by a flood of
adventurers from Europe and other parts of the world,
under the pretext that it was an unpopulated land. At
issue are the continuous and repetitive acts of
aggression carried out by this usurping entity against
the Arab States and its occupation of the Palestinian
territory since 1948, in addition to its occupation of the
Syrian Golan and Lebanese territory.

In summary, we are dealing with the tragedy of a
people under occupation, subjected to the worst forms
of repression, brutality and displacement. The question
is the suffering of more than 4 million Palestinian
refugees, who were forced to leave their land, in
contravention of the principles of international law,
which guarantee their full right to return to their
homeland.

The Zionist, racist creed, which is expansionist,
arrogant and hateful, is the reason behind all the
tragedies that have befallen the Palestinian people,
including the desecration of holy sites that more than a
billion Muslims, and Christians as well, hold sacred.

In short, this is the essence of the Palestinian
question, and these are its principal components. So if
we want a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, we
should consider all these elements, because together
they represent the essence of the tragedy of the
Palestinian people. If we fail to do so, the Zionist
aggression will continue, and the Security Council will
continue to be incapable of assuming its
responsibilities vis-a-vis this serious situation, which
threatens, and will continue to threaten, international
peace and security.

