Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
warmly welcome you to the presidency, Sir, and I thank
you for your kind words earlier in this debate.

It is very good to see the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi here with us today. It has been extremely
important for us to listen to their statements and to
engage in a very necessary debate.

Like my two predecessors in this discussion, I
point to and fully support the statement which Sweden
will make on behalf of the European Union later on
today, but I want to make one or two remarks in my
national capacity.

The United Kingdom takes very careful note of
the work done so far by the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We thank the members of the Panel for their
diligence and their courage.

The report of the Panel addresses an issue of
considerable concern: the way the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are being used
to fuel the conflict there. There is more work to be
done to shed light on this problem, and we therefore
support the extension of the Panel's mandate.

In the presidential statement which the Council
will adopt later today, we set out guidelines for the
continued work of the Panel. Among other things, the
extended mandate will allow the Panel to pursue
further information which was not previously available
and to follow up responses to the Panel's report,
including the extremely important ones today. We
believe that an addendum to the Panel's work will
provide an opportunity to produce a fully balanced
analysis and to record, as far as possible, corroborated
evidence relating to all parties to the conflict.

This is a key element, because one of the most
important things the work of the Panel has done is to
bring this problem, of which we had all heard reports,
closer to the surface. We now need a serious and frank
dialogue with all concerned, but especially with the
parties to the conflict. Today's debate is a start, and,
given the vigorous contributions we have heard so far,
the debate is, of course, going to continue.

We and all the parties agree that illegitimate
exploitation has to end. That is a vitally important basis
of agreement. But there is also, of course, some
disagreement on the precise facts of what was and is
illegitimate exploitation. That is inevitable, given the
circumstances in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the scope of the problem. We must engage
with each other and try to achieve greater clarity, but
we also need to focus on the primary goal here, which
is not to punish or narrowly to assign blame, but to
tackle the problem in the interests of promoting the
wider peace process and alleviating the suffering of the
Congolese people. It is their resources which have been
unscrupulously exploited for the benefit of others.

We do not regard resources as being the cause of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
nor would addressing this problem alone solve that
conflict. But the natural resources of that country have
become part of what fuels the conflict, so all of the
parties must recommit themselves to work across the
board to bring an end to the conflict. In that context,
the Panel might usefully focus, in the next three
months of work, on better long-term sectoral strategies,
concentrating on specific materials, for instance, gold,
diamonds and coltan.

It is vital for the future peace, stability and
development of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that its natural resources should work for the benefit of
its people. In addressing the abuses, we must also be
prepared to help the Government and the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to build effective
and transparent structures for legitimate exploitation
and trade in resources, including with its neighbours.
We therefore look to the Panel to establish a
comprehensive approach to the long-term aspects of
the problem which could help determine the success or
failure of the future of our efforts to bring peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to the region.

