Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): 1 have
the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of
the States members of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as Chair of the
OIC Group.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate South
Africa on its successful presidency of the Council this
month. I would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his comprehensive briefing this morning.

Today's discussion highlights the alarming situation
on the ground and the need to act urgently to save the
prospects for peace and the two-State solution. In that
regard, the OIC member States remain committed to
an outcome that enables an independent Palestinian
State based on the 4 June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, according to the relevant
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.

We would like to once again reiterate that reaching
a just and comprehensive solution to the conflict will
not only enable Palestine and Israel to live side by side
in peace and security but also support the stability of
the region. Otherwise, the continuation of that injustice
will be exploited by extremist groups for recruitment
and radicalization, which can only further destabilize
the region.

Therefore, we call on the Council to implement
effective measures, in line with its duties under the
Charter of the United Nations and its own resolutions,
to put an end to this conflict, including by compelling
Israel to halt its illegal policies in Palestine.

The OIC member States particularly deplore
the continued building of new settlements and the
expansion of existing ones, as well as the annexation
and confiscation of land in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We also draw the
Council's attention to the resolution adopted by the OIC
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on 15 September, in
which the OIC member States rejected and condemned
any intention to annex parts of the West Bank. The OIC
resolution considers such actions a dangerous escalation
and a flagrant breach of the United Nations Charter.

Another source of concern is the unlawful effort to
alter the historical status and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem. That includes the illegal
and provocative acts concerning the Christian and
Islamic holy sites in the city, including in particular
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Such actions threaten the sanctity,
stability and status of those holy sites and may fuel
further Violence and extremism in the region.

Similarly, we are worried about the deterioration of
the humanitarian and economic situation in Palestine,
especially in the Gaza Strip, which remains under an
Israeli blockade. As we have heard in every briefing on
this issue, Gaza is suffering from a lack of medicines
and health-care equipment, limited supplies of
electricity and water and high rates of unemployment
and poverty. The harsh living situation has spread
despair among the 2 million people living in Gaza,
leading to what the health teams of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) call an epidemic deterioration
of mental health conditions. In addition, the United
Nations warned in a recent report that an increasingly
fragile Palestinian economy will lead to a higher risk of
violence and instability. Such trends are alarming and
should be a source of grave concern to us all.

Given the current challenges, the OIC member
States recommend that the Security Council and the
wider international community prioritize the following.

First, we must create an environment conducive to
peace efforts by reversing negative trends on the ground.
That requires halting any illegal and provocative
measures that undermine the two-State solution, such
as settlement activities, which are highlighted in
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). This is fundamental to salvaging the two-
State solution and ultimately bringing an end to this
illegal occupation.

We also call for Israel's full withdrawal from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions.
We further affirm the need for all external parties to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria
and reiterate our support for the political solution of the
Syrian crisis consistent with resolution 2254 (2015).

Secondly, we need to drive international momentum
to launch credible negotiations on all final-status issues
in the Middle East peace process, in accordance with
the established terms of reference.

Finally, we must urgently avert the further
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Palestine and alleviate the humanitarian
needs and suffering of the Palestinian people, including
Palestinian refugees. We encourage Member States
to provide funds or to increase their contributions to
UNRWA, the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations entities that are working
diligently to provide education and health care, to
improve the livelihoods of Palestinians and to support
economic recovery and development. In that regard,
the OIC member States reiterate their strong support
for UNRWA, which plays a vital role in supporting
Palestinian refugees and maintaining regional stability,
and for the renewal of its mandate.

In conclusion, we affirm that our goal is to achieve
the long-delayed vision of two States, Palestine and
Israel, living side by side in peace and security. The OIC
member States will continue to support international
efforts to promote a just, comprehensive, lasting and
peaceful solution to end this conflict, which, in our
View, is a vital prerequisite for regional and international
peace and security.
