Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I congratulate you, Sir, on
presiding over the Security Council's work this month
in an excellent manner. I also appreciate the convening
of this open debate on this very important issue.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and wishes to add its own
comments.

It is indeed welcome that the Security Council
has shown serious concern about the possible
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery by non-State actors. The threat of
such proliferation is real. Therefore, United Nations
Member States have expressed their anxiety about it on
many occasions in the past.

In this era of global terrorism of increasing
sophistication, the international community ought to
engage in collective efforts to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling into the wrong hands. For
durable success, such efforts must be an integral part of
the process of ridding the world of all weapons of mass
destruction. As such, my delegation commends the
stated objective of the draft resolution and applauds its
sponsors for their hard work and ingenuity. However,
we have a few fundamental problems that pose
enormous difficulties for us.

First, the Security Council lacks competence in
making treaties. We are afraid that the Council, through
this draft resolution, is seeking to establish something
tantamount to a treaty by its fiat. This is likely to
undermine the intergovernmental treaty-making
process and implementation mechanisms.

Secondly, the proposed draft resolution has no
concrete measures that would bring terrorists and other
non-State actors into compliance with its own provisions
and those of the existing non-proliferation regime. It adds
very little of value to the existing disarmament and
non-proliferation regime, but it imposes tremendous
new obligations on Member States, many of which
might not have the necessary resources to meet them.
The best way to address the issue would have been to
strengthen the existing regime.

Thirdly, the opaque and exclusive decision-
making process in the Council does not inspire much
confidence among the wider membership of the United
Nations. It deprives the majority of United Nations
Member States of the opportunity to participate in
negotiations leading to agreements and decisions that
would have profound and wide ramifications for
Member States.

Fourthly, it is completely incomprehensible to my
delegation as to why the draft resolution needs to be
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Council,
as it appears, wants to keep the option open of using
the present draft resolution to impose its will on
Member States which could compromise their
sovereign rights.

Fifthly, the draft resolution is riddled with
ambiguities and many speakers have already
highlighted that aspect. The monitoring mechanism
envisaged in the draft lacks transparency and its time
frame is unrealistic. It is critical that all United Nations
Member States feel comfortable with the draft
resolution before it comes for action to the floor of the
Council. We appreciate the consultations undertaken by
the sponsors of the draft resolution before us and
encourage them to engage in further consultations to
address all key concerns raised here today.

The Council needs the willing support of the
broader membership to maintain international peace
and security. To ensure such support, the Council
should work within its mandate and be seen to be doing
so. Therefore, it should resist the temptation of acting
as a world legislature, a world administration and a
world court rolled into one.

