Mr. Feltman: The deep-seated fragilities stretching
across the broad Sahel region of Africa are a matter
of growing concern to the people and Governments
of the region as well as to the broader international
community and the Security Council. The threats and
challenges cut across borders and disciplines, and their
solutions must be cooperative and comprehensive. I
am pleased, therefore, to brief the Council today on
the progress made in the development of an integrated
regional strategy for the Sahel that encompasses
security, governance, development, human rights
and humanitarian dimensions, as requested of the
Secretary-General in resolution 2056 (2012), adopted
on 5 July.

Let me first underline some of the main challenges
in the region, which is receiving renewed attention
as a result of the complex and deeply worrisome
crisis in Mali. The kinds of stress factors tearing
today at Mali's social and political fabric are not
unique to that country. Politically, the Sahel region
has long been characterized by cyclical instability
and unconstitutional changes of Government. State
fragility is also visible in the economic and social
spheres, given the limited capacity of authorities to
deliver basic services and institutionalize dialogue.
Economically, the Sahel States suffer from extreme
poverty, with human development levels among the
lowest in the world. Socially, the region suffers from
fractures rooted in societal divides in some countries
of the region. Political uprisings in those countries have
been spurred just as much along ethnic lines, including
in successive Tuareg revolts in the Niger and Mali and
political conflicts in Mauritania. While States have
recognized the need to engage with wide sections of
the population to heal the social rifts dividing them,
it has proven difficult to do so in the context of weak
institutions, corruption and marginalization.

The challenges in the Sahel are not only political,
but also involve the areas of security, humanitarian
resilience and human rights. The long, porous borders
of the Sahel region present a significant security
challenge because they facilitate the activities of
transnational criminal and terrorist groups, especially
in remote and poorly administered regions. Porous
borders also facilitate trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons. Coupled with the effects of continued internal
armed conflicts, those various threats undermine
economic development.

Human rights challenges in the region result from a
combination of long-standing weaknesses in the rule of
law, social exclusion and discrimination. Countries in
the Sahel have traditionally suffered from weak national
human rights protection systems, with the judiciary
often lacking independence or being under-resourced.
Accountability is lacking and discriminatory practices
against women and minorities are all too common.

Too often households and communities do not
have the capability to withstand the damaging effects
of the multiple climate and market shocks. For the
most vulnerable, survival strategies during a severe
crisis include selling off assets, particularly livestock,
pulling children out of school, reducing the quantity
and nutritional quality of food and consuming grain
that may be required as seed for the next planting
season. While they may save some lives, such
strategies compromise the ability of households to
rebuild after a crisis and have a life-long impact on
children's development. To break that negative spiral,
it is necessary to develop programmes that support the
households most vulnerable to humanitarian crises so
that they can better absorb shocks, rebuild after a crisis
and support a longer-term transformation through
education and livelihood diversification.

I would like to take this opportunity to remind the
international community of the humanitarian plight
of the people of the Sahel. The emergency this year is
the third of this scale since 2005. More than 18 million
people were estimated to be at risk of food insecurity
in 2012, and more than 1 million children in the region
are at risk of suffering from severe acute malnutrition.

Food and nutrition insecurity may ease in October
with the first harvest and a subsequent drop in food
prices, but many households will continue to feel the
consequences of the crisis. Further efforts are required
within the current rainy season; for example, we have
seen an increase in reported cases of cholera and
malaria.

In view of the multiple recurrent and chronic
emergencies the region is facing, it is critical that the
international community commit to deal effectively
with the underlying structural causes of vulnerability
in the Sahel. As humanitarian agencies continue to
provide life-saving assistance and address the most
acute needs, we will also collectively aim at rebuilding
assets, supporting livelihoods, scaling up social
protection, and providing access to basic services
without any form of discrimination. With sufficient and
sustained resources, we will be able to consolidate the
gains achieved through this range of interventions.

It is in this context that United Nations regional
organizations in Dakar, including the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Regional Directors Team
and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator have
worked with Headquarters in developing the integrated
response strategy for the Sahel. It builds upon the
work of the the plan of action and the framework for
resilience in the Sahel, which focuses on humanitarian
and development challenges and looks at strengthening
the resilience of communities in the region.

The integrated strategy provides a conceptual
framework and strategic priorities to guide United
Nations engagement in the Sahel at the regional level,
and sets the basis for follow-up consultations with
regional organizations, Governments and key actors
in the region. The strategy will be comprehensive in
scope, preventive in nature and respectful of States'
international human rights obligations, and will build
on existing mechanisms in the region. The strategy
is regional because political and security challenges
are interconnected, because environmental concerns
cannot be geographically isolated, and because building
economic resilience is restricted not to communities,
but to the ability of the region as a whole to withstand
climate and market shocks. As such, the focus of the
strategy will be on areas where the United Nations
can best engage on regional or cross-border issues and
contribute to strengthening regional and subregional
cooperation. Engagements will be anchored in national
ownership and driven by regional needs, in a fluid
exchange with implementing partners and Sahel
Member States.

One of the important strategic areas of engagement
where the United Nations may bring added value is the
establishment of a forum for regional and international
partners to discuss and coordinate their Sahel
strategies. We also believe that the United Nations can
provide expertise and support the sharing of national-
level experiences to create synergies on disaster risk
reduction, agricultural production and changing
grazing patterns, social safety nets, environmental
sustainability and water management.

We can promote conciliation, mediation and
arbitration, including by strengthening local and
regional capacityiesto prevent cross-border tension and
mediate local conflicts. We can assist in developing
regional integrated strategies and approaches to
counter terrorism and organized crime, including
through the provision of expertise on developing
legal and institutional frameworks and anti-money-
laundering measures. Importantly, we can assist in
developing coordinated regional approaches to address
the proliferations of arms and weapons and improve
border management and cooperation.

In implementing all of these actions, the strategy
will incorporate a human rights-based approach that
encompasses the non-negotiable principles ofrespect for
participation, non-discrimination and accountability. It
needs to be re-emphasized that the blue-print for the
implementation of the strategy should emerge from a
process of broad discussions, debate and consensus-
building with national and international partners to
develop a sense of collective ownership.

While the integrated regional strategy for the
Sahel will help the United Nations to deliver as one
in the region, it is crucial that we acknowledge the
importance of coordination with other important
partners of the Sahel. The United Nations is looking to
work with them in the implementation of the strategy,
building upon the initiatives already in place to offer
coherent and coordinated international support to the
people and States of the Sahel. In particular, the United
Nations is looking at synergies with the European
Union in the implementation of its Strategy for
Security and Development in the Sahel. We are looking
at continuing to work with the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States, and to
build upon their plans of action on drug control and
crime prevention. We are looking to engage with other
subregional organizations and bilateral partners on the
implementation of the strategy, including by working
with national Governments in the implementation of
their own programmes, such as Niger's national strategy
on terrorism, security and development or Mauritania's
food security and humanitarian strategies.

As part of this consultative process, the Secretary-
General intends to host a high-level meeting on the Sahel
on 26 September, in the margins of the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. The key objective of
the meeting is to present, in broad strokes, the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and generate
international support for its implementation. It will
also take stock of recent developments in the Sahel and
examine current national, regional and international
efforts to address the multiple challenges confronting
the region. In addition, the meeting will aim at
re-energizing the international response to requests for
assistance by the Governments in the Sahel region and
United Nations agencies to meet the most immediate
needs of the population. The Secretary-General is
convinced that the issue of the Sahel requires focused
attention and follow-up, and he is still examining how
best we can do that.

In closing, I call on the members ofthe Council and
the wider international community to support United
Nations efforts in the development of the integrated
regional strategy, as well as to support the humanitarian
appeal. I can assure the Council that the United Nations
will remain committed to building the capacity of the
States in the Sahel to secure peace and stability for the
region.

