Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the Council's unanimous adoption today
of resolution 2387 (2017), renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). It affirms the important role ofa Mission
that continues to represent the core contribution of the
United Nations to maintaining stability and peace in
the Central African Republic, particularly in the light
of the increasing challenges in the country and the
deterioration of the security situation owing to increasing
sectarian and religious violence. Clashes involving
armed groups are also posing an increasing threat to
civilians, MINUSCA troops and humanitarian workers.

Egypt therefore welcomes the fact that the
Mission's mandate focuses on a number of priority
tasks, notably support to the political and reconciliation
process. We are especially pleased that the resolution
requires the Mission to work in partnership with the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
support of the political efforts of the African Union
and the relevant subregional organizations. Egypt
believes firmly that African efforts, with the support
of the United Nations and international partners,
represent the best way to reach a political settlement
and comprehensive agreement in the Central African
Republic. We are also pleased that the mandate focuses
on the protection of civilians. The resolution provides
for measures to increase MINUSCA's effectiveness and
its ability to implement its mandate, including the fact
that it specifies the latest increase in MINUSCA'S troop
numbers, which should enable it to deal more effectively
with the security challenges across the country.

Egypt is one of the largest troop-contributors to
MINUSCA and to peacekeeping operations in general.
In our view, the way to increase the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions is through cooperation within
a framework of triangular cooperation between the
Security Council, as the organ mandated to approve the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, the troop- and
police-contributing countries, as the implementers of
the mandates, and the Secretariat of the United Nations.
We therefore emphasize the importance of addressing
all issues relating to the efficiency and effectiveness
of troops participating in peacekeeping operations
within the framework of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly,
as the appropriate platform for such matters. In that
regard, Egypt welcomes the efforts of MINUSCA,
in partnership with troop- and police-contributing
countries, to address sexual exploitation and abuse,
which has led to a significant reduction in the number
of such cases, a fact recognized in resolution 2387
(2017). Egypt calls for continuing those efforts on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 71/278, adopted
by consensus, as it is the most comprehensive and
appropriate framework for promoting both efforts
to combat sexual exploitation and abuse within
peacekeeping missions and the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy.

Achieving sustainable peace and stability in the
Central African Republic requires establishing national
institutions, including defence and security forces, so
that the State can extend its control throughout the
country. Deploying the Central African armed forces is
a major step that MINUSCA should support in line with
its mandate to restore the State's authority. We look
forward to hearing the Secretary-General's proposals
for that, in accordance with his report (S/20l7/865). In
that context, it is important to ensure that the Mission
is provided with the resources it needs to fulfil its
mandate, a responsibility that falls to all the Members
of the United Nations, as stipulated in paragraph 37 of
resolution 2387 (2017).

