Mr. Mammadyarov (Azerbaijan): I would like
to start by expressing my profound gratitude to the
Australian presidency of the Security Council for
having convened today's meeting on the very important
issue of small arms and light weapons.

The high-level participation today attests to the
importance accorded by the members of the Security
Council to an acute problem being faced in many parts
of the world, including our own. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Vice-President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their informative and insightful
presentations.

The holding oftoday's meeting is timely. It provides
us with an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the
Council's decisions on the small arms and light weapons
problem in conflict and post-conflict situations in
its purview, consider practical steps to strengthen its
responses and give impetus to the implementation of
relevant international obligations in that sphere.

The consequences of the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons are grave and immeasurable. Yet
the worldwide negative effects are more than evident.
In a sense, small arms and light weapons may not
trigger conflicts but their excessive accumulation and
wide availability beyond control heighten tensions,
exacerbate armed violence, prolong conflicts and fuel
terrorism and criminal activities.

Domestically and in a wider context, the impact
of illicit small arms and light weapons circulation
has similar security, political and socioeconomic
dimensions. Its repercussions often become serious
impediments to the democratic and economic
development of countries and whole regions. The
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/503)
aptly defines the scope, gravity and magnitude of the
undermining impact of small arms and light weapons
on international peace and security in several regions.
Most importantly, it offers a number of pertinent
recommendations and observations on some aspects
of the problem. We believe that the recommendations
related to the Security Council engagement on the
issue should receive due consideration and be properly
reflected in its future decisions.

More generally, we emphasize the utmost
importance of continued and full implementation
of the 2001 Programme of Action on Small Arms as
the main international framework to prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects, as well as the 2005
International Tracing Instrument.

Building strong national capacities is pivotal for
the effective implementation by States of their relevant
obligations. Various multilateral mechanisms and
processes should aim to foster international cooperation
and assistance for States and complement national and
regional efforts.

Azerbaijan fully supports international initiatives
and instruments on the prevention and eradication
of the illicit manufacture, transfer and circulation
of small arms and light weapons and their excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled proliferation. The
same position concerns first and foremost the 2001
Programme of Action on Small Arms. At the regional
level, we stress the relevance of the Document on
Small Arms and Light Weapons of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
its important contribution to addressing the problems
in the OSCE area. Azerbaijan takes all the appropriate
measures at the national, regional and global levels to
implement its commitments and meet the objectives
of those instruments. We have established efficient
inter-agency cooperation and information sharing as
well as a robust national export control system that
involves best practices. Azerbaijan stands for increased
transparency and responsible behaviour in the global
trade in small arms and light weapons and conventional
weapons.

However, our efforts taken at the national and
international levels are being seriously hampered by
the continued occupation of Azerbaijani territories
by neighbouring Armenia. In gross violation of
international law and the relevant regional documents
to which it is a party, Armenia continues its military
build-up in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan.
Large quantities of small arms and light weapons and
conventional weaponry are being channelled to that
territory beyond international control. Azerbaijan has
repeatedly drawn the attention of the international
community to the illegal transfer of small arms and
light weapons and other conventional weaponry by
Armenia to the occupied territories of my country. We
urge all States to refrain from, condemn and prevent
such illegal activities, which violate Azerbaijan's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and, more broadly,
prevent the establishment of peace and prosperity in the
region.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome the
adoption of resolution 2117 (2013) as an outcome of
our deliberations today. Not only does the resolution
provide an important basis for reinforcing the Council's
engagement on small arms and light weapons but it also
effectively guides the efforts of the States Members
of the United Nations and the relevant entities in the
implementation of the Council's decisions on that cross-
cutting problem. I commend Australia for its hard work
in that regard.

