Mr. Valle (Brazil): I wish to thank Special
Representative J essen-Petersen for his detailed briefing
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I take this opportunity to express
our recognition of the quality of his work and that of
UNMIK personnel.

I am also pleased to recognize the presence of
Mr. Covic' of Serbia and Montenegro.

After more than four years of international
involvement in Kosovo, as we approach the moment of
beginning status negotiations in that province, the lack
of progress in standards implementation is an
unfortunate reality that can not only jeopardize the
progress made so far, but also delay the beginning of
the process to determine final status. Although there
have been tangible advances in some very specific
areas, such as the reconstruction of homes and public
buildings looted in March, it is still regrettable to see
that, regarding such key issues as the overall situation
of minorities, very little has been achieved.

A firmer stance is required against unchecked
abuses that continue to take place routinely against
minority groups, virtually deprived of their freedom of
movement and disrespected in their basic human rights
and needs. Although the Provisional Institutions carry
the primary responsibility for the implementation of
standards and for alleviating the plight of minority
groups, the international community must also take
concrete action to improve the security conditions for
those groups, and especially for the Kosovo Serbs. It is
encouraging that the October elections were held in an
environment of calm and order. Lack of participation
by the Kosovo Serbs in the poll, however, thwarts
efforts towards building a multi-ethnic society and is
detrimental to the situation of the Serb minority. It is
unfortunate that the constructive appeal of some
Serbian leaders, including many authorities in
Belgrade, in favour of participation in the elections
was not heeded by the Kosovo Serb population.

The political parties in Kosovo have now reached
agreement on the formation of a coalition Government
for the province. The composition of such a
government should not lead to an exacerbation of
tensions in the region. Moderation is key to conducting
Kosovo safely to the final status negotiations. The fact
that there are plans to include members of minorities in
the new ministries is encouraging, but the weak and
declining presence of minorities within the Provisional
Institutions remains a matter of deep concern.

Sustained social, economic and institutional
development is a condition for final status. A
revitalized economy, the creation of jobs and new
opportunities, especially for the young, will help ease
underlying social unrest.

We are pleased to note the continued progress in
the task of bringing to justice those involved in the
riots of last March. The fact that more than 300 cases
have been completed or are under consideration bears
witness to the good work being done by judges and
prosecutors under the monitoring of UNMIK.
Achieving a constructive and engaged dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade remains an imperative
for the eventual success of international efforts in
Kosovo. In that context, Pristina and, especially,
Belgrade should be persuaded to resume negotiations.

While frustration and despair grow amidst all
ethnic groups in the region, the temptation for
unilateral, even violent, initiatives may be
surreptitiously increasing. As the moment of truth for
Kosovo approaches, all parties concerned must be
conscious that no durable, stable, satisfactory solution
will be found without respect for the rights and
legitimate aspirations of all.

