Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I associate Ireland with
Ambassador van Walsum's acknowledgement this morning
of the United Kingdom and the United States, as the
Council presidencies that will straddle the millennium, for
their initiatives in Council procedures today and next
month. We, too, will await the creative initiatives of future
presidencies in this regard. I also associate Ireland fully
with the statement made this morning by Finland on behalf
of the European Union.

We have listened very carefully to a useful debate in
which delegations made a wide range of suggestions. The
Council itself already referred to a number of these in its
presidential statement of 30 November. In that statement,
the Council reaffirmed its commitment to the maintenance
of international peace and security. It is my delegation's
conviction that from now on this commitment will be tested
principally in Africa.

I would like to stress the central role of the
Organization of African Unity, both today under Algerian
chairmanship and henceforth. We have seen the emergence
of a number of important African subregional organizations
which have become actively engaged in the work of
conflict prevention and resolution. Individual African
leaders have also engaged actively in the search for
peace. As the Ambassador of Cameroon pointed out, this
has opened the possibility of the application of Articles
52 and 53 of the Charter of the United Nations. This is a
highly positive development, deserving the strongest
possible support.

However, a developed capacity for conflict
prevention at the regional and subregional levels in Africa
cannot be created overnight, or by the Security Council
on its own. Given its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Council has a duty to give the necessary impetus to this
process and to ensure that the required resources are
available. It is not satisfactory that urgent efforts are
made to provide the necessary support at the regional
level only when disputes are well on the way to
becoming, or have already become, large-scale conflicts.

The point has been made strongly here today that for
a peacekeeping operation to succeed the parties to the
dispute or the conflict must demonstrate their willingness
to make and keep the peace. Such willingness is, of
course, central. But there is another consideration, and
that is the credibility of a peace process and of the
Council itself. Without such credibility the parties are so
much less likely to respect a peace process or to heed the
calls made on them by the Council. An impression of
foot-dragging by the Council could be as fatal to a peace
process as the bad faith of belligerents. From this derives
the essential need for the Council to take, and to be seen
to take, prompt and decisive action.

Finally, several participants have referred to the
economic causes and consequences of conflict. The
Secretary-General and some others have stressed the
nexus between peace and development. African and non-
African Member States, including my own, are partners
in development, the importance of which was stressed by
the Ambassador of Uganda. Very considerable resources
have been and must continue to be committed to
providing Africa with the necessary investment for
development. It is hardly sensible therefore to place this
appropriate, necessary investment at risk for the sake of
the relatively very modest resources that would make all
the difference in ensuring effective peacekeeping in
Africa.

