Mr. Axworthy (Canada): The proliferation, misuse
and excessive accumulation of small arms and light
weapons is a direct concern for the Security Council. I
would like to thank the Netherlands for taking this
initiative today to focus the Council's attention on a very
critical issue.

( spoke in French)

Last week, the Council studied the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. That report places human security at the centre
of the Council's work. That was Canada's objective last
February when it requested that report in the Council.

It is impossible to secure the protection of civilians
without controlling small arms. These arms are the main
instruments of war today. They are used to kill, mutilate
and terrorize people, most of whom are innocent civilians.

 

(spoke in English)

In the past decade alone, 46 of the 49 conflicts that beset
the world have been carried out primarily or exclusively
through the use of small arms and light weapons; that is
close to 90 per cent. The impact on civilians has been
devastating. Consider these facts: civilians constitute over
80 per cent of casualties in armed conflict; more than a
million people die each year as a result of those conflicts;
and 90 per cent of those deaths are caused by small arms.
Conservatively speaking, this means that more than 700,000
civilian deaths a year are attributable to small arms.

These are truly arms of mass destruction. Their
widespread availability has made it easier to fight,
multiplying the human cost in civil and ethnic disputes.
Small arms are simple to use and light to carry, lowering
the barrier for violence and terror. They make it easy for
corrupt Governments and warlords to transform innocent
children into chillingly efficient killing machines. They
endanger international military, police and humanitarian
assistance workers, whose very jobs are to help those
victimized by conflict. These arms make economic
development impossible. The challenges of controlling them
are complex, but come down to a question of supply and
demand and, frankly, the political courage to do something
about them.

The demand for small arms is fuelled by those whose
ambitions perpetrate human misery. They are aided and
abetted by the dubious business interests that profit from
the market place of conflict. One of the failures of
globalization is that it has permitted the creation of a new
war economy where, in exchange for diamonds and other
natural resources, certain corporations provide warlords
with the financial resources they need to operate - money
that is funnelled back to yet other dubious businesses that
are only too happy to make their profit through the illicit
arms trade. Those companies must look beyond narrow
short-term interests and start to appreciate the real impact
of this trade on the lives of people. In other words, they
must become part of the solution.

Some encouraging steps are being taken. Canada and
a number of other members of the Wassenaar Arrangement
have worked to ensure that Wassenaar members respect the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
moratorium on small arms and light weapons. This is what
I mean by responsible behaviour: when a group of countries
has the courage to say "no" to small arms, we must have
the decency to respect their decision.

We also need to think of new ways to approach the
problem of small arms. Small arms are ubiquitous, but
they are useless without ammunition. We should consider
how we might track, control or mark ammunition as one
way of controlling the lethal effect of these weapons. As
one expert has told me, sometimes it is too late to stop
the supply of the weapons themselves; but if you stop the
supply of bullets, you stop the killing.

We should also look at unilateral actions such as
destruction of surplus stocks. South Africa did it because
it had the foresight to know that it had to destroy these
weapons before they could kill.

( spoke in French)

A broader and more systematic approach is needed:
that is the conclusion of the United Nations Group of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms, which proposed a
world conference in the year 2001. Canada supports that
proposal. In order to be effective, that conference must
have the broadest possible mandate and agenda.

(spoke in English)

We need to use the conference, and more
importantly, the time between now and then, to change
our thinking and to change behaviour. Canada is ready to
host a preparatory meeting to bring a practical focus to
this work, but we cannot wait until 2001 to take action:
the need is too urgent and too immediate. Rather, 2001
should be an opportunity to take stock of results and plan
the way ahead. But to get those results we need to start
action now.

Canada believes we should take a practical approach
to this problem. That is why we have supported
microdisarmament in Mozambique and El Salvador;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts in
Sierra Leone; and elaboration of a firearms protocol
within the Economic and Social Council. Even in the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), we have
called on new members to ensure that their modernization
efforts do not result in unwanted flows of arms to other
regions, and we have served notice on would-be members
that their behaviour in this regard will be factored into
enlargement decisions.

The fact is, on small arms, small steps often yield
big dividends. Earlier this week, Canada and Norway
hosted a meeting of microdisarmament practitioners from
Sierra Leone, El Salvador, Mozambique and Albania. The

 

purpose was to share experiences and identify how
Governments and other agents can work to support them.
Their experiences were both compelling and encouraging.
Above all, they emphasized that in order to be effective,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration need to be
well planned and well coordinated within the United
Nations system and with others that may be involved. Most
importantly, it needs the full support of the parties most
directly affected.

More active measures to limit the use of these deadly
weapons, to prevent the need for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in the first place, would be
even better. To this end, the Council needs to inform itself
about the abuse of small arms and military weapons in its
examination of individual conflicts, and to make redressing
those abuses the centerpiece of its efforts to restore
stability.

Where appropriate, the Council should impose arms
embargoes and other sanctions targeting the illicit trades
that pay for these weapons. Most importantly, the Council
must not merely call for, but rather must ensure full and
effective implementation of these measures.

This is the impetus behind Canada's efforts as
Chairman of the Angola sanctions Committee - to choke
the illegal diamond revenues that fuel UNITA's war effort;
to reduce access to the petroleum resources that make it
possible to operate their war machine; and, perhaps most
importantly, to curtail acquisition of the weapons that
makes the continuation of this murderous war possible. If
we are successful in curbing the flow of diamonds and
other resources, it will help the Security Council to devise
models that might apply to other conflicts.

In this context, efforts to control the spread of small
arms call for a shift in the way we apply sanctions.
Comprehensive sanctions cannot and must not be used as
a way of doing peace and security on the cheap. They are
a blunt instrument. And as we know, blunt instruments
hurt - but not always the ones they are intended to hurt.
We need to make sanctions razor-sharp. They should be
pointed at the perpetrators of conflict; they are the ones
who should suffer, not the innocent people.

Clearly the means are within our grasp to
operationalize an agenda for action against small arms.
First, the Council can act in the ways I have outlined: on
sanctions, peace operation mandates, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. Secondly, the
General Assembly can reinforce and push the Council to
implement the resolutions it has adopted and to do more.
Thirdly, regional organizations can reinforce stability and
security with arrangements and conventions on illicit and
licit trade and trafficking in these weapons, as our friend
from Malaysia has pointed out.

Individual Member States can act to ensure that they
have the legal framework in place to control the import
and export of small arms and to destroy those weapons
that are surpluses to their legitimate needs.

Non-governmental organizations and civil society
can work in partnership with Governments to promote
implementation of measures designed to enhance
individual security by curbing the spread and use of small
weapons and working to build societies that see no value
in the illegal possession and use of these arms.

(spoke in French)

The challenge posed by small arms is considerable.
A variety of responses are needed - political, pragmatic,
financial, technical and cultural.

(spoke in English)

We should pledge here to achieve a global division
of labour to fight on all fronts - from the Security
Council to individual Governments to the level of
community organizations - to address the menace of
small arms. If we work together with determination, I
believe we just may succeed.

