Mr. Boisson (Monaco) (spoke in French): I am
particularly pleased to see you, Sir, in the Security
Council presidency this month, and to congratulate
you.

Once again, we come to the Security Council to
plead a cause which affects the human being in his very
nature, as well as in his future. The recruitment of
children in armed conflicts is an intolerable and
unacceptable violation of the rights of the child, a
violation clearly condemned by the universal morality
to which the States of our Organization adhere.

Like many heads of delegation, the Chairman of
the delegation of Monaco to the special session of the
General Assembly on children, His Serene Highness
Crown Prince Albert, last May referred to this painful
issue, which, naturally and quite wisely, was
fortunately taken into account in the very important
final declaration adopted on that occasion.

The Secretary-General's report of 26 November
2002 (S/2002/1299) had already alerted us to the
difficulties which the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, had encountered in carrying out his
lofty mission, but also, we are pleased to see, to the
undeniable progress achieved, which is extremely
encouraging.

This public meeting of the Security Council, in
this first month of the year 2003, under the French
presidency, of which we appreciate both the initiative
and quality, gives us the opportunity to express our
unreserved support for the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, and the opportunity to
encourage them to continue and strengthen their action
in favour of this noble cause.

As the principal organ under the United Nations
Charter with responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
indeed urges us to undertake some soul-searching that
should lead us to take decisive decisions in order to put
an end to the painful situation of child soldiers. These
are tragic and pathetic situations that, beyond the
emotions they give rise to, undermine the principles of
humanity on which our cooperation is built and on
which rest our hopes and our deepest convictions.

Using children as a tool of war, of suffering and
death, is intolerable. This idea revolts and disturbs us.
As a crime against children, a crime of genocide, a war
crime, a crime against humanity, the use of children in
armed conflicts makes it incumbent on the international
community and the Security Council, which is its
authorized voice, to embark on a new stage. The report
of the Secretary-General and his message today, and
the message that his Special Representative has just
given us, as well as that of Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of UNICEF, emphasize the urgency
and need for action.

The Principality of Monaco, on the initiative of
both its highest sovereign authorities and its people,
has consistently put the protection of childhood,
physical as well as moral, at the forefront of its
concerns and national and international commitments.
The public authorities have devoted many efforts to
this. Many non-governmental organizations, with the
support of the royal family, the Government and the
parliament, are also making unflagging efforts to
contribute to the protection of children in danger and
the improvement of their plight, particularly when it is
affected by poverty, violence and a destructive lack of
a future.

An international law symposium, which will be
followed by a public meeting with civil society, is now
being prepared in Monaco on the initiative of the
World Association of Friends of Children (AMADE).

Effectively headed by Crown Prince Albert, who
since May 1993 has chaired the Monaco delegation at
the General Assembly sessions, and by Her Royal
Highness Princess Caroline of Hanover, this initiative
should make possible a better grasp of the concepts and
the legal contexts involved nationally and
internationally in the protection of children, as well as
the ways of facilitating legal proceedings and
strengthening sanctions in the case of serious, flagrant
and repeated violations of their basic rights and
fundamental freedoms. The symposium should
contribute to increasing awareness, which is needed
now more than ever on the global level, of this serious
issue, given that we now have today - with the entry
into force of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and the two Optional Protocols to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child - indispensable specific instruments to combat
this ultimate form of barbarism that affects children.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child, as
well as its Optional Protocol on children in armed
conflict - which the Principality has signed and
ratified - and the very valuable experience gained by
the international criminal tribunals will indeed be the
basis for this exercise in reflection, as will the role of
the International Criminal Court, which is awaited with
great hope.

This will involve, without academic disputes,
trying to determine, in a realistic way, the most
efficient legal and judicial ways and means to allow for
prosecuting, beyond time and space, the most serious
crimes against children.

The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict will also be, of course, at the heart
of the symposium and the meeting with civil society.
The Monaco authorities, which have contributed to the
special fund for children involved in armed conflict
since its inception, pay due tribute to the activities of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
this area. They greatly welcome the provisions that he
advocates, given that they are without a doubt a
decisive stage in the protection of children during
armed conflict, internal as well as international, and
regardless of the parties involved. In particular, we
note with satisfaction the list of parties involved in
conflicts contained in the report's annex - parties
against which there is proof that they continue to
recruit and arm minors and use them without restraint
or caution in situations of extremely brutal hostilities.

The resolution to be adopted at the initiative of
France at the end of this exchange of views should
grant all the necessary legitimacy and authority to its
provisions to follow up specifically on the previous
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
1261 (1999), 1314 (2000) and 1379 (2001).

Defining as a war crime by the Statute of the
International Criminal Court of forced recruitment of
children under the age of 15 in hostilities, including in
internal conflicts, as well as attacks on hospitals and
schools, or serious, repeated sexual violent acts, should
help us. This definition is decisive insofar as the
Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory
Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against
Humanity, of 26 November 1968, explicitly stipulates
in article I that war crimes and crimes against humanity
are without statutory limitation, like genocide, which
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, of 9 December 1948, considers
as a crime against the rights of nations, jus gentium,
whether committed in time of peace or in time of war.

I would recall furthermore that article VI of the
Convention on genocide had already provided for an
international penal tribunal as may have jurisdiction
over such crimes, and article VII stipulated that such
crimes would not be considered political for the
purpose of extradition, which would also be agreed by
the contracting parties in accordance with their laws
and treaties in force. Article II (c) of this same
instrument also considers - and this is noteworthy -
that genocide also extends to an act of forced transfer
of children from one national, ethnic, racial or religious
group to another, committed with intent to destroy
them.

Today, as the Secretary-General stated in his
report, the true challenge lies in the implementation
and the effective application of existing international
instruments and norms. However, it is undeniable and
encouraging to note, undoubtedly for the first time in
such a report, references to Governments, paramilitary
organizations and armed groups that are guilty of
kidnapping children and training them, despite their
will, to become war criminals, murderers and torturers.
We now know the perpetrators of these crimes, or at
least some among them. We have the legal means to
prosecute and punish them. Without a doubt, we must
see to it that there is the political will to act and find
the financial and law enforcement resources to
intervene effectively.

Undoubtedly also, we must strengthen the
programmes for reinsertion of child soldiers and
develop new ones, while seeing to it that these
programmes become integral elements of any post-
conflict reconstruction and development projects. The
appointment of advisers in certain of the programmes
under way seems to be bearing fruit and therefore is an
interesting path to pursue and encourage. As the
Secretary-General has also recalled, the creation during
armed conflicts of protected zones in which women,
children, the elderly, the wounded and the disarmed
can find asylum and protection is one solution to
impose. It is a solution that the highest authorities in
Monaco have always wished to see encouraged and
promoted by the United Nations. Such zones should
benefit from secure access routes to allow for the
intervention of humanitarian personnel.

Ahmadou Kouroma, who has recounted his
adventures as a child soldier in a very beautiful novel
that received several literary prizes, clearly shows that
reinsertion is always possible and often crowned with
success. For, as this author wrote of his mother, "after
30 years of suffering, smoke and tears, there was still
something marvellous in the hollows of her face".
The moving observation by this child, a criminal
despite himself who found again his place in human
society, should lead us to be optimistic and give us,
with hope, the will to act that naturally follows from
this.

In that spirit of optimism and hope, we must have
the courage of our convictions and take the necessary
decisions in order to ensure that the recommendations
of the Secretary-General are effectively followed up
and his expectations fulfilled.

The clear and unambiguous desire of the
Government of the Principality is quite clear in this
regard: justice must be done, and international law,
which deals with this question extensively and in
detail, must triumph so that the murderers of children
are punished for their crime - the worst crime of all:
turning children into criminals and transforming their
innocence into barbarism.

Here, we believe that there are three crucial
elements. First, when internal judicial proceedings
have been exhausted, or in cases where such
proceedings have not been used, the competence of
international bodies, in particular the International
Criminal Court, should naturally come into play.

Secondly, crimes and violations against girls and
boys of less than 15 years of age should not be
excluded from the criminal definitions contained in the
Statute of the International Criminal Court as they
relate to the crime of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, under articles 6, 7 and 8 of
the Statute respectively.

Thirdly, it should be possible to apply, without
reservation, the principles of the Convention on the
Non-Applicability of the Statute of Limitations to War
Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity of 26 November
1968, as well as, when justified, those of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948.

