Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation too would like, first of all, to express our
gratitude to the Indonesian delegation, to your country
and to you, Sir, in particular, for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on a subject which is
fundamentally important to the United Nations and the
Security Council. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for having participated in our debate
today.

The founders of the United Nations recognized,
from the inception of the Charter, that there is a
specific role for regional organizations in contributing
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to
international cooperation. We simply need to look at
the significant participation in today's debate to see
how much these organizations have developed since
1945. There is no longer any corner of the world where
the strengthening of regional solidarity has not become
a principle objective and, often, a concrete reality.

This evolution is, for us, a challenge. It represents
a great asset. Regional organizations bring to the table
critical capabilities to help us deal with crises
involving political and jurisdictional mechanisms,
military police and help for reconstruction. There are
two examples that come immediately to mind.

First of all is the European Union (EU) - and I
would clarify here that France fully concurs with the
statement to be made by Portugal on behalf of the EU.
The EU has made an excellent contribution to
international peace and security by stabilizing the
European continent and by assisting in its prosperity.
Once it began to project its identity and peaceful
ideals throughout the world, it cooperated closely with
the United Nations. It supported the United Nations in
Bosnia where it took up the police mission; in Kosovo,
where it is getting ready to take over the police and
judicial operations of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo; in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo where the EU brought in
decisive military support to Ituri in 2003 to the United
Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
where it also significantly contributed to the
organization of the elections and where it continues to
strengthen international action for the reform of the
security sector; and finally, in Sudan, particularly in
Darfur, where the EU supports the African Union
Mission in Sudan and will support the hybrid force. I
would also like to mention the EU involvement in the
Central African Republic and in Chad with the
deployment of a European force, mandated by the
United Nations, which will protect civilians and
support a United Nations police mission there.

There is also the example of the African Union
(AU). France directly, and through the EU, supports
the strengthening of the capacities of this organization
and its members so that they may participate more
actively in stabilizing the African continent. I will not
go on in length on items others have mentioned, but I
would like to note how much the strengthening of the
AU and its stronger cooperation with the United
Nations has been very promising. I am particularly
thinking here of the decision to establish the United
Nations-African Union hybrid force in Darfur.

The Security Council, within its responsibilities,
notes this rise in importance of the AU and notes,
particularly, the participation of President Konare' in
the 25 September Council summit on peace and
security in Africa, a meeting that was chaired by the
President of the French Republic.

I would also like to note and welcome the
growing role played by the Association of South-East
Asian Nations in the peaceful settlement of regional
crises and, in particular, its commitment to a true,
inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation in
Burma.

The growth in the role of regional organizations
also offers opportunities which we need to seize. I am
thinking specifically of three areas where increased
cooperation could be especially beneficial. First of all,
in combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), Security Council resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006) envisions an obligation
to combat the risk of access to WMDs or related
materials by non-State actors. Regional organizations
can provide key support in this area to the committee
established under Council resolution 1540 (2004). This
is cooperation which needs to be greatly developed and
one which we actively support.

Secondly, in combating terrorism, a solid and
focused cooperation on results with international,
regional and subregional organizations is vital to the
implementation by States of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001). The same can be said for the
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Cooperation with Interpol, in particular, is recognized
in Security Council resolution 1699 (2006). Others
have developed since then, especially regionally. A few
days ago, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) met
in Nairobi for its fifth special meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We welcome the results of this meeting.

However, it is necessary to increase and broaden
such partnerships. Today's events, and in particular the
attack in the province of Baghlan in Afghanistan,
which France resolutely condemns, once again
illustrate, were there even a need to do so, the need to
strengthen our collective efforts against terrorism by
working with regional organizations.

In conclusion, I should like to refer to an area -
the illicit trafficking in light weapons - where we
think there is a need to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations. Light
weapons destabilize entire regions and are sometimes
even used against United Nations forces. No effort
should be spared to enable regional organizations to
contribute to combating that trafficking.

Nevertheless, as Members of the United Nations,
we should continue to be vigilant as we help regional
organizations come of age. We represent a universal
Organization. Despite all the regional specificities and
local values, the Organization is founded on the
rejection of relativism and on the promotion of the
universal ideal of peace and cooperation. There is no
area of the world where the United Nations is not
involved - nor should there be. There are no customs
that make a region incomprehensible or inaccessible to
the United Nations. The United Nations is, and must
continue to be, at the heart of the system of collective
security. Regional organizations can support the United
Nations, but they are no substitute for it.

This is first and foremost an issue of legitimacy,
but it is also a matter of efficiency. There is therefore a
need for special vigilance with regard to the use of our
resources. Cooperation with regional organizations
should not mean relegating the United Nations merely
to providing ways and means to third parties without it
being at the centre of control and the taking of
decisions.

I should like to conclude by referring to the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Commission
could serve as a point of convergence for all
stakeholders emerging from regional conflicts. The
participation of regional and subregional organizations
is crucial. France very much looks forward to
interacting with them.

Finally, I should like to express the support of the
delegation of France for the draft presidential
statement that has been prepared by Indonesia, which
we will adopt shortly.

