The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Tunisia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Weissbrod
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 22 July 2009
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2009/380
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Monday, 27 July 2009, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Fernandez-
Taranco.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I now give
the floor.


