Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important meeting. I also congratulate you,
Sir, on the Chinese delegation's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month, and
we wish you well. I also want to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, for briefing us on the recent developments,
and Ambassador Patriota in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

I am honoured to address the Council this morning
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil,
Cabo Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and, my
own country, Timor-Leste.

Under the steady leadership of the newly elected
authorities, Guinea-Bissau has made significant
progress in recent months. They have taken the first
steps to implement security sector reform, reinforce
the judicial system, improve the management of State
revenues and enhance the delivery of basic social
services and utilities, with a particular focus on the
education sector and Ebola prevention.

With regard to security sector reform, the new
Armed Forces Chief of Staff has been reshuffling the
leadership of various units since his appointment, and
the Minister of Defence has established a committee
to review the list of military personnel to demobilize
through retirement. We thank the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) for the continued
maintenance of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB). We recognize the critical role it has played
in maintaining stability, protecting the authorities and
institutions and engaging in efforts aimed at security
sector reform. Those efforts must continue in a
sustainable way as part of a holistic programme and
in coordination with other international partners that
envisage resuming cooperation in that area, including
CPLP countries.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/37)
points to the many challenges that lay ahead for Guinea-
Bissau. We therefore encourage the Government
to continue the State reforms aimed at greater
political stability and socioeconomic development,
at consolidating the rule of law and at protecting and
promoting the civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights of all Bissau-Guineans. However,
despite those accomplishments, Guinea-Bissau remains
a post-conflict State with fragile institutions and
scarce financial resources. It is therefore vital that the
international community support the reform efforts
in their technical and financial aspects, including by
guaranteeing stability to enable the national authorities
to implement the necessary reforms.

The CPLP and its member States remain deeply
committed to supporting the people and authorities
of Guinea-Bissau. On 29 October, an extraordinary
meeting of the Council of Ministers of the CPLP
reaffirmed the relevant role the Community can play in
providing technical assistance to the country, drawing
on the common language, administrative model and
experience of its member States in cooperating with
Guinea-Bissau.

As previously mentioned by the representative
of Ghana, in November, our respective Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, as Chairs of ECOWAS and the CPLP
respectively, hosted a very successful and fruitful
meeting of the International Contact Group, where His
Excellency Prime Minister Domingos Simoes Pereira
shared the Government's main reform priorities. The
Group highlighted the need for ECOMIB to continue its
mission. The Group also called upon all international
partners to actively participate in the Guinea-Bissau
international donor conference scheduled for March 25
in Brussels.

On behalf of the CPLP, I want to assure Guinea-
Bissau of the full support of all of the Community's
member States to the donor conference, and that we will
continue to seek the full engagement of all international
partners. At this crucial juncture, it is imperative that
the international community support the ongoing and
planned reform efforts of the authorities of Guinea-
Bissau and that all stakeholders align themselves with
the priorities set by the Government and approved by
the National Assembly.

The CPLP and its member States remain engaged
in coordination efforts with the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the African Union and the European Union.
The Peacebuilding Commission, its Guinea-Bissau
configuration and the International Contact Group are
well-suited platforms to deepen that cooperation in
support of the priorities identified by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, we recognize the crucial role of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. In that regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General's recent report on
Guinea-Bissau and its recommendations, which we
fully support, particularly the extension of UNIOGBIS
for a period of 12 months and the Council's endorsement
of ECOMIB as a guarantor of stability and a partner in
security sector reform.

