Mr. Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the State of Palestine, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country, Pakistan, on
your effective presidency and wise stewardship of the
Security Council this month. We also express our deep
appreciation to the fraternal Kingdom of Morocco for
its skilled leadership of the Council in December.

I also thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing today and for his tireless efforts on the ground.

I also wish to extend Palestine's warm
congratulations to the new Security Council members,
the friendly countries of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda.
We are confident of their commitment to upholding
the Charter, international law and the Council's
resolutions, without exception, and we wish them every
success in fulfilling their great responsibilities. I also
convey Palestine's deep appreciation to the members
whose terms ended in December 2012 - the friendly
countries of Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal and
South Africa. We are grateful for the tireless efforts
they exerted during their tenure in support of the rights
of the Palestinian people and in aiming to reach a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

I am honoured to address the Security Council
today for the first time on behalf ofthe State of Palestine
following the historic decision by the General Assembly
to accord Palestine non-member observer State status in
the United Nations with its adoption of resolution 67/ 19,
on 29 November 2012. The overwhelming support of
Member States for that initiative is a reflection of the
strong support for the inalienable rights and legitimate
national aspirations of the Palestinian people, including
the right to self-determination and to a life of freedom
and dignity in their independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. That support clearly
represents long-overdue recognition by the Assembly
of Palestine's statehood. A new era has begun, and we
hope it will mark a turning point for making peace and
security a reality between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, and in the region as a whole.

We are grateful for the principled support
demonstrated in that courageous decision taken by
Member States at this juncture in history. It is high
time that the State of Palestine take its rightful place
among the community of nations. Our hope is renewed
by that important step, which should pave the way for
the acceptance of our September 2011 application for
full membership in the United Nations. Moreover, we
are encouraged by the signs that that momentous step
will reinvigorate the international community's long-
standing, yet unfulfilled, commitment to achieving
a just and peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
In that regard, it is clear that support for that
resolution constituted an unequivocal reaffirmation of
the international community's commitment to the two-
State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and in
accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
from resolution 181 (II), of 1947, to resolution 242
(1967) and all other relevant resolutions thereafter, as
well as the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map. The urgency of that reaffirmation
cannot be understated in the light of the two-State
solution's severe denigration over the years and the
collective consensus that the window of opportunity for
justly and physically achieving that solution is rapidly
closing. No one in the Chamber today can deny that.

The Assembly's adoption of resolution 67/19
must therefore be viewed as a legitimate, multilateral,
peaceful and political effort to save the two-State
solution, to reaffirm its basis and to create the proper
environment for convening substantive negotiations
between the parties - within a credible peace process
based on the well-known terms of reference and
according to a limited time frame - aimed at achieving
an end to Israel's occupation of Palestinian territory
since 1967 and at a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace settlement that resolves all outstanding core
issues, including Palestinian refugees, Jerusalem,
settlements, borders, security, water and prisoners.

Despite that strong message by the international
community, the period following the General
Assembly's decision has regrettably witnessed Israeli
actions that represent the complete antithesis of the
two-State solution. The Palestinian leadership, under
the stewardship of President Mahmoud Abbas and the
Palestine Liberation Organization - the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people - has
reaffirmed its commitment to the path of peace and
its immediate readiness to engage in negotiations on
the basis of clear parameters. Israel, however, has
persisted along the path of occupation, conflict and
fear-mongering.

Rather than reciprocating with regard to the hand
extended in peace, Israel has chosen to embark on a
destructive escalation ofits illegal agenda inthe occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem - the
territory that constitutes the State of Palestine, which it
has been illegitimately and forcibly occupying for over
45 years. As conveyed in a series of letters recently
transmitted by the State of Palestine to the Security
Council, Israel has persisted in behaving with utter
contempt, deliberately breaching international law and
disregarding the will of the international community.
That has been most starkly reflected in its
intensification of its illegal settlement campaign
and its heavy-handed, punitive measures against the
Palestinian people and their leadership in the aftermath
of the adoption of resolution 67/19. Those measures
have included the withholding of Palestinian tax
revenues, which has exacerbated the financial crisis
and compromised the functioning of our national
institutions and system of democratic governance.
That has been accompanied by Israel's contempt for
the international community, particularly the United
Nations, as epitomized, inter alia, in the statement by
the Israeli Ambassador in the General Assembly on
29 November (see A/67/PV.44) and the remarks by the
Israeli Prime Minister on 21 December in an interview
in which he defiantly insisted on Israel pursuing its
illegal colonization programme and stated, "What the
United Nations says doesn't interest me".

On the ground that attitude has manifested itself in
the systematic escalation of Israel's illegal settlement
campaign, particularly in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. We recall that in December 2012, Israel
blatantly announced its intentions to proceed with plans
for the construction of more than 7,000 units in illegal
settlements and the confiscation of hundreds more
dunums of Palestinian land throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. At the core of that unprecedented
settlement drive are plans to establish illegal settlements
in sensitive areas to the east and south of occupied East
Jerusalem, namely, the so-called E-1 area east of the
city and a hill area between Jerusalem and Bethlehem,
both of which are integral to the continuity and viability
of the State of Palestine, as well as the settlement
activities in the Al-Khalil area and the Jordan Valley.
That provocative Israeli approach is also manifested in
continuing terror and violence by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians and property, under the protection
and with the support of the Israeli Government.

We reiterate once again before this Council that
it is abundantly clear under international law that all
Israeli settlement activities are illegal. Regardless
of whether it is one settlement unit or thousands, a
settlement or an outpost - whatever the pretext, they
are all illegal. Countless resolutions have affirmed
that, as has the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of July 2004. Moreover, Israeli
settlement activities constitute grave breaches of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, including war crimes, as
further determined pursuant to Additional Protocol I
of the Geneva Conventions and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.

Israel's illegal settlement campaign also constitutes
the main obstacle to the attainment of a peace based
on the vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. A
halt to settlement construction is not a precondition. It
is a legal obligation. It requires the Security Council
to assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and to act in such a way as to bring
about a long-overdue solution to the conflict. We are at
a pivotal moment. We should send a clear message to
Israel to the effect that all such practices and policies
are illegal and must be stopped. Otherwise, Israel will
be held accountable for its violations and destruction of
the two-State solution.

It is a fact that Israel has never been held accountable
for its crimes. That has fostered its sense of impunity
and encouraged its rejection ofthe path ofpeace. In that
connection, it must be recalled that Israel's hostile and
punitive behaviour following the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19 was, in fact, preceded by
yet another Israeli military aggression against the Gaza
Strip, in November 2012, and repeated declarations by
Israeli officials about their preferred path, that is, the
path of war. Once again, a barrage of death, trauma and
terror was inflicted on the Palestinian people by Israel
forces, causing the death and injury of hundreds of
Palestinians, including many women and children, and
the destruction of homes and infrastructure through the
indiscriminate Israeli bombing of densely populated
civilian areas, including refugee camps.

That aggression, in addition to the Israeli blockade
since 2007, has led to an escalation of the human
suffering in Gaza in collective punishment of the
population. Regrettably, other than issuing a press
statement on 21 November 2012 (SC/10829) after the
conclusion of the ceasefire agreement, the Security
Council again failed to shoulder its responsibility to
put an end to that Israeli aggression and to protect the
Palestinian civilian population, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.

Nevertheless, at that time the Palestinian leadership
reaffirmed, as it does now, its rejection ofthe path ofwar
and its commitment to the path of peace. Public support
for that position, which constitutes the core of the
political policy of President Abbas and his Government,

was manifested across Palestine, in particular in Gaza,
at the beginning of the year in the huge rallies held on
4 January to mark the forty-eighth anniversary of the
Fatah movement, in support of President Abbas and
long-standing Palestinian national aspirations.

The significance of that event must be highlighted
and should serve as a clear reminder to those who
question the Palestinian people's support for peace
and the legitimate leadership of President Abbas. In
that context, reconciliation between the Palestinian
political factions, in particular Fatah and Hamas, is
being pursued to end the division. That is one of the
demands of our people and is Vital to our national goals.
In that connection, we reiterate our appreciation to the
Arab Republic of Egypt, the League of Arab States and
all other concerned parties for their efforts. We hope
that Palestinian unity will soon be achieved and that it
will be respected by the international community.

Despite Israel's ongoing provocations and
hostilities, which increase tensions and destabilize
the situation on the ground, the developments of
29 November 2012, the ceasefire agreement in Gaza and
the popular non-violent acts of the Palestinian peaceful
resistance to the occupation, most recently seen in the
courageous establishment of the Bab Al- Shams and Bab
Al-Karamah protest villages on confiscated Palestinian
land marked for Israeli colonization and in the weekly
demonstrations against the settlements and the wall in
villages throughout Palestine, are all abundant evidence
of the Palestinian commitment to the path of peace.

However, in choosing to blindly adhere to its
expansionist agenda, Israel is undermining the
contiguity and unity of the land of the State of Palestine,
threatening the viability of the two-State solution.
We are at a crossroads. Israel must choose either to
honestly engage in a meaningful political process
towards achieving the two-State solution on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders, which is a historic compromise
and the relative justice to which we committed decades
ago, or to force us into in an era in which that solution
is abandoned. The Palestinian people would enter a new
stage in their national struggle to defend and achieve
their rights through all peaceful, political, diplomatic
and legal means available to the State of Palestine.

The international community has a historic
responsibility before it. Action must be immediately
undertaken, in particular by the Security Council, to
compel Israel to stop its breaches of the law and to
commit to the path ofpeace. Negotiations cannot succeed
if they are sabotaged by an unrelenting occupation
that mocks and makes it impossible to achieve peace.
Moreover, the past years have proved that the parties,
left to an unbalanced and unfair negotiations process,
cannot achieve peace. It is also necessary to reaffirm
clear parameters for the solution and for the parties to
commit to them.

Business as usual cannot continue. Bold leadership,
in particular by those that have staked a claim in
shepherding the peace process over the years, and
a significant United Nations role, including by the
Security Council, are required. That leadership must
be consistent with the professed values of freedom,
tolerance, human dignity and justice, which are the core
elements for peace and stability in our world and our
region, without exception. Strong political and moral
will are needed to salvage the two-State solution and
to help the two parties overcome the political deadlock
in order to guarantee a successful political process for
the realization of a final peace agreement during the
critical year of 2013.

I would like to reiterate what President Mahmoud
Abbas said to day in the wake of the Israeli elections:
Palestine is willing to work with any future Israeli
Government, provided that it is committed to the latest
General Assembly resolution regarding the recognition
of the State of Palestine along the pre-l967 borders.

The Palestinian people and its leadership remain
committed to the two-State solution i as is the wider
Arab and Islamic world - as reflected in the continued
support for the historic Arab Peace Initiative since
2002. We appeal to the international community to
heed the call for peace and to conscientiously support
those who yearn for freedom, with a View to ushering
in an era of long-overdue justice and independence
for the Palestinian people and peace and security for
Palestinians and Israelis.

