Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation joins the previous speakers in welcoming
the Deputy President of South Africa, His Excellency
Jacob Zuma, and thanking him for his briefing on the
developments in the peace process in Burundi. We also
appreciated his analysis on the ways and means of
consolidating what has been achieved to date and of
gradually getting Burundi back on the path to peace,
security and progress. We also thank the President of
the Economic and Social Council for his excellent
statement.

My delegation would like to extend its deepest
appreciation to the South African Government for its
commendable efforts to restore peace to Burundi and
for its decisive contribution it made to the political and
military protocol which was signed on 8 October in
Pretoria between the Transitional Government and the
Forces for the Defence of Democracy (FDD).

We also pay tribute to the countries in the region
for their successful contributions to the regional
initiative. My delegation welcomes the positive
developments in Burundi, evidenced by the signing, on
16 November 2003 at Dar es Salaam, at the 20th
summit of the Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi, of
a power-sharing agreement on political, defence and
security matters between the Transitional Government
of Burundi and the faction of the National Council for
the Defence of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) led by Pierre Nkurunziza.

Furthermore, Deputy President Zuma told us in
detail about the progress that has been made. My
delegation therefore warmly congratulates the
Burundian parties and urges them to resolutely
continue in this direction. Without their desire for
reconciliation, without their ability to make the
concessions necessary for a cessation of hostilities and
a return to a situation conducive to the well-being of
their peoples, we would not have been able to achieve
the Agreement that we welcome today.

We thank President Domitien Ndayizeye for his
work and his determination, from the time he assumed
power, to ensure reconciliation for all Burundians and
to restore peace in Burundi. The tireless efforts he has
made in this area since then are admirable. We also
welcome the commitment made by the parties to end
hostilities, to establish the rule of law and to establish a
national army. We strongly support the ultimatum
given to Agathon Rwasa's National Liberation Forces
(FNL) to cease hostilities and join the peace process
within three months. The FNL has to understand there
is no alternative to the negotiating table.

We fully agree with Deputy President Zuma's
analysis of this situation. It is important that the peace
process in Burundi now be given greater support by the
international community on an urgent basis,
particularly at this stage where there is a lack of
resources for the peace process. The United Nations,
the European Union and the donor community must all
act quickly to maintain the momentum generated by the
signing of the Agreement. In this connection, we would
like to thank the European Union for offering an
additional $25 million in assistance. It is important that
the funds be made available shortly.

Living conditions in Burundi are among the most
precarious in the world. Various spheres, including
food security and protection of and access to basic
services, are in need of vital humanitarian assistance.
In this regard, we endorse the appeal for funds for
Burundi that was issued last month by the United
Nations.

The issue of refugees and displaced persons is
crucial. They are the main victims of the Burundi
conflict. In early 2003, there were 800,000 Burundian
refugees in Tanzania and there were 300,000 displaced
civilians. These numbers have increased since then
because of the fighting last month between government
forces and the FNL of Agathon Rwasa. The situation of
the refugees and displaced persons continues to
deteriorate. All necessary efforts must be employed to
ensure that managing repatriation and reinstallation
does not become a new source of conflict, endangering
the peace process.

The peace process in Burundi is at a decisive and
irreversible stage. There is no better time or
opportunity for the international community to make a
decisive contribution to the return of peace, security

and harmony to that country that has suffered so much.
It is our hope that the appeal will be heard and that it
will be followed with actions.

In conclusion, I would like to say that my
delegation supports the sending of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission to Burundi.

