Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
presence of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, and
of the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman. We thank them for their briefings.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela notes with
concern that, over the past few years, the Security
Council has increasingly sough to deal with topics
outside its specific mandate, which has to do with
maintaining international peace and security. We
reject that trend. Our country believes that the Security
Council should focus on the specific mandate conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, which
sets out a strategic vision for a clear division of roles
among the various organs of the Organization. In that
way, there is an attempt de facto to alter the founding
principles of the Charter and, by way of employing a
double standard, to redefine what does and does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and the meaning of the principle of sovereignty,
including by invoking Chapter VII of the Charter to
deal with issues such as migrants.

The international community currently faces major
and complex challenges that require attention and
timely and concrete efforts on situations of conflict that
have often been prolonged owing to the geopolitical and
economic interests of certain Powers. In turn, that has
had a negative impact on the effectiveness of the work
of the Security Council and the credibility of this organ
in the eyes of international public opinion. The issue
of terrorism - and how it is promoted via geopolitical
interests in the Middle East - and the Palestinian
question should instead be among the top priorities for
Council action.

The topic we are discussing today, the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, does not contribute to the proper and effective
functioning of the United Nations system. Meanwhile,
the Security Council has been expanding its activities
into areas that do not fall under its mandate. This forum

does not have the prerogative to address human rights
situations. Issues related to human rights should be
taken up by the General Assembly and by the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, the latter body having been
specifically established to debate such issues and
endowed with the necessary competence to deal with
them. We would therefore urge the Council to expand
upon the progress that has been achieved since the
establishment of the Human Rights Council and to
prioritize the Universal Periodic Review mechanism as
the most important cooperation format for addressing
the issue of human rights. In that context, Venezuela
supports the position of the Movement of Non-aligned
Countries with regard to its rejection of addressing
human rights issues for politically motivated ends
and in a selective, partial, unobjective and politically
motivated manner, with the goal of exerting pressure
on specific countries under the pretext of protecting
human rights, while at the same time often applying
double standards for political and economic reasons.

The situation on the Korean peninsula continues
to be delicate and complex. The adoption of measures
that could affect the necessary climate of trust for the
promotion of dialogue in order to guarantee peace and
stability in the region will not effectively contribute to
a sustainable, sound or genuinely democratic solution.
At the same time, efforts to politicize human rights
by singling out a particular country have shown
themselves to be ineffective, as they serve only to
fuel confrontation and undermine the express goals
of the Organization and of this organ, namely, to use
diplomacy to solve conflicts in a specific manner.
Such measures only divert us from the path to peace
and towards an artificial divide where there are good
countries and bad ones. That in no way contributes to a
climate of national harmony and dialogue in situations
of great fragility, such as that on the Korean peninsula.

Furthermore, we welcome the fact that, last August,
following intense negotiations, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea reached
an agreement aimed at easing tensions and resuming
dialogue. The putting in place of a plan to resume
negotiations between both countries in a sovereign and
independent manner and with the constructive support
of the international community is a positive indication
of the commitment of the parties to find a negotiated
political solution to the crisis, which we believe to be
the only desirable way of achieving a firm and lasting
peace. We therefore reiterate our appeal to Member
States to effectively promote a climate of trust that

helps overcome tensions in a peaceful and constructive
way and to embark upon a fruitful dialogue process.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
the Security Council should strictly comply with
its responsibilities and focus on addressing matters
that have a direct bearing on international peace and
security. This debate is not being conducted in the
appropriate forum - the Human Rights Council, which
we support - and is outside the context of the situation
on the Korean peninsula. As is the intention today, this
meeting is being turned into a disruptive factor when
it comes to the overall goal of stabilizing the Korean
peninsula, reducing military tension and promoting and
supporting the initiatives under way to work towards
the priority goal of the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula through diplomatic initiatives and political
negotiation. That is the path that we believe the parties
should embrace in order to arrive at a definitive solution
based on international law.

