Mr. Al-Otoom (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting and to congratulate
you on the important and substantial work undertaken
by Spain in the course of its membership of the Security
Council and at the head of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which has been
effectively and positively reflected in the Council's
work during the past two years. I also wish to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson; Mr. Kim Won-so,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs; and
Mr. Bryan Finley and Mr. James Min for their briefings.

The danger posed by the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) by non-State actors is alarming, in
particular given the work of terrorist groups throughout
the world, starting with the Middle East and continuing
through Africa and Europe. These groups use different
means to effectively plan and implement their work.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has stated that the terrorist group Da'esh
is using mustard gas in Syria, Lebanon and Iraq. We
must therefore examine the capacities of these terrorist
groups, which kill and terrorize people in order to
achieve their goals.

Jordan has taken concrete steps to implement
resolution 1540 (2004). We have enacted a number
of national laws, enforced effective measures and
developed national regulations to control and prevent
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery. We have submitted three reports on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I would like to refer to the workshop for States
members of the League of Arab States on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which was
hosted in June by Jordan, with the assistance of the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. The
workshop included the participation of representatives
of 15 Arab States, donor States, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Group of Experts and 11 regional and international
organizations, as well as representatives of the
private sector and civil society. We exchanged views,
discussed practical difficulties in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and developed a road map on
how to overcome them. We also discussed cooperation
among Member States and regional and international
organizations in strengthening national capacity-
building.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004), which
we hope will pave the way for the implementation of
the resolution and contribute to capacity-building. We
support the recommendations contained in the report,
in particular with regard to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) through focused approaches
to be implemented by the Committee and by
maintaining the important cooperation between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the 1540
Committee in order to update information concerning
the capabilities of terrorist groups and their ability to
use WMDs.

We emphasize the need for continued cooperation
between the 1540 Committee with other relevant
international organizations, in particular the
International Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL,
as well as the international initiatives on combating
nuclear terrorism and the international partnership to
counter the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We stress
the need for States to strengthen cooperation across their
own sectors, such as the industrial and parliamentary
sectors, civil society and the academic sector.

During its term on the Security Council as a
non-permanent member, Jordan was vehement in its
efforts towards calling attention to the work of the
1540 Committee in its belief of the need to facilitate
its success. We emphasize the importance of the
continuation of the Committee's work and cooperating
with it to achieve a world of stability, peace and love.

