Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would especially like
to thank the Polish presidency for organizing this
important open debate and to express my appreciation to
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanna Edwar for their important
contributions today.
Sweden aligns itself with the statements to be made
later today on behalf of the European Union and by the
representatives of Norway, on behalf of the Nordic
countries, and of Switzerland, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

In last Thursday's open debate on upholding
international law (see S/PV.8262), my delegation asked,
rhetorically, how it could be that we succeed in using
the tools of international law in most areas yet fail in
this most critical one - protecting the life and dignity
of our fellow human beings. This morning, the briefers
eloquently and powerfully outlined the consequences
of that failure. They are not abstract. They are lives
shattered and futures erased as a result of a reckless
and unacceptable disregard for international law and
the civilians whom it is there to protect. And we,
the 15 members around this table, have a particular
responsibility, individually and collectively, to reverse
that trend.

The Secretary-General told us again this morning
that preventing conflict and sustaining peace are his
top priority. We welcome his efforts over the past year
and fully support that agenda. Prevention is the most
effective tool to ensure the protection of civilians. It
is our first line of defence. But when prevention does
not succeed, international humanitarian law should
provide a safety net for civilians caught up in armed
conflict. We commend the Secretary-General for his
action-oriented approach to enhancing respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and for promoting good practice.

Despite our efforts, unspeakable crimes continue
to be committed. The use of rape and sexual and
gender-based violence have reached new and horrific
levels. The widespread constraints on humanitarian
access by parties to conflicts and deliberate attacks
against medical personal and humanitarian workers
cruelly deprive civilians of the assistance that they
so desperately need. The protection needs of women,
girls, men and boys often differ. Integrating a gender
perspective into the implementation of international
humanitarian law and our targeted humanitarian
responses is essential. The experiences from Mali,
Iraq, Afghanistan and South Sudan affirm the
importance of integrating a gender perspective across
the operations of United Nations missions, including
references to gender in Security Council resolutions
and statements and collecting and analysing gender-
and age-disaggregated data. In addition, creating a link
between protection, empowerment and participation
can help support sustainable peace and avoid the narrow
perception of women as primarily objects of protection,
as Hanaa Edwar said this morning.

The disproportionate suffering of children as a
result of armed conflict must be highlighted. Boys
and girls are killed and maimed, recruited as soldiers,
as human shields or even as forced suicide bombers.
Schools and health-care facilities are destroyed,
impeding children's enjoyment of their human rights.
It is essential that we protect children today to prevent
new cycles of violence and conflict tomorrow. The
children and armed conflict agenda is an important
accountability mechanism. Its reporting and monitoring
of grave violations against children in armed conflict
are important elements not only for ending impunity,
but also for engagement with parties to conflict. As
Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, Sweden will continue to
insist on action on this agenda in the Council.

The Secretary-General spoke about the need to
break the vicious circle between conflict and food
insecurity. We welcome the ongoing work of the Council
on conflict and hunger, which we hope can lead to the
adoption of a resolution in the very near future.

I would like to focus on three issues at the heart of
the protection-of-civilians agenda.

First, there is an urgent need to advance the
commitments set out in resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of health care in armed conflict and on
turning the recommendations of the Secretary-General
into action on the ground. In Syria alone, 112 attacks
against medical facilities and workers took place in
2017. In addition, 645,000 medical items were removed
from inter-agency cross-line convoys. In Yemen, health
infrastructure has deteriorated drastically during the
conflict, and we are witnessing the breakdown of public
institutions, including health-care services that have
to make do with very scarce supplies. In Afghanistan,
women make up the largest group of those unable to
access health-care services as a result of violence.

The international community, including the
Council, can and should act to protect medical care in
armed conflict. International law must be respected, and
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law, must be addressed.

We need concrete steps to improve monitoring
and reporting mechanisms, as well as data collection.
We are currently looking into how United Nations
peacekeeping missions and military practice could
be improved to more effectively protect health care.
Together with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and the Swedish Red Cross, the Swedish
Government will launch a project aimed at enhancing
the ability of armed forces to meet their obligation to
ensure the protection of and respect for health care in
armed conflict while performing their duties.

Secondly, we welcome efforts to strengthen
the protection-of-civilians mandate of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. While the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians undoubtedly
lies with the host nation, United Nations missions have
a crucial role to play. In this regard, we need to build
on positive experiences and best practices. We welcome
the newly agreed accountability policy clearly stating
the responsibility of senior leadership for strategically
employing the protection-of-civilians mandate in the
work plans of missions.

Thirdly, at the core of both the Secretary-General's
and the President of the General Assembly's agendas
are the global compacts for refugees and migrants.
The number of people displaced by conflict continues
to rise, and today's levels of forced displacement are
unprecedented. Safeguarding respect for international
humanitarian law, refugee law and international human
rights law in these compacts will be crucial.

In practical terms, close coordination and solidarity
across the international community is essential
to effectively addressing the needs of migrants
and refugees.

We support the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/462) and are
committed to implementing them. Today the ICRC and
Ms. Edwar have asked us to do more, so it is high time
to step up. Waging war in violation of the rules seems to
come at a very small cost; the cost is borne by innocent
civilians. We must strive to create a world in which no
one, neither Government nor armed groups, believe
that they can violate without consequence the rules that
we have all agreed on to protect civilians caught up in
conflict. The Council has a unique role in changing the
game. It is one we cannot abdicate or ignore.
