Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am fully
confident that, with your experience and your diplomatic
skill, you will conduct our work in an entirely successful
manner. Please be assured of the complete cooperation and
support of the Italian delegation.

At the same time, I want to express our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov and his delegation for
the outstanding way in which that representative guided the
work of the Council during the month of December.

Italy will vote in favour of the draft resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). We believe that its
contents give a clear and firm indication of the Security
Council's position on the question of Abkhazia, Georgia.

We agree that there is a need to establish the basic
political conditions to support the negotiations. The parties,
and particularly the Abkhaz leadership, need to step up
their efforts to find a comprehensive solution to the crisis
based on the principles long affirmed by the Council
relating to Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The parliamentary elections of November 1995, of which
the Council would rightly take note, are a positive element,
especially considering President Shevardnadze's statement
of 26 November 1995, which clearly expressed the
Georgian Government's willingness to find a balanced and
reasonable constitutional solution. My delegation's support
for the draft resolution is based also on the growing
concern it would voice over the humanitarian situation in
Abkhazia, particularly in the Gali region.

We were shocked at the news provided by the
Permanent Representative of Georgia regarding the events
of 5 January in Sheshleti. These events unfortunately
seem to confirm an increasing climate of violence, as
noted in the Secretary-General's report, which describes
the operations of the Abkhaz military in the Gali region
in early November.

In this context, UNOMIG's activities must not
contribute to an indefinite paralysis of the situation. On
the contrary, thanks to effective and constructive
collaboration with the forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), UNOMIG should continue to
play a dynamic role. One wonders what might have
happened in early November, for example, had it not been
for the vigilance of observers and peace-keepers in the
Gali region. UNOMIG's role should help to restore a
climate of security that will finally make it possible to
settle the crucial problem of the return of refugees.

In this regard, the close collaboration between
UNOMIG, the UN HCR and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) represents a positive
element in a general context that, unfortunately, does not
carry much promise of a breakthrough, as the Secretary-
General's report underlines. Nevertheless, the United
Nations, the Russian facilitator and the OSCE must
pursue their efforts: other crises that were once considered
intractable have ultimately yielded to peace agreements,
and the Abkhaz question too can be settled by following
the difficult road of negotiation.

