The President: I thank the representative of Indonesia
for the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Abou-Hadid (Syrian Arab Republic)
(interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to
convey to you our great happiness at seeing you presiding
over this meeting as a sign of your appreciation of the
importance of the item on the Council's agenda from an
African, Arab and international point of view.

We cannot at this time fail to extend our thanks to the
members of the Security Council, who agreed to convene
this meeting. I should also like, on behalf of my country, to
welcome the participation in this meeting of our brother
Mr. Omar Mustafa Muntasser, the Secretary of the General
People's Committee for Foreign Liaison and International
Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. There is no
doubt that his participation lends particular importance to
our discussion and to the question being debated by the
Council.

We are meeting today to debate a legal question that
was brought to the International Court of Justice by a State
Member of the United Nations. The Arab States, including
my own country, welcomed with a profound sense of
satisfaction the decision handed down by the Court at The
Hague regarding the trial of the suspects in the Lockerbie
incident, especially since it was handed down by the
highest judicial organ in the world, one that has the greatest
integrity and is a principal organ of the United Nations.

In this regard, I should like to remind members of a
well-known statement made by the former Secretary-
General of the United Nations in his Agenda for Peace:

"The docket of the International Court of
Justice has grown fuller but remains an underused
resource for the peaceful adjudication of disputes.
Greater reliance on the Court would be an important
contribution to United Nations peacemaking."
[S/24111, para. 38]

The Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
stated, following the decision by the Court, that the
imposition of sanctions against Libya by the Security
Council gave a misleading impression, as if the suspects
had already been tried. He considered that a contravention
of one of the most important legal principles in force in
all countries of the world, including the countries
concerned in this matter, which provides that a suspect is
innocent until proven guilty. My country welcomed those
decisions with great satisfaction, because it feels that we
have now embarked on the right path to deal with this
crisis on a sound legal basis.

Here I should like to refer to the British newspaper
The Independent, which stated that the real victors in the
decision of the International Court of Justice were the
relatives of the Lockerbie victims, who had become fed
up with the Anglo-American stalling.

The Security Council is convened today to hear the
views of the States participating in the debate. We had
hoped that the Council would assume its responsibilities
in full and debate all aspects of the question - not
simply listen - in order to reach a just solution to this
conflict. In this context, we would like to recall that
Libya had initiated proceedings before the Court before
the adoption of resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993),
and in good faith brought before the Court the dispute
over the implementation and interpretation of the 1971
Montreal Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

We had expected international justice to have time
to decide on this dispute after the definitive decision by
the International Court of Justice. Unfortunately, the
Security Council was pushed to adopt resolutions and to
impose sanctions against Libya and on its fraternal
people, who have been suffering the effects of these
unwarranted sanctions for more than six years, with no
hope of seeing light at the end of the tunnel.

 

Libya has made proposals for settling the question of
Lockerbie, which shows its good intentions and positive
stance with respect to finding a solution to this problem in
a way that would guarantee the correct application of
international and domestic laws. The Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic expressed its support for these
proposals because it felt that they would allow us to find an
equitable and realistic solution making it possible to lift the
unwarranted sanctions imposed against the fraternal Libyan
Arab people.

The international community, represented by the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, at their various summit conferences
and other meetings at various levels, expressed support for
the Libyan proposals. We now have before us three options
endorsed by the League of Arab States and the
Organization of African Unity. These options have enjoyed
international support on a wide scale.

We feel that the options consisting of trying the
suspects in a neutral third country to be designated by the
Security Council, or of trying them by Scottish judges but
at The Hague on the basis of Scottish law, or of trying
them in an ad hoc court established for that purpose at the
headquarters of the International Court at The Hague should
lead to a solution that would fulfil the requirements of
justice and international law.

We hope that the Council will seriously review these
options and will put an end to this continuous human
suffering that has lasted for more than six years. The
Judgments by the International Court of Justice pave the
way for a final settlement of the dispute over the Lockerbie
question. Hence we feel that there no grounds for the
Security Council to maintain the sanctions imposed against
the Libyan people. In this light we feel that it is high time
that the members of the Security Council, especially the
parties concerned with this dispute, undertake measures to
put an end to this suffering by lifting or freezing the
sanctions pending a decision regarding this matter by the
Court. This proposal was endorsed by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs at the twenty-fifth Conference of Foreign
Ministers of the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
which recently concluded.

Let us work together in the spirit of international
responsibility to apply the criteria equally and universally,
avoiding selectivity and double standards. Before this
international forum we emphasize the principles of equity
and equality and the necessity for the resolutions adopted
here to be applicable to everyone, with the same firmness
and determination to preserve the credibility of the
Council in undertaking its mission of maintaining
international peace and security.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Mr. Samhan Al-Nuaimi (United Arab Emirates)
(interpretation from Arabic): It is a great pleasure for me
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates to address to you,
Sir, my heartfelt congratulations on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to thank you as well as the other Member
States for having convened this meeting in order to
consider the evolution of the Libyan affair and its most
recent developments.

The United Arab Emirates feels that it must
associate itself with the community of nations in
expressing its deep regret at the great human tragedy
which followed the attack on the United States Pan Am
flight over Lockerbie in 1988. Today, as we hold this
meeting, we must reiterate our strong condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. This is a
serious scourge that threatens the security and stability of
States as well as the future and prosperity of mankind as
a whole.

We have followed very closely the various
developments in the Lockerbie crisis since its origin, a
conflict between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, a fraternal
country, on the one hand, and the United States and the
United Kingdom, on the other. We were very concerned
to see that this issue was not, apparently, moving towards
any final, just settlement. On the contrary, the crisis has
worsened, because we are still lacking a consensus on the
question as to whether this is a political matter, which
requires consideration in the Security Council, or a legal
matter which is a matter of international law, international
conventions, the principles of the Charter, and, first and
foremost, the 1971 Montreal Convention.

Security Council resolutions 778 (1992) and 883
(1993) imposed mandatory sanctions against Libya, under
Chapter VII of the Charter. They involved restrictions on
the freedom of movement of diplomats and air traffic, a
freeze on goods and assets, an embargo on equipment and

 

so on and so forth. This has been an attempt to link Libya
with terrorism not on the basis of undeniable legal proof
but simply because that country detained two of its citizens
who were suspect and requested that they be tried by an
equitable tribunal.

Libya showed its good faith in opting for a peaceful
settlement and vigorously condemning terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. It announced that it was
completely prepared to cooperate with international efforts
to eliminate this phenomenon. Libya also showed that it
respected Security Council resolution 731 (1992) and
declared that it was entirely desirous of cooperating in
reaching a solution to this crisis with the other States
concerned through negotiations and a judicial settlement. It
was even willing to extradite the two suspects in order to
bring them to a just and fair trial outside its territory by a
neutral and impartial legal body - a solution that would
make it possible for Libya to preserve its national
sovereignty and its dignity, as stipulated in the Charter.

Libya presented positive and rational proposals which
were accepted by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement. But
the other parties concerned refused these proposals, which
constitutes an obstacle on the way to a just and equitable
resolution of this question.

The sanctions regime - which Chapter VII of the
Charter allows the Security Council to impose to resolve
certain situations that are a threat to international peace and
security - has proved to be unsuccessful. This is because,
far from being a specific measure designed to sanction
certain erroneous policies on the part of certain States who
have breached international legality, these sanctions have
effected vital spheres of activity for Libyan development.

Punishment has been inflicted on an entire people, in
violation of the principles of the Charter and of
international and humanitarian law. The sanctions have thus
become a kind of sanction against the Libyan people as a
whole, which deviates from the reasons why this regime
was set up in the first place. The fact-finding mission that
visited Libya between 13 and 18 December and was headed
by the Secretary-General's personal envoy, Mr. Vladimir
Petrovsky, reported on the human and material losses
suffered by the Libyan people, particularly in the areas of
health, education, agriculture, production, investment and
development. These losses are the result of the sanctions
imposed on Libya pursuant to Security Council resolutions
748 (1992) and 883 (1993) and have given rise to a human
and social crisis of tragic dimensions and phenomena
hitherto unknown in Libya, such as increases in the
mortality rate and in the number of handicapped persons.

We therefore believe that these international
measures imposed against Libya no longer have any
justification, particularly after the Judgments handed down
by the International Court of Justice on 27 February 1998,
which have confirmed that this is a legal dispute within
the jurisdiction of the Court, in keeping with the Montreal
Convention of 1971.

That is why the United Arab Emirates, convinced of
the need to strengthen the role of the International Court
of Justice as a competent legal body to resolve disputes
between States, would like to reiterate the following.
First, there is a need to endorse the two Judgments of the
Court, which are binding Judgments that pave the way to
a final settlement of the Lockerbie question. Secondly, the
necessary steps should be taken to follow up the two
Judgments, inter alia, by reconsidering the question of
sanctions against Libya and by suspending them
immediately until a final decision has been taken by the
Court making it possible to resolve this matter once and
for all. Thirdly, the Security Council must adopt urgent
preliminary measures to authorize some humanitarian
flights to and from Libya, particularly those involving
medical evacuations, the delivery of medicine and
humanitarian aid and pilgrimages. Restrictions should also
be loosened on imports of aircraft, spare parts for planes
and equipment for agriculture and other vital services in
order to meet the essential humanitarian needs of the
Libyan people.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support
for the position of the brotherly Libyan people regarding
the solution to this crisis, a position supported by the
majority of the international community, particularly in
the light of the Court's two recent Judgments. The United
Arab Emirates hopes that the two States involved will
participate in and contribute to the efforts and initiatives
being made to resolve this crisis in keeping with the
principles of the Charter and international law.


The President: I thank the representative of the
United Arab Emirates for the kind words he addressed to
me.

The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

 


