Mr. Salim: I would like at the outset to express my
appreciation to the United States presidency of the
Security Council, and in particular to Secretary of State
Albright and Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, for
undertaking the important initiative of devoting the month
of January in the Security Council to dealing with African
issues. We are indeed encouraged by this initiative, which
acknowledges the magnitude of the challenges that our
continent is currently confronted with and the need for
determined and concerted efforts to address them.

In deliberating on these issues, I am confident that
the Security Council will appreciate the efforts that are
being deployed within the continent to contain the scourge
of conflict, disease, economic deprivation and poverty.
Indeed, hardly a day passes without initiatives, measures
and efforts being made by Africans designed to address
the various challenges confronting our continent.
However, crucial as these efforts by Africans themselves
and their leaders are, if they are to have an effective and
sustainable impact, they need clearly to be strongly
supported by the rest of the international community.

 

This particular meeting of the Security Council is
devoted to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The unprecedented presence of so many African
heads of State at this special meeting is clear testimony to
the seriousness with which they and the rest of Africa view
the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also
reflects their determination to continue to assume their
responsibility for seeking a lasting solution to this African
problem, whose magnitude and dimension have far-reaching
implications. This impressive presence of African heads of
State at this Security Council meeting also represents their
expectations and hopes for greater solidarity and support
from the rest of the international community to complement
Africa's own efforts.

This hope and these expectations are predicated within
the context of international partnership that is anchored in
the concept of our global village, with commonly shared
values and destiny. Such international solidarity and
partnership will achieve its full potential and significance
only when it clearly manifests itself in more coherent and
concrete actions by all of us working together to address
the many crises affecting our common humanity,
particularly, problems of insecurity, instability and
underdevelopment in Africa. I need not stress, in this
regard, the special nature of the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its consequences for that
country, for the region and for the continent of Africa as a
whole.

On our part, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
has spared no effort in supporting the regional efforts to
end the conflict based on the principles enshrined in the
OAU Charter, particularly the cardinal principles of respect
for the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of its
member States and the peaceful settlement of disputes. On
the basis of our attachment to these principles and our
concern that these same principles have been under serious
threat in the Democratic Republic of the Congo because of
the internal and external dimensions of that conflict, we, in
tandem with the region and other partners, have worked
assiduously to bring an end to the conflict.

These combined efforts culminated in the signing of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, which constitutes a unique
instrument for forging peace and understanding based on
the cooperation and good faith of the parties, as well as on
the support of the international community.

Since the coming into effect of the Lusaka Agreement
at the end of August 1999, the Organization of African
Unity has made sustained efforts to fulfil its share of
responsibilities for its implementation. In this endeavour,
we have been working very closely with all the parties
concerned. We have, in particular, benefited from the
support and untiring efforts of President Frederick
Chiluba of Zambia, the coordinator of the regional peace
efforts, and all his colleagues in the region.

We have also worked closely with the current
Chairman of the OAU, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
and other African Leaders, who continue to demonstrate
serious concern about the situation and actively engage in
support of the efforts to resolve the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. At every stage, we
have endeavoured to coordinate our efforts with those of
the United Nations, as our experiences in dealing with
conflict situations in Africa point to the need for us to act
in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.

I wish to underscore the daunting difficulties that are
being confronted in the process of implementing the
Lusaka Agreement. In particular, we have had to work
hard and persevere to mobilize the necessary financial and
logistical support to facilitate the establishment of the
Joint Military Commission (JMC) at its temporary
headquarters in Lusaka and the deployment of the local
joint military commissions in three out of the four
identified areas within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In this context, it should be noted that the
enthusiasm and goodwill that were demonstrated by our
partners at the time of the negotiations and signature of
the Lusaka Agreement were not accompanied by the
required level of support. This was particularly evident
when resources were sought to establish the Joint Military
Commission, the main organ responsible for monitoring
the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement pending
the deployment of the peacekeeping mission by the
United Nations. As we meet today, the support given to
assist the JMC to perform its tasks has been far below its
essential requirements. Nonetheless, the JMC, under the
leadership of its Chairman, General Lallali of Algeria, has
been striving to perform its duties under very difficult
circumstances.

I wish here to join President Chiluba in thanking
those countries that have already concretized their pledges
in support of the JMC. I wish also to express my
gratitude to OAU member States and our partners, who
have provided the human, financial and logistical
resources that enabled us to establish the JMC not only in

 

Lusaka, but also in three out of the four identified areas in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It goes without saying that the support of the African
States and of the rest of the international community will
also be needed as we prepare the ground for the
commencement of the inter-Congolese political negotiations
and dialogue. I wish to use the opportunity provided by this
forum to express our appreciation to the former President
of Botswana, Sir Ketumile Masire, for having accepted to
serve as the Facilitator following a series of consultations
among the Congolese parties to the Ceasefire Agreement,
organized by the OAU. I would like to urge the
international community at large to provide the necessary
political, logistical and financial support to sustain the
efforts of the Facilitator in undertaking this crucial and
challenging task of assisting the Congolese parties in their
search for a new political dispensation for their country.

At the same time, we need to be mindful of the fact
that the role which the international community could play
in this process has of necessity to be limited in scope and
conducted in a manner than can allow the people of the
Democratic Republic of Congo themselves, through an
all-inclusive process, the time and space that they need to
negotiate such a new political dispensation.

It is important also to underscore the interlinkage
between the political and the military processes. There is
therefore the urgent need for an effective United Nations
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
form of military observers and peacekeepers. It is, at the
same time, our fervent hope that the parties concerned will
extend the necessary cooperation to facilitate that
deployment. We also hope that, throughout this process, the
necessary understanding and flexibility will be brought to
bear by all the parties concerned.

In this context, mention must be made of the fact that
one of the areas of concern in the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement relates to the violations of the Ceasefire
Agreement that have been reported. This issue has been a
source of concern to members of the Security Council, as
it has been for all of us. It is, however, worth noting that,
despite the situation created by the violations, the
Agreement continues to hold. Moreover, the violations have
not eroded in an irreversible manner the commitment of the
parties to the Agreement, as the latter have continued to
cooperate within the JMC, within the Political Committee
and, more recently, in the selection of the Facilitator for
their political negotiations.

Let me also at this point acknowledge the fact that
the Ceasefire Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo may not be a perfect document, given that it
is the product of compromise. However, the Agreement
remains the only expression and instrument of the
collective will of the different parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that was negotiated by
all of them and accepted by the international community
as a viable framework which, if implemented in good
faith, would facilitate a return to peace, security, national
reconciliation and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We therefore have a collective
responsibility to make the Agreement work.

It was against this backdrop that the recently held
summit of the Southern African Development
Community, which took place in Maputo, Mozambique,
on 16 January, urged the signatories to the Ceasefire
Agreement to cooperate in a more active manner to
ensure the full and successful implementation of that
Agreement. Subsequent to the Maputo summit, it was
encouraging to note the resolve and commitment that was
reiterated by the parties during the last meeting of the
Political Committee, held in Harare, Zimbabwe, from 17
to 18 January. That commitment entailed the respect of
all the provisions of the Ceasefire Agreement and their
implementation on the basis of an updated calendar that
was adopted on that occasion.

As we continue to insist, and rightly so, that the
parties to the conflict show good faith in the
implementation of the Agreement that they freely signed,
let us endeavour to effectively assist them in order to
achieve the desired objectives of the Lusaka peace
Agreement. In this respect, any procrastination will
definitely be to the detriment of the peace process. It is
therefore our expectation in the continent that the
deliberations of the Council will result in a clear
commitment and concomitant action for the speedy
deployment of United Nations military observers and
peacekeeping forces, the size and mandate of which
should be commensurate with the magnitude of the crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is also our sincere hope that the Security Council
will be able to respond positively to the need for concrete
support for the facilitation efforts of Sir Ketumile Masire.
The intention of the United States Government to
contribute to that effort, expressed this morning by
Secretary Albright, is certainly a welcome decision.

 

The perception that the Security Council has been
hesitant in mandating the deployment of a force that can go
into the Democratic Republic of the Congo and make a
difference has, unfortunately, served to undermine the
speedy implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. It has
also served to strengthen the conviction regarding the
unfortunate imbalance that exists in dealing with African
crises. While we wholeheartedly welcome the renewed
interest and focus of the Council on African issues and
problems, it remains our fervent hope that the African
agenda of the Council will go a long way in terms of
responding to the needs of the moment. We need to
recognize the indivisibility of the challenges that confront
our common humanity, and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo provides us with a unique opportunity to match our
words with our deeds.

The purpose of this special meeting is precisely to
provide new momentum for the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and to create conditions for
the Security Council to act swiftly and decisively in pursuit
of its responsibilities towards the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as the principal organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security. For
there is no denying the fact that if there is one conflict in
Africa that has all the attributes of constituting a threat to
international peace and security, it is the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The task of the international community - and in
particular of the Security Council - is not merely to win
the battle by creating a temporary peace, but rather to win
the war by ensuring a stable and peaceful Democratic
Republic of the Congo after the settlement of the conflict.
Together we should be able to join hands in support of the
parties in the implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement.
This Council meeting should provide us with an opportunity
to reiterate our collective commitment - the commitment
of the parties and the commitment of the international
community - to the implementation of the Agreement, and
to agree on the best ways, means and modalities to achieve
this objective. Failure to do so will represent a serious let-
down to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to the peoples of Africa in general.
Furthermore, given the high profile of this Council meeting,
such a failure will constitute a particularly poignant setback.
I submit that we cannot afford to do so.
