Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.

As forecast in my December address (see S/PV.7073), in this reporting period the Prosecution
finished presenting its evidence in all the remaining
trials. We are now well and truly in the final phase of
our work. In the Karadzie case, the defence case has
closed and the parties are now preparing their final
trial briefs and closing arguments for late August and
September, respectively. Following the closing of the
Prosecution's case in both the Mladie and the Hadiie
cases, the respective Trial Chambers denied the defence
motions for acquittal. As a result, the Mladic' defence
began presenting its evidence two weeks ago and the
defence in the Hadiie case is scheduled to begin on
3 July. The trial judgement in the Seselj case is still
pending.

The Appeals Division of the Office of the Prosecutor
is presently occupied with five appeals. I would like to
refer the Council to the full written statement for more
details in that regard.

The appeal judgements earlier this year in the
Sainovie et al. and Bordevie cases established two
additional legal precedents with far-reaching and
positive significance for both the Tribunal and for
international criminal law. First, in both cases, the
Appeals Chamber corrected errors at the trial level that
resulted in unduly restrictive approaches to assessing
whether the accused could foresee crimes of sexual
violence. In correcting those errors, the Appeals
Chamber has strengthened the foundations for holding
senior officials accountable for crimes of sexual
violence amid a violent criminal campaign. Secondly, in
the Sainovic' et al. case, the Appeals Chamber affirmed
that specific direction is not a requirement for aiding
and abetting, thereby bringing the Tribunal's case law
back in line with customary international law.

I am pleased to report that the day-to-day
cooperation between my Office and the countries of the
former Yugoslavia continues smoothly. Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina have responded as required
to our requests for assistance and have generally
facilitated our work on the remaining trials and appeals.
We call upon the national authorities to maintain that
good cooperation throughout the next reporting period
and beyond. I am also pleased to note that additional
cooperation protocols have been concluded among
the countries of the former Yugoslavia on war crimes
issues and that information exchanges are taking place.
That is clearly an improvement, and we encourage the
national authorities to translate the goodwill enshrined
in the protocols into more visible action.

When it comes to implementing the Bosnia and
Herzegovina National War Crimes Strategy, the picture
is unfortunately bleak. As I have reported over the
past four periods, very little progress has been made
towards finalizing the remaining category II cases,
the last of which my Office transferred to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2009. Only one indictment in relation
to those investigation files was issued in the current
reporting period, leaving the other seven files pending,
with no discernible progress made. In April, I had
in-depth discussions with representatives of the Office
of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina but did
not receive convincing explanations for the absence of
relevant activity on the remaining files. That situation
cannot continue. The responsible authorities must
commit to a dramatic improvement in processing the
category II cases.

More generally, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
National War Crimes Strategy is considerably delayed
and a large backlog of cases remains. According to the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
around 350 complex cases should be completed by the end
of 2018. That is three years after the deadline originally
prescribed. Then there is the far larger backlog of less
complex cases, many of which still await investigation
and, in some cases, the start of investigations. Serious
action is required if that large volume of cases is to be
completed by the 2023 deadline.

The delay does not arise solely from a lack of
resources. There is little commitment on the part
of the responsible institutions to prioritizing war
crimes investigations and prosecutions. While more
resources alone will not solve some of the fundamental
problems of the National War Crimes Strategy, my
Office welcomes the justice budgetary support of
the Instrument for Pre-accession Assistance, funded
by the European Union, which aims to strengthen
resources for war crimes processing. My Office also
recognizes the efforts of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to set up a new and more coordinated
national training programme for war crimes cases. As
emphasized in a report prepared on behalf of my Office
last year, a comprehensive and coordinated training
programme is an essential precondition for successfully
implementing the National War Crimes Strategy. My
Office remains available to work with the OSCE and
other relevant partners to integrate the knowledge and
expertise of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia into the programme.

My Office is in the process of finalizing the first
edition of a paper that records our best practices and
lessons learned with respect to investigating and
prosecuting crimes of sexual violence. We know that
such crimes occurred in shockingly high numbers
during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and that
many of them remain unaddressed. We also know
that crimes of large-scale sexual violence continue to
characterize ongoing conflicts around the world. We
plan to make available our experience over the past
21 years in navigating some of the distinctive obstacles
that arise in sexual Violence cases. The paper will be
of interest to a range of actors, including the national
authorities of the former Yugoslavia and other countries
around the world.

Our work also reinforces other efforts currently
under way within the international community to
elevate the priority accorded to crimes of sexual
violence and to improve the guidance available to

those investigating and documenting such crimes. One
such effort is the United Kingdom's Preventing Sexual
Violence Initiative, launched in May 2012 by Foreign
Secretary William Hague. We will be present at the
Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
in London next week and look forward to sharing our
insights and expertise as part of that unprecedented
dialogue on conflict-related sexual violence.

On a similar theme, we are pleased that, of course
within the constraints of our available capacity, the
expertise within my Office is being channelled into
rule of law capacity-building efforts across the world.
Periodically, we have been called upon to advise and
assist in post-conflict accountability processes in the
Middle East, Africa and South America. We have also
assisted other parts of the United Nations system, such
as the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and UN-Women, in that regard. In that way, we
have been pleased to reinforce the operational capacity
available within the international community for
investigating and prosecuting international crimes. To
the extent compatible with our core functions of trial
and appellate work, we will remain open to further
requests to assist in the future.

In conclusion, as downsizing continues in
compliance with the completion strategy, my Office
remains firmly focused on the final trials and appeals,
which are among the most important and complex in
the Tribunal's history. We are also taking a deep and
reflective look at the practices that we have developed
and the lessons learned over the past 21 years. We
know that there is an increasing interest among many
stakeholders in accessing such information, and we are
committed to sharing it. We will continue to encourage
the national authorities, especially those of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to take full advantage of the resources
available to them within my Office in order to ensure
accountability for the crimes committed. More broadly,
we know that finding creative and effective new
strategies for national capacity-building is a priority
area if we are to construct a more coherent and complete
international justice system. We will ensure that our
experience and expertise are available as a building
block for that process.

