The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay.

On behalf of my country, I wish to express my
great satisfaction at the adoption of resolution 2261
(2016), and congratulate the friendly country of
Colombia on taking this essential step to achieve
lasting peace. The resolution establishes the role that
the international community, through the United
Nations, will play in monitoring the implementation of
one of the most complex aspects of the post-conflict
process: the conditions ceasefire and bilateral and
definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of
arms by both parties to the conflict, the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo.

The resolution enjoyed the unanimous support of
the entire Security Council, and surely of the entire
international community. That is so in large part
because of the firm conviction and determination
demonstrated by both parties to attain lasting peace.
This attitude is clearly reflected in the text adopted,
which recognizes the unambiguous national ownership
of the implementation of the Final Agreement and
establishes a political mission with unarmed observers,
which says a lot about the political and institutional
maturity of Colombia.

I also wish to acknowledge the important role played
as guarantors of the process by a number of countries,
including Cuba and Norway; Chile and Venezuela,
which supported the process; and the United Kingdom
as facilitator of the resolution.

There is one last effort remaining before the
definitive peace agreement is signed on 23 March,
after which it will be subject to the political will of the
Colombian people.

I am proud to be presiding over this meeting for
two reasons. The first is the clear empathy that we feel
for the Colombian people; the second is that this event
makes the entire American continent free of armed
conflict. We, the inhabitants of the Americas, and the
world should be proud of this. Uruguay will continue
to support this process so long as the parties deem
necessary.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

