Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the invitation, for convening this
meeting and also for the excellent contribution that
you presented on behalf of the Security Council at
the annual session of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), held earlier this week. And I would like to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Brazil,
Ambassador Patriota, for his very strong leadership
and commitment during his chairmanship of the
Peacebuilding Commission last year.

The world today is torn by more violent conflict
than it has been in a very long time, leaving in its wake
unprecedented suffering and displacement. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
reported this weekend that more people fled their
homes last year than at any time since records began.
More than half the people displaced by conflict and
persecution are children.

It is against that backdrop that we are meeting
today, during this peacebuilding week. Peacebuilding
is about preventing relapse into conflict by holistically
supporting countries emerging from conflict on
a path towards sustained peace. It is therefore
about establishing the nexus between security and
development. To that end, we need to be more effective
and coherent in United Nations activities that assist
national peacebuilding efforts.

The expert group report on the 10-year review of the
peacebuilding architecture is expected to be submitted
very soon. That review, conducted simultaneously with
the peace operations review and the high-level review
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), offers
a unique opportunity to strengthen the work of the
United Nations in peace and security. I am hopeful that
all three will reinvigorate our collective efforts to build
and sustain peace.

I would now like to turn to the work of the
Commission. Iwould argue that its Vision and usefulness
remain as valid as ever. We have to be more effective in
addressing the challenge of helping countries transition
from war to lasting peace, including by improving
strategic planning in the United Nations system; helping
countries strengthen their national capacities, including
institution-building; ensuring predictable and flexible
funding; improving the coordination of international
post-conflict activities; and providing a diversified
intergovernmental forum that can help ensure greater
coherence of support and extend the period of political
attention.

I would now like to outline the focus areas of the
Peacebuilding Commission during the ongoing ninth
session. First, let me turn to peacebuilding in Ebola
recovery. The three countries most affected by the
Ebola disease outbreak - Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea - are all on the PBC agenda. The Commission
has been instrumental in ensuring that peacebuilding
priorities are addressed as part of the recovery
efforts, including the need to accelerate support for
institution-building. We will continue to advocate for
this, not least at the upcoming high-level meeting on
Ebola recovery to be hosted by the Secretary-General
in a few weeks' time.

Secondly, with respect to the Peacebuilding Review,
as previously mentioned, the work of the advisory
group is about to come to an end, since it will submit
its report in the next few days. We are eagerly awaiting
its analysis and recommendations, and look forward to
the findings, which will provide important input for
the intergovernmental negotiations. That review can
tie into the review of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, as well as the review of peace
operations.

Thirdly, there will be a focus on continued support
for and coordination with regional organizations,
not least the African Union. By drawing on the work
initiated last year by my predecessor, Ambassador
Patriota, we will identify ways to deepen the dialogue
with regional organizations to see how our different
comparative advantages can best be utilized.

Fourthly, the Commission will consider the
recommendations emanating from the annual session
of 2015, held on Tuesday, focusing on the issues of
predictable financing for peacebuilding. In addition,
the Peacebuilding Commission will continue to move
forward with the cross-cutting issues of gender equality
and women's empowerment in all peacebuilding
efforts. That is a crucial aspect of sustainable peace and
development.

I look forward to this afternoon's informal
interactive dialogue on post-conflict peacebuilding. It
is an important opportunity for us to reflect on how the
relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council can be strengthened. Against
the backdrop of the UNHCR report this weekend and
what we all know to be the untenable strains on the
humanitarian system as a whole, I believe we must unite
our efforts now to further enhance the effectiveness and
coherence of the international response to post-conflict
challenges and better support national efforts to avoid
conflict and sustain peace.

