Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me, first, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and to assure you of my delegation's full
support in the conduct of your work. I should also like
to thank you for the kind words addressed to Indonesia
as President of the Council for the month of November.

We thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing
regarding the activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) since June 2007.

Various atrocities continue to be committed by all
sides in Darfur. We note that since the Prosecutor's
briefing last June, the ICC has delivered requests to the
Government of the Sudan for the arrest and surrender
of certain individuals. Those requests were also
reiterated in statements by the Prosecutor and Court
officials, including by the President of the ICC to the
General Assembly. My delegation notes and
appreciates the Prosecutor's efforts to pursue contacts
with the Sudan's neighbours, the United Nations
Secretariat, the African Union (AU), the League of
Arab States, local groups, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and others. We also note the
Prosecutor's position that alleged attacks committed by
rebel factions against peacekeepers and humanitarian
convoys warrant further investigations.

It is deeply troubling that the conflict in Darfur is
continuing, with the attending consequences of a
worsening humanitarian situation. The displacement of
the population, the deliberate attacks on civilians,
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers as well as
tribal clashes can, if unchecked, only create more
difficulties for the establishment of peace. The civilian
toll of the conflict also gives us pause. It has also been
the worst year for the African Union Mission in Sudan
(AMIS) peacekeepers in terms of staff killed and
wounded - more than half of the AMIS personnel
killed since the mission's deployment in 2004 were
killed this year. The Council condemned the Haskanita
attack against AMIS at the end of September, which
killed 10 AU peacekeepers. The Council has also
demanded that no effort be spared to identify and bring
to justice the perpetrators.

My delegation condemns the continued gross
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Darfur. These crimes are egregious
affronts to the norms, rules and collective conscience
of the international community. The perpetrators of
those acts must be brought to justice. We extend our
deepest sympathies and solidarity to the victims for
their suffering, as well as to the people of the Sudan,
who continue to face the impact of conflicts in their
country. In the interest of the victims and the
community as a whole, justice must be served without
unnecessary delay.

This Council received important briefings from
Special Envoy Jan Eliasson and Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno last week on the status of the
political process and deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Using the Addis Ababa conclusions of last
year as a yardstick, we believe we are making some
headway in the political process and the deployment of
UNAMID. The briefings, however, also made clear the
challenges confronting those efforts. They include the
boycott of the Sirte talks, a lack of critical specialized
units for UNAMID and difficulties in the talks between
the Secretariat and the Sudanese authorities on the
follow-up to resolution 1769 (2007).

These developments point to the need for the
Council to continue to enhance its efforts to attain a
political framework for peace and a sustainable
ceasefire, supported by effective peacekeeping.
Moreover, we believe that it is essential that the
Council maintain its unity, encourage the parties in the
Sudan to participate constructively in the peace process
and push forward with the Hybrid Operation.

While peace cannot be complete and sustainable
without justice, justice cannot prosper in the absence of
peace. The implementation of resolution 1593 (2005)
should pay due regard to the wider efforts to achieve
peace in the Sudan. Dialogue and cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan is key.

The role of the ICC, in accordance with the Rome
Statute, should be complementary to national criminal
jurisdiction. We believe that the implementation of
resolution 1593 (2005) and action taken by the
Prosecutor shall neither nullify the principle of
complementarity nor prevent the Sudanese national
court from invoking its jurisdiction against the
perpetrators. We also believe that the cooperation of
the Government of the Sudan with the ICC should be
addressed in a comprehensive manner in the context of
achieving peace and security.

Finally, we wish to underline the dependence of
the Court on the conduct of its work. We believe that
once a case has been referred to the Court, including by
the Council, there should be no interference in the legal
process. At the same time, we recognize and underline
the responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that
the Government of the Sudan complies fully with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).
There cannot be any impunity.

