Mr. Cortorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to congratulate the Security
Council, under the presidency of Peru, for convening
this first open debate since the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, as well as
Mr. Simpson for presenting the progress study on the
subject (see S/2018/86). We also extend our sincere
thanks to the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth
and the representative of civil society for sharing their
important perspectives.

Resolution 2250 (2015) is a historic document and
a point of reference for Member States to give a greater
voice to young people in decision-making and to
implement mechanisms that allow them to participate
meaningfully in peace processes. The study not only
places young people at the forefront of a dialogue that
directly impacts them, but also serves as an inspiration
for us to take advantage of the unique energy that
they possess to fulfil the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, namely, Goal 16, on the promotion of
peace and inclusive societies.

We must be careful when viewing young people only
as perpetrators or victims of violence. Young people
have a pivotal role in guaranteeing the success ofefforts
to maintain lasting peace, promote peacebuilding and
achieve more equal andjust societies. We must therefore
guarantee their active and meaningful participation in
that regard.

It is essential that we ensure respect for the law and
the protection and full enjoyment of human rights, with
greater attention given to the most vulnerable young
people, with a View to prevention and the consolidation
of peace. It is also urgent that we guarantee young
people access to quality education and social protection,
as well as economic empowerment.

We are pleased to see that the study addresses
various types of violence. One of the most appalling
types of violence is that perpetrated against women,
affecting mainly young women, which is an evil that
afflicts many countries of the world. In that regard, the
Dominican Republic is working to train young people,
primarily men, in the areas of analysis, prevention and
eradication of violence against women.

Moreover, climate change threatens the peace and
security of nations, from the hurricanes that beset
our region, to drought, increasing temperatures and
water scarcity, which contribute to social upheaval and
violent conflict, thereby directly affecting the security
and development prospects of young people around
the world. In that vein, involving youth in creating
awareness about climate change is essential if we are to
respond immediately and effectively.

We must exercise caution when it comes to the
dangerous narrative of exclusively highlighting
programmes that support young people involved in
conflict. We tend to forget to foster more programmes
that favour young people who contribute to
peacebuilding. Many organizations do not have enough
funding to achieve their peace and security goals,
which limits their work and the scope and impact of
their projects. We need further alliances among young
people, Governments, civil society and the international
community.

Gathering data is crucial, not only to be able to
calculate exactly how many young people are exposed to
different forms ofviolence or have their rights infringed,
but also to be able to guide policies and programmes
aimed at the empowerment and the well-being of our
youth, primarily based on the five pillars of resolution
2250 (2015). We recognize that monitoring the progress
made in implementing the resolution is fundamental,
as with the women and peace and security agenda,
through an annual report to analyse the implementation
of the recommendations of the study.

The Dominican Republic plans to join the Security
Council as a non-permanent member during the period
2019-2020, and those will be part of our priorities. We
understand that we should not only address the youth,
peace and security agenda in isolation or solely in
open debates, but also in other discussions within the
Council, the General Assembly and the United Nations
system.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic is fully
committed to implementing the recommendations of
the progress study pursuant to resolution 2250 (2015).
We hope to have an opportunity as a Council member
to continue working with the United Nations, Member
States and civil society to advance the goals of the
youth, peace and security agenda.

