Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Chinese presidency for convening this open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, which compels us to
take urgent action, without which the present tensions
could destabilize global security. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Our world and the Middle East are once again in
danger, and the risks cannot be underestimated. It is
with that in view that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled "Manifesto: The World. The 21st
Century" at the 2016 Nuclear Security Summit,
held recently in Washington, DC. The manifesto is
significant as it announces a momentous stand on the
issue ofwar and peace. To implement it, he proposed the
establishment of a global coalition of States for peace,
stability, trust and security, under the auspices of the
United Nations. The common task of the coalition for
the next decade should be to end wars and conflicts,
including in the Middle East.

The Head of my State underlines that a world
without conflicts requires the removal of injustice,
which is its root cause. It is obvious that barriers to
trade and development have to be lifted, while the
principles of international law must be reaffirmed
and respected by all countries. Those steps should be
completed, President Nazarbayev urges, by the time the
United Nations celebrates its centenary. In addition, the
President warns that

"In the twenty-first, century humankind must
take decisive steps towards demilitarization. We
will not have another chance."

All of those approaches are quite relevant to the
situation in the Middle East. It is clear that tensions in the
Middle East also gravitate around the Palestinian issue.
We realize that the two-State solution, the recognition
of the Palestinians' right to self-determination and the
creation of an independent State ofPalestine, peacefully
coexisting with Israel within the pre-1967 borders, are
the only means of durable peace. We also stand for
promoting Palestine's full-fledged membership in the
United Nations and encourage Israeli and Palestinian
leaders to demonstrate a political commitment to reach
a historic peace agreement.

Kazakhstan fully supports the Syrian peace process
within the Geneva III peace talks and resolution 2254
(2015). We call on Member States to endorse the
measures of the Secretary-General, the Arab League
and the International Syria Support Group to find
viable solutions. As our input, Kazakhstan hosted in
Astana in 2015 two rounds of Syrian consultations,
which were attended by the leaders of different
opposition groups and representatives of Syrian ethnic
and religious minorities.

By setting an example in Central Asia, the
Government of Kazakhstan fully endorses the long-
standing proposal of establishing in the Middle East
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. Establishing such a zone is dictated
by its pivotal role in ensuring both regional and global
security. Once again, we call upon all interested
parties to exert political will, understanding and trust
to overcome the different standpoints and to speedily
establish such a zone.

Furthermore, at the initiative of my country and
other partners, under the auspices of the United Nations
and the President of the General Assembly, a high-level
dialogue, entitled "Religions for Peace", will convene
on 6 May to demonstrate the power of religious
unity against the destructive nature of terrorism and
violent extremism.

At the recent thirteenth Summit ofthe Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, held less than a week ago
in Istanbul, the leadership of Kazakhstan, together
with the host country, initiated the process of Islamic
reconciliation as a new paradigm of relations in the
Muslim world, with the aim of reaching a peaceful
settlement of disputes and strengthening the unity of the
Islamic Ummah. We therefore call on the leadership of

all countries in the region to take the necessary measures
to prevent further escalation of sectarian tensions.

In conclusion, we reiterate Kazakhstan's
commitment to join the multilateral effort to ensure
peace in the Middle East.

