Ms. Pham (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN):
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam.
We are honoured to acknowledge the presence of the
Prime Minister of Sweden and take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to Sweden for moving this
agenda forward. We extend our thanks to all of the
briefers for their statements.

While welcoming the positive developments
in the protection of children in armed conflicts,
ASEAN remains deeply concerned over the alarming
increase in grave violations against children. Attacks
on schools, students and education personnel are
alarming as children are put at risk and deprived of
their opportunities to learn and grow for a better future.
These ongoing shocking realities call for greater
consensus and stronger actions by the international
community. In that regard, ASEAN would like to
highlight the following points.

First, more coordinated and responsive strategies
at the national, regional and global levels are urgently
needed, ranging from bringing an end to and preventing
the use and recruitment of children, as well as ensuring
their reintegration and rehabilitation and accountability
for perpetrators.

Secondly, ASEAN looks forward to the development
of practical guidelines for the integration and inclusion
of child protection issues in peace processes. Such
guidelines need to fully address the needs of children
during and after armed conflicts.

Thirdly, ASEAN emphasizes the importance of
constructive engagement among relevant partners, in
line with the principle of the primary responsibility
and authority of States, including closer coordination
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and
concerned States to ensure comprehensive, accurate
and objective reporting.
Fourthly, ASEAN encourages those countries that
have yet to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child to do so, as proof of their unwavering commitment
to child protection issues.

For ASEAN, the protection of children is always
high on our agenda. In 2016, the ASEAN Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women
and Children adopted a work plan with 16 thematic
areas, including the elimination of violence against
children and the right of children to participate in all
affairs that affect them. ASEAN also has been working
closely with external partners in that endeavour.

It has been two decades since the first open debate
of the Council on this agenda item (see S/PV.3896).
Next year will also mark the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1261 (1999) - the first resolution on
children and armed conflict. Those outcomes reflect
our dedication to this important matter, and we realize
that much remains to be done.

ASEAN reiterates its strong commitment and
stands ready to work with other external partners to
ensure a better future for children all over the world.

