Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
congratulating Special Envoy Martin Griffiths on
his first briefing in the Chamber. I thank him for his
initial report and convey our readiness to extend our
full support to him and his mission. I also thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing.

We commend the sterling contribution of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the World Health Organization (WHO),
especially in providing increased medical supplies
and rendering life-saving services and surgical
procedures. Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the
selfless commitment of OCHA and other humanitarian
organizations to easing the suffering of the Yemeni
people in their present difficult circumstances.
Since the start of this month, humanitarian partners
have provided about 60,000 people with emergency
assistance. Over 2 million people, 90 per cent of whom
fled their homes more than a year ago, still remain
displaced across the country owing to the conflict. It
is necessary to increase humanitarian emergency aid
and provide unhindered access to all areas of Yemen.
We emphasize that all obligations under international
humanitarian law must be respected and all parties
must take responsibility to mitigate the humanitarian
situation by cooperating fully with the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian organizations.

The large-scale vaccination campaign to control the
spread of diphtheria in Yemen, undertaken by WHO,
UNICEF and health authorities, is noteworthy. That
campaign targeted nearly 2.7 million children between
the ages of6 weeks and 15 years old in 11 governorates.
As of 1 March, the World Food Programme had provided
over 6 million people with emergency food assistance
and nearly 2 million people with safe drinking water
by rehabilitating urban water systems and rural water
programmes and water was delivered to nearly 375,000
of the most vulnerable internally displaced persons.

My delegation welcomes the coalition's decision
to keep open all of Yemen's main ports, including
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, in order to allow access
to humanitarian and commercial cargo without
restrictions, similar to the previous situation when
Yemen was importing 90 per cent of its food staples.
Maintaining the flow of those imports is absolutely
essential for humanitarian assistance.

On the political track, we are alarmed by the
resurgence of hostilities in Yemen, particularly in
Yemen's southern Al-Hudaydah governorate, which is
about 100 kilometres south of Al-Hudaydah port, and in
the Sana'a governorate in northern Yemen. Air strikes
and clashes have also intensified in neighbouring
Al-Jawf governorate. Kazakhstan therefore calls on
all parties to commit themselves to establishing a new
regime for the cessation of hostilities. Such a temporary
respite would create conditions for the resumption
of negotiations.

It is obvious that solving all outstanding issues
and stabilizing the country will require many years
of additional effort and the involvement of the
international community. However, the cessation of
hostilities will provide an opportunity to revive the
economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore
basic public services to the population, which has been
severely affected over the past three years. Achieving
that goal should be a priority for the Council.

In general, the Security Council should work more
resolutely to resolve the Yemeni conflict and focus on
stabilizing the situation in the entire region, combating
terrorism, implementing the humanitarian mission in
order to preserve civilian lives, and bringing about
an end to the war in the country. The Special Envoy
plays a key role in that regard. We have repeatedly
said that balanced external support for a settlement in
Yemen could effectively complement the work of the
Special Envoy. The search for a peaceful resolution to
the conflict through dialogue and confidence-building
measures should be intensified, and an urgent, universal
ceasefire without preconditions must be reached.

Victory cannot be achieved exclusively by military
means. It is necessary to prevent the splitting of the
country. All parties in Yemen must seek compromises
and reject unilateral decisions that could harm the peace
process. At the same time, the parties to the conflict
are obliged to refrain from committing acts that could
lead to an escalation of the regional situation and
insecurity. It is not acceptable to conduct rocket attacks
against civilian targets on the territory of Saudi Arabia,
and Kazakhstan strongly condemns those attacks.
All parties should exercise restraint amid mounting
tensions. A military escalation is not a solution.

Yemen is the world's worst humanitarian crisis,
with more than 22 million people - three quarters
of the population - in need of humanitarian aid
and protection. Under such critical conditions, it is
important that the United Nations initiate a plan for
further action. We were pleased that, in Geneva on
3 April, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait and more than 30 other countries generously
pledged over $2 billion to support the humanitarian
response in Yemen. Kazakhstan was also part of that
effort. We endorse the Secretary-General's View that
humanitarian resources are very important, but they
are not enough. It is essential that they reach people
in need.

Lastly, we also call upon the parties to the conflict
to demonstrate sincerity and flexibility, to avoid
disagreements in the course of consultations and to
properly resolve complex issues, in particular the
withdrawal of forces, disarmament and the formation of
a Government of national consent, in order to achieve
a comprehensive settlement, taking into account the
national conditions in Yemen and the concerns of all
parties. We fully agree with the words of the Secretary-
General that a negotiated political settlement, through
inclusive intra-Yemeni dialogue, is the only solution.

