Mr. Fulci (Italy): Allow me first of all to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. Your
wisdom, impartiality and high degree of professionalism
have been an art and a constant guarantee of our
effectiveness. At the same time, I wish to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Tono Eitel, Permanent
Representative of Germany, for his exemplary leadership
of our proceedings for the month of August.

Let me also say at the outset that Italy fully
associates itself with and subscribes to the statement that
will be made later on by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

Almost exactly three years ago, on 13 September
1993, we witnessed a great moment in contemporary
history: the Prime Minister of Israel, Yitzhak Rabin, and
the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, shook hands on the
White House lawn, marking the start of a peace process
that until then had seemed absolutely impossible.

This happened because of the dedication, tenacity
and hard work of men and women of good will from
several countries who never lost faith. They overcame
difficulties that had been considered insurmountable for
many years. The Nobel Peace Prize awarded to the two

 

main architects of this watershed sanctioned the transition
to a new era in relations between the Israelis and
Palestinians.

Since then, amid enormous and ongoing difficulties,
and at times misunderstandings, the peace process has
continued. Not even the tragic assassination of Prime
Minister Rabin could stop it.

When the new Israeli Government was installed, its
commitment to continue to implement the peace agreements
was greeted with profound satisfaction by the entire
international community.

Unfortunately, in the past three days, a spiral of events
has taken place that is threatening the very foundation of
this peace process. One of the deepest values of mankind,
religious sentiment, has entered the fray. Feelings like this
obviously risk igniting powerful emotional reactions, as was
unfortunately confirmed by the grave events that followed.

Something unprecedented has now occurred. For the
very first time, the Palestinian police and the Israeli
soldiers, who are supposed to be together leading the way
to peace, exchanged gunfire instead. It seems that the
ensuing clashes were the heaviest in many years. And,
according to reports, this morning - this morning alone -
in a third day of violence, 10 more people lost their lives.

Needless to say, such an event is a setback for the
peace process; worse than that, it could turn back the clock
that until now had been marking the hours of hope. In fact,
the concrete risk is that the situation may spin out of
control - that violence will beget more violence.

I would like to recall at this point that the Irish
Presidency of the European Union had appealed to all the
parties concerned to immediately stop the violent
confrontation and resume negotiation. The European Union
troika - that is to say, Ireland, Italy and the
Netherlands - met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Israel here in New York on Wednesday, 25 September, to
express grave concern over a possible escalation of the
conflict and disquiet over the current fragility of the peace
process. The European Union troika also reiterated the
Florence Declaration of 19 June 1996, according to which
the Oslo agreements are the only way to achieve a lasting
peace in the Middle East.

In line with these European steps, the Prime Minister
of Italy, the Honourable Romano Prodi, personally
contacted President Arafat by phone. As the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Italy, Lamberto Dini said yesterday:

"N ow Israel needs to send a signal. It needs to
take action that will demonstrate that it really
remains committed to peace."
In fact, there are concrete measures that the Israeli
Government can take unilaterally to implement its
commitments in a concrete way and to dispel the
misgivings and deeply felt concerns, not only of the
Palestinians and of the Arabs, but of many other countries
whose voices we have heard this morning. Such measures
were also discussed at the meeting some weeks ago
between President Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu.

Like the great majority of nations, Italy hopes that
all the frantic efforts being made in these very hours to
save the peace process may be truly successful. But they
must be successful quickly because there is not one
minute to lose. Meanwhile, we join the appeal of other
members of the Security Council to the Israelis and the
Palestinians to stop fighting.

Action must be taken rapidly to appease restless
consciences. We believe that, in the current phase, this is
the primary, though not exclusive responsibility of the
Israeli Government. The good will, commitment and
courage that have been invested in the peace process must
not be squandered. This is the sincere hope, this is the
expectation of the Italian Government, of our Parliament
and of our entire people.

