Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
delegation of Russia for having asked the presidency to
convene this meeting, for I think it very important to
exchange views about what is happening in Syria. We
also grateful for the briefing by Mr. Mark Locock.

Bolivia reiterates its regret that the crisis in Syria
has to date led to so many lives being lost and so much
destruction. According to Mr. Lowcock's office, more
than 500,000 people have died since the beginning of
the conflict, 13.1 million people require humanitarian
assistance, of whom 2.9 million are trapped in besieged
or hard-to-reach, and 6.9 million persons have been
displaced internally. We regret that recent events have
led to more people dying or needing humanitarian
assistance. We call for the earliest possible beginning
of demining operations and for the provision of
humanitarian assistance - such as to the city of
Raqqa - in order to facilitate the safe and dignified
return of the families that were displaced as a result of
the conflict.

We also regret that the latest events in Syria
have once again served to underscore the urgent
need to revitalize the Geneva political process, while
strengthening the tangible results achieved in Astana
and Sochi, in consultation, of course, with all the parties
concerned. We reiterate what several of our colleagues
have said during this meeting: there is no military
solution to the situation in Syria, only a political one.

We also again reiterate our great gratitude for
the work being done by the staff of the humanitarian
assistance agencies and groups on the ground. We
demand that the parties involved comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
We reiterate to the parties involved that they must
respect the agreements and the de-escalation zones,
as well as avoid attacks on civilian facilities - such
residential areas, schools and hospitals - in line
with international humanitarian law, so as to ensure
the protection of civilians and unrestricted access
for humanitarian agencies to provide much-
needed assistance.

I understand that we all agree with those principles,
as they are basic, fundamental principles of international
humanitarian law. Each and every one of us has spoken
repeatedly about the obligations ofthe Security Council
under the Charter of the United Nations, including its
highest responsibility in terms of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Nevertheless, my
delegation cannot agree with double standards being
applied on any issue, and much less on humanitarian
ones. We must not drag down the Security Council by
using it as an instrument for a different agenda. Nor,
as we have also said several times, should we allow
the Council to become an echo chamber where we
repeatedly recite well-known areas of war.

In referring to double standards, I will desist from
referring to the humanitarian situation in other places
around the world. I will limit myselfjust to Syria. My
delegation is surprised, and does not understand, at how
the Security Council has not even been able to express
itself on the terrorist attacks on the Russian Embassy
in Damascus, a member the Council. We have counted
six such attacks in the past two weeks, followed by
silence on the part of the Council. That should draw our
attention as to double standards.

I repeat that we totally reject the politicization of
any humanitarian issue. We know that the situation in
Syria is urgent. We need to think very carefully about
how we can address each of these situations, given that
each has its particular characteristics.

With regard to the draft resolution that has been
circulated for the Council's consideration, first of
all, my delegation would like to sincerely express its
gratitude for the efforts of the delegations of Sweden
and Kuwait. We have seen them work with great
dedication, consulting with the various delegations as
part of what of course is a complicated process. That is
the nature of negotiations. We hope that the various calls
for the Council to do something will come to fruition.
. However, I think we have to recognize that putting to
a vote a draft resolution, as several delegations have
called for today, in the knowledge that it will not be
adopted by the Council shows that the goal is not of a
humanitarian nature, the aim is political. Putting to a
vote a draft resolution while knowing that it will not
be adopted means that the goal is not to alleviate the
humanitarian situation but to garner a few headlines
in the media. That is why we say that we should avoid
making the Council an instrument for political ends.

We very much welcome the fact that the Russian
delegation has put forward language to enable us to
continue the negotiations, which is essential. I agree
with what my colleague the Ambassador of Sweden
said, that is, the Council is being tested in alleviating
the humanitarian situation in Syria. The Council is
indeed being tested, and that test is to achieve unity
in the Council. If we do not, then the meeting at which
the draft resolution is put to the vote will go down in
history as just a few headlines. But it will come to
nothing and will in no way alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria.

I therefore issue a fraternal call on my colleagues
the members of the Security Council - especially
my beloved brothers the Ambassadors of Sweden and
Kuwait - that we do everything we can to send out a
signal for there to be a change in direction with regard
to what the Council has been doing repeatedly over the
past months, and show that by being united we will in
some way be able to meet the expectations of the rest of
the membership and meet the responsibilities assigned
to us by the Charter.

