We would like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui and Mr. Usseni for their insightful briefings. They clearly attest to the usefulness of regular discussions on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), especially at this critical juncture of a worsened humanitarian situation and a quickly approaching deadline for further MONUSCO transitioning. We also want to seize this opportunity to make a couple of points. First of all, we are concerned with the overall humanitarian situation. The Secretary-General most recent report on this issue (S/2020/554) mentions an estimated 25.6 million people in need of assistance and 5.5 million individuals being internally displaced. It also refers to recent negative developments, including displacement in Ituri, severe flooding across several eastern provinces, the re-emergence of the Ebola virus and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The humanitarian crisis is compounded by the ongoing measles and cholera epidemics, which have unfortunately claimed even more victims than the combined death toll of the Ebola and coronavirus epidemics. Moreover, if not properly handled, the escalating violence in Ituri may degrade the situation even further. It is therefore essential to fully support the 2020 humanitarian response plan and the new national COVID-19 multisectoral humanitarian response plan. In that regard, Belgium and its European Union partners, including France, have taken the lead, as attested by our recent humanitarian flights to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, our short-term concerns should not blur the fact that we, collectively, need to keep working on a realistic, conditions-based and progressive transfer of MONUSCO's tasks to the Congolese authorities in the years ahead. In that regard, we note that several factors have impeded the development of a joint strategy and that detailed discussions with the Government have yet to begin. However, MONUSCO's exit benchmarks are due by 20 October. We therefore welcome the report's repeated recommendations to deal with this issue as a matter of national priority. National ownership of security sector reform and a vision on the implementation thereof will need to be at the heart the process. Moreover, it remains essential that the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade have the means and political willingness to complete its respective tasks. The recommendations of the report authored by former United Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, should therefore be fully and unabatedly implemented. Thirdly, the development of MONUSCO's progressive exit strategy should go hand in hand with adequate attention to counter the root causes of conflict, including the illegal exploitation of natural resources. We therefore highly welcome Mr. Usseni's interesting briefing today. We also intend to organize an Arria Formula meeting on this topic in July, in cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United States and South Africa. The illegal exploitation of natural resources has been recognized as one of the main underlying causes and effects of conflict in the Great Lakes region. In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the illegal exploitation of gold, coltan and other resources has fuelled conflict for more than 20 years, involving a wide variety of national, regional and international State and non-State actors. We are also convinced that the ongoing development of a new United Nations regional strategy for the Great Lakes would provide a good opportunity for further and deeper exchanges on this topic.
