Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would first like to join
others in extending our gratitude to the Presidents of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Meron and Judge
Mose, as well as Chief Prosecutors Ms. Carla Del
Ponte and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, for their very
informative presentations.

I also wish to express commendation of and full
support for the important work the two Tribunals have
accomplished so far. We take note with satisfaction of
the progress achieved by both Tribunals in the
implementation of their respective Completion
Strategies. We are particularly encouraged by the
optimistic note of reports submitted to the Council with
regard to the prospects of meeting the time lines
indicated in the Strategies.

We are certainly aware of the persistence of a
number of factors that might come into play and
negatively impact on the process. Obviously, full
cooperation with the Tribunals by all countries
concerned is first among those.

We welcome, on the basis of the report submitted
by the ICTY, the encouraging assessment of
cooperation with the Tribunal by the authorities of
Serbia and Montenegro. We also note the positive shift
in the approach of the authorities of the Republika
Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard to
cooperation with the Tribunal.

Nonetheless, further steps have to be taken,
especially insofar as the apprehension and handing
over of the high-profile indictees who are still at large
are concerned. Within the same broad context of
cooperation, I would like kindly to seek further
elaboration from the ICTR representatives regarding
the prospects for bringing into the Arusha-based
jurisdiction the other prominent fugitive, Mr. Felicien
Kabuga.

The transfer of cases involving medium- and low-
level accused to national jurisdiction is an essential
component of the Completion Strategies. We believe
that such an approach would not only case the docket
of the Tribunal, but also contribute to fostering local
ownership.

We welcome the recent inauguration of the War
Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and encourage the officials of the two
Tribunals to pursue their efforts aimed at consolidating
the capacities of the domestic criminal justice systems
to deal with such cases. At the same time, it is of the
utmost importance that all States concerned continue
the process of adopting and adapting their legal
frameworks so as to comply with existing international
legal standards, including the ICTY's statute. Domestic
regulations could also be supplemented, to the extent
possible, by a network of bilateral agreements among
the respective countries, establishing the terms of
cooperation in such fields as extradition, mutual legal
assistance and witness protection.

It has always been and remains the constant
position of my delegation that all those suspected of
having committed crimes within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunals should be brought to justice. Justice should
be served, irrespective of the political, ethnic or
cultural affiliation of the alleged perpetrators. Since the
indicting stage has come to an end for both the ICTY
and the ICTR, some of the main perpetrators of crimes
within their jurisdictions might, however, remain
outside the scope of the Tribunals' activities.

As we learn from the report submitted by the
President of the ICTY, 17 out of 51 individuals
currently awaiting trial have been provisionally
released. Taking into account the serious nature of the
crimes they are accused of, it would perhaps be useful
to get an indication of the criteria that informed those
decisions.

Finally, I would like to pick up on one issue that
has just recently been brought to the attention of the
Council, and encourage United Nations Member States
to put forward candidatures for the posts of ad litem
judges with the ICTY. As the mandates of the current
judges have already expired, it would be highly
desirable if the General Assembly were to proceed as
soon as possible with the election of the new roster, in
accordance with the ICTY statute.

