Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): On behalf of the Government of the Central
African Republic, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We are encouraged by
your country's commitment to supporting States
weakened by Violence of every kind in their quest for
peace, stability and development. I also commend you
for your commitment to the issue of women and
children in conflict.

On behalf of the Central African Republic, I
again congratulate the Secretary-General on his
successful re-election as head of our shared
Organization, enabling him to continue, consolidate
and complete the many projects begun during his first
term. We also take note of his report of 16 May
(S/2011/3ll), which has just been introduced, on the
political, security and social and economic situation in
the Central African Republic, as well as the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
there. That virtually exhaustive report comes at the
right moment, considering what is currently at stake
both nationally and internationally.

Here I would like to thank and express our deep
respect for Ms. Margaret Vogt, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the clarity,
depth and above all the concision of her briefing. I
cannot fail to include in our thanks her predecessor,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, who in difficult and unusual
circumstances skilfully led her mission before, during
and after the elections last January.
11-40363

We have witnessed a series of encouraging events
since those elections, as has already been mentioned
and which is worth repeating. These range from the
Constitutional Court's partial cancellation of a quarter
of the National Assembly seats, to the round table for
Central African Republic donors held in Brussels three
weeks ago. They also include the formation of the
Government and its general policy statement, affirmed
by the Parliament; the tripartite Sudan-Chad-Central
African Republic summit; the signing of a ceasefire
agreement with the Convention des patriotes pour la
justice et la paix, the last rebel group remaining outside
the Libreville peace accords; the imminent return to its
own country of a foreign politico-military movement;
and the start of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process.

We in the Central African Republic are certain
that these events, with the agreement, efforts and
cooperation of all stakeholders, offer hope of a return
to peace. They are visible signs of that return to peace
and essential factors in a lasting recovery. The
President of the Republic and his Government will do
their utmost to maintain dialogue with the political
players and civil society, as was recommended in the
inclusive political dialogue. They are determined to
pursue the DDR process, which from now on should be
coupled with the security sector reform programme
with the aim of restructuring the defence and security
forces effectively. In my fragile nation, peace is
priceless, and any consolidation of democratic gains
requires it.

If these measures are to be achieved, they must of
course continue in coordination with our bilateral and
multilateral partners, particularly the United Nations
through the Peacebuilding Commission in its Central
African Republic country-specific configuration,
chaired in masterly fashion by Ambassador Grauls,
whom we hold in great esteem and whom I would like
to commend here.

While they are committed, to the extent possible,
to carrying out the report's recommendations, the
highest Central African authorities recall nevertheless
that, in an accurate assessment of the situation in the
Central African Republic e which lies at the very
heart of the African continent - requires internal and
11-40363

external factors alike to be taken into account, as,
thankfully, has been done here. The situation with
regard to the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), a cruel,
barbarous rebel group from a non-bordering country, is
a perfect example. The LRA's atrocities, destruction,
pillaging, forced conscription and deportation of men,
women and children have made it deserving of
eradication once and for all through the comprehensive
mobilization of efforts and shared resources.

That is why, while recognizing the full value of
the United Nations and African Union initiatives on
this issue, the Central African Republic vests great
hope in the creation, within the next 48 hours, of a new
bordering State that will drastically overturn certain
principles and alter the geography of the area, albeit
with foreseeable consequences. We remain convinced
that that State will join us in our tireless struggle
against a cross-border enemy with nebulous ambitions
that disturb the tranquillity essential to the
development of the subregion.

In conclusion, as it has done in the past, my
country will continue to cooperate with all States
without exception. At times, discerning friends and
observers, justifiably weary of the issue of the Central
African Republic, question its will and its ability to
recover or merely to move forward.

The Central African Republic is definitely not a
hopeless case; its failure is even less a foregone
conclusion. With its limited means and working
tirelessly, it is fighting to remain on its feet. It is
fighting to build the rule of law. My State is fighting
daily to remain a good father to its population, which
aspires only to live and prosper in peace.

The Central African Republic expresses its
undying gratitude to the international community of
which it is fortunate to be a part, whose unwavering
and many forms of support have never failed it, and on
which it hopes to be able to rely throughout this
painstaking process.

