Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset I would like to thank President Meron,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Joensen and
Prosecutor Jallow for their briefings on the work
of the two Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

During the reporting period the two tribunals
have continued to overcome various difficulties, such
as the retention of staff, and have taken various steps
to advance their work. The International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) delivered judgements
on two appeal cases, and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda just heard oral arguments in the
last appeal case. The Residual Mechanism is up and
running, having delivered its first judgment. China
acknowledges the results of those efforts but notes, at
the same time, that, for various reasons, the ICTY has
once again deferred the judgment delivery dates for
certain cases.

With regard to the work of the two Tribunals and the
Mechanism, I would like to put forward the following
views. First, concerning the progress of the work of the
two Tribunals, both are organs of international criminal
justice established by the Council and in which the
international community places its hopes for judicial
justice. However, justice delayed is justice denied.
The repeated delay in the work is not in line with the
hopes of the Council and the regional countries. It is
estimated that the ICTR will conclude its work by the
end of 2015 and the ICTY by 2017. China hopes that,
while ensuring judicial justice, the two Tribunals will
organize their work properly, fully utilize available
resources, improve judicial efficiency, expedite their
work so as to avoid further delays and complete their
work in 2015 and 2017, respectively.
Secondly, regarding cooperation with States,
cooperation with States is crucial to the effective
functioning of the two Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism. The arrest and transfer of fugitives,
the collection of evidence and the enforcement of
judgements are not possible without the cooperation
of countries, especially those within the region. China
has noted with appreciation that the Prosecutors of
the two Tribunals and the Mechanism have expressed
satisfaction with the cooperation received from Serbia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Rwanda.

At present, the ICTR and the Mechanism face two
challenges. One is the relocation of persons released
and acquitted, and the second is the fact that nine of the
indicted persons still remain at large. China appreciates
the steps taken by the ICTR and the Mechanism to seek
relocation for those released and acquitted. At the same
time, we call on the countries concerned to demonstrate
the political will to render further help to the ICTR
and the Mechanism. On that issue, the ICTR and the
Mechanism should also listen to the views of Rwanda
and other countries. On the question of the tracking
of fugitives, we hope that the ICTR, the Mechanism
and the regional countries will devote more resources
and enhance information-sharing, so as to arrest those
criminals at an early date.

Thirdly, with regard to the transition to the
Residual Mechanism, the ICTR and the ICTR branches
of the Mechanism started their work in July 2012
and July 2013, respectively. At present, the ICTR's
transition to the Mechanism is close to completion
and the transition of the ICTY is progressing well. We
hope that the two Tribunals will organize their work
properly and enhance communication and coordination
with the Mechanism in order to ensure the successful
completion of the transition. In addition, before the
final conclusion of their work, the two Tribunals should
sum up lessons learned so as to assist the international
community in combating impunity and in addressing
the relationship between the maintenance of regional
peace, the achievement of national reconciliation and
the pursuit of judicial justice.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Chile, as
the Chair of the Working Group on the International
Tribunals, and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs for their work.

