Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): I welcome the opportunity
to greet you, Sir, as the President of the Security Council
for the month of July. Your initiative, which led to today's
open debate on the centrality of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants to the
restoration of stability and sustainable peace, represents a
natural extension of Malaysia's extensive record in the
fields of international peacekeeping and peace-building. As
a country with direct recent experience in matters that we
are discussing today, we wish to make a specific
contribution concerning elements that might be incorporated
into future planning and execution of United Nations-led
operations and missions of the regional security
organizations.

It is our pleasure to participate in the debate and share
our views on a comprehensive approach to the questions of
peacekeeping and peace-building. We are aware that
different requirements embedded in military management
and bureaucratic governance in United Nations missions
call for distinct categories and tasks of peacekeeping and
peace-building efforts. Nevertheless, all of these efforts
comprise the same continuum on the road towards a lasting
peace.

The objective of restoring and maintaining a lasting
peace should not fall victim to conceptual or bureaucratic
compartmentalization, its value being too large and its
opposite too costly. If the Security Council indeed wishes
to enhance the effectiveness, scope and reach of its Charter-
mandated responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, it should not shy away from improving upon old
or searching for new means to fit new realities in a
comprehensive manner.

In this regard, Croatia salutes the initiative to move
away from a piecemeal approach to what it takes in today's
world and age to enhance the prospects for sustainable
peace. The quest for developing general principles and
guidelines for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping and peace-
building environment is timely, and fully consistent with
existing efforts of the Secretary-General. It is also
consistent with the political will of a number of Member
States, as evidenced best by today's turnout of speakers.

Having hosted five distinct United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the last eight years, Croatia has
gained experience that entitles it to reflect upon the
lessons learned in peacekeeping and peace-building. On
this occasion, I will not comment on those operations on
Croatia's soil that did not succeed. Rather, I wish to
elaborate briefly on three points from the lessons learned
from the successful United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES). Those three points are: a pioneering
model of disarmament that was used in the Croatian
Danubian region during the UNTAES mission; a follow-
on security assistance and political mission that ensued
upon the successful completion of the United Nations
mission; and finally, national strategy and policy measures
regarding rehabilitation and reintegration of former
combatants.

UNTAES was created in an environment favourable
to its ultimate goal of peaceful reintegration of the
formerly occupied Croatian territory: we had the
agreement of the parties to the conflict; recourse to the
military option was unattractive to all interested parties;
and the political goal of peaceful reintegration was clearly
set and known, as well as supported by the political will
of the host Government, the international community and
the skilled United Nations leadership in the field. And
yet, the process of reintegration was, of course, more than
politically challenging. It represented major technical and
bureaucratic difficulties for civilian aspects of
reintegration.

Critical to the orderly implementation of the civilian
timetable of reintegration, however, was the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants. Importantly, this process was launched not
only early on in the operation, but also, was completed
swiftly and competently in an innovative manner of a
weapons buy-back scheme. The firearms buy-back
programme lasted approximately ten months, and was
jointly conducted by the Croatian Government and
UNTAES. Under the programme, significant amounts of
firearms, explosive ammunition and ignition devices were
collected, for which approximately $1.6 million were
paid. Since, the process of voluntary return and collection
of small arms has continued, beginning in August, any
further illegal possession of arms will be penalized.

The UNTAES operation was concluded on schedule
on 15 January 1998. During the last few months, the
number of peacekeepers was scaled down substantially.
As the transition period proceeded, an increasing number
of security functions were performed by the Transitional
Police Force (TPF), which was made up of 40 per cent

 

each of Croats and Serbs and 20 per cent of other ethnic
groups present in the region. Importantly, the international
community provided training assistance for a number of
TPF members, which proved crucial to establishing a high
level of professionalism. This was invaluable to proper
reintegration of former combatants and maintenance of law
and order. Initially under the responsibility of UNTAES,
the TPF later came under the management of the Ministry
of the Interior one year prior to complete reintegration of
the region.

The nine-month follow-on United Nations support
group, by monitoring civilian police practices, added its
weight to the positive momentum for a normalization of life
in the area. Not necessarily enchanted, but fully cognizant
of the magnitude and complexity of the ongoing process of
reintegration, Croatia later invited the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to continue
with certain monitoring duties in Eastern Slavonia. In doing
so, Croatia has recognized the need to do what it takes to
consolidate stability and sustain peace, and thereby help the
local population move on towards joint tasks of rebuilding
prosperity. In this regard, as was recently emphasized
during the Zagreb regional conference on anti-personnel
landmines, demining remains a priority task.
In the interest of speeding up reconciliation and
overall post-conflict recovery, special importance should be
attached to economic and social measures. In this respect,
reintegration of ex-combatants into civil society carries
additional weight. In Croatia, we tried to stimulate this
reintegration in several ways, including by adopting an
amnesty law that exonerated former rebels, except for the
perpetrators of war crimes. Veterans are given priority in
access to higher education and to employment in the public
sector. They are also eligible for preferential lines of credit
for new business ventures or agricultural leases. For those
who cannot be included in the active working population,
special unemployment benefits, including health care, as
well as early retirement benefits, are also available.

Needless to say, all of these policy measures have
proven expensive. They are taxing on the national budget
of an economy burdened with reconstruction, low
investment and real growth rates and high unemployment,
as is always the case in a post-conflict society. This is why
Croatia strongly recommends that, as a part of the
international financial assistance provided to post-conflict
societies, special funds be earmarked for, and allocated to,
specific programmes that support rehabilitation and
reintegration of former combatants.

As we have stated before in this and other forums,
reconciliation does not take place overnight, but
represents a long-term process. In this regard, I cannot
over-emphasize the importance of establishing the truth
about what happened during the conflict, that is, the
establishment of responsibility for war crimes that have
been committed. The goal of reintegration of former
combatants cannot be attained without this element of
justice. The alternative, if war criminals are not brought
to justice, is that a neighbour will not trust a neighbour
walking down the street after sunset, let alone join hands
in rebuilding and developing a livelihood in the same
community.

