Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Ambassador of Brazil, as well
as his predecessor, the Ambassador of Croatia, for their
briefings.

At the heart of the activities of the United Nations,
peacebuilding remains a challenge that deserves the
full attention of the international community. The
recent crises in the Central African Republic and South
Sudan remind us of the importance of a continued
shared commitment to support States in post-conflict
situations. We therefore welcome your initiative,
Mr. President, in convening this debate, which provides
the Council with an opportunity to consider the issue
and, in particular, to review the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The United Nations provides both an opportunity
and a framework to work in a coordinated way to
promote peacebuilding. Coordination among all the
actors that contribute to peacebuilding is indeed Vital.
The Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund can
play a very useful role in support of efforts on the
ground - for example, by acting synergistically with
international stakeholders that are physically present.
In that regard, we welcome the establishment of justice
and police poles in Liberia, which were financed by
the Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, which is just one example of
cooperation between actors within the United Nations.
In Guinea, the PBC has also made possible effective
coordination among international actors, in particular
with respect to financial organizations.

In addition, in order to avoid duplication and
in preparation of exit strategies, there needs to be a
successful handover among the different actors. There
was an effective transition in Sierra Leone, where the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office was
recently closed, which bears witness to the progress
achieved since the civil war. Moreover, with respect to
complex peacebuilding efforts, it is important to ensure
strengthened links between the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who relies on measures
provided by the operations of the PBC, and the country
teams of United Nations agencies, which are led by the
Resident Coordinators.

Finally, it is critical to proceed in stages in order
to allow the stakeholders concerned to participate
at the moment when they can play the most suitable
role. In order to respond to the numerous challenges
posed by regions or States whose national structures
have virtually disappeared, peacekeeping operations
often play a decisive role in laying the foundation for
peacebuilding. However, the implementation of such
operations must correspond to a sequential logic,
without attempting to accomplish multiple tasks in
a single year. It was in that spirit that the Security
Council developed the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

Peacebuilding processes can succeed only if the
following priorities are respected.

Peacebuilding presupposes the implementation of
inclusive processes, especially national dialogue. It is
essential that all stakeholders accept this process and
participate fully in it. In Burundi, it is important for the
international community to continue to work with the
Government in order to encourage open dialogue and
the development of an environment conducive to fair
and credible elections in 2015.
The work to build peace after a conflict must include
all segments of society. We have consistently supported
the implementation of the Council's resolutions on
women, peace and security and the recommendation
contained in the Secretary-General's report to ensure
the full participation of women in all peacebuilding
processes. In that regard, the presence of Ms. Samba-
Panza as Head of the Transitional Government of the
Central African Republic is a strong symbol.

To ensure lasting stabilization, it is important to
work on justice and the fight against impunity, both of
which are essential vectors of all reconciliation. National
Governments clearly have the primary responsibility to
prosecute and punish those responsible for atrocities.
However, if they fail to do so or are unable to fulfil
their responsibilities, the International Criminal Court
must play its full role. The Court is already seized of
cases relating to the Central African Republic, Mali
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Moreover, it is essential to engage in long-term
work to rebuild institutions and enable sustainable
resource mobilization. This theme was addressed
in a meaningful way at the annual session of the
Peacebuilding Commission in June. Resource
mobilization is indeed crucial. In the Central African
Republic, in parallel with security work, it is important
to act now to restart the Central African State and to
restore its attributes as a State of laws. Resources are
necessary to undertake such projects. The international
community must continue to mobilize to this end.

The review of the architecture of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2015 will provide an opportunity to go
further in terms of coordination. The Commission must
continue to play its role as a catalyst of goodwill and
to enhance its impact on the ground. We must pursue
that effort, launched in 2010, so as to improve the
transparency of its actions, for instance by continuing
work to link the actions of the PBC to those of the
Peacebuilding Fund. It is also necessary to pursue
the contacts made with the international financial
institutions. We must seize the opportunity of the
review to further improve the functioning of the PBC,
including by making it more flexible and responsive.
In that regard, the development of close relations with
the Security Council has proved useful, as evidenced
by the Council's interaction with the chairs of the PBC
country configurations.

In conclusion, I welcome the mobilization of the
many actors working daily for peace and encourage
them to further improve their cooperation. That is how
we can improve the coherence of international action
for peace.

