Mr. Vieira de Mello: Since I last briefed the
Security Council on 27 June, we have witnessed two
opposing developments. On the one hand, there has
been a significant deterioration in security and an
escalation of violence in Nusa Tenggara Timur - West
Timor - most tragically highlighted by the murders in
Atambua on 6 September of three staff members of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). Security, and the measures
required to restore it, will thus prominently feature in
this briefing, which I very much regret. I had much
rather talk of something else.

On the other hand, and more encouragingly, there
has been much progress in the reconstruction being
carried out by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in all spheres
and in the establishment of those institutions which
will prove critical to the viability of the future
independent country of East Timor. In my presentation,
I shall also be summarizing some of what has been
achieved in this regard. In order to enable me to focus
on essential developments in this presentation, a note
containing other salient information is being
distributed, as has been done in the past.

Let me start by referring to security in West
Timor. Since 6 September, I have met twice with the
Coordinating Minister for Political, Security and Social
Affairs of the Government of Indonesia, Mr. Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono. I stressed, as I had on several
occasions prior to this latest crisis, that the militias
presented a serious threat not only to East Timor, but
also to the very integrity of Indonesia. I repeatedly
called not just for their disarming, but also for the
arrest of their leaders and their disbanding and
relocation.

As a starting point, I believe it is essential to
recognize that the root cause of our and Jakarta's
problems on Timor island is the militias. Only when
this problem has been effectively addressed will we be
able to resolve the plight of the remaining East
Timorese refugees and focus on developing friendly
cooperation between East Timor and Indonesia, to
which we are committed. I have pledged our complete
support to Foreign Minister Shihab's comprehensive
plan of action to bring about an end to the refugee
crisis, but the plan cannot succeed until the militias
holding the refugees through threats and
misinformation are removed.

And how should we resolve the problem posed by
the militias? I must be frank and state that, first of all,
the Indonesian authorities have to acknowledge and
confront the fact that it is their responsibility to address
this threat. We all realize that the militias are not the
creation of the administration of President Wahid and
that they do not act on instructions from the
Government in Jakarta. We sympathize with the
dreadful legacy with which the authorities have been
left by previous policies towards East Timor.

Nonetheless, the repercussions are likely to be
more unrest and loss of innocent lives in West and East
Timor unless the root of the problem is recognized and
eradicated. Regrettably, I remain sceptical that current
activities will achieve this goal. Where resolution and a
certain degree of ruthlessness would seem to be
required, we are witnessing hesitation and
prevarication. As many here are aware, at the request
of the Indonesian authorities I sent a small UNTAET
delegation to attend a disarmament ceremony in
Atambua on Sunday, 24 September, attended by Vice-
President Megawati Sukarnoputri, Minister Yudhoyono
and many senior Indonesian Armed Forces (TNI) and
police officers. On the departure of the Vice-President
and her delegation, the well-known suspect Eurico
Guterres appeared in the midst of the police compound
in which the ceremony had been held. He proceeded to
incite his followers and several militia members
reclaimed some of the very weapons that formed the
raison d'etre of the ceremony, unimpeded by the very
large TNI and police presence. Subsequently, he and
several hundred of his followers agitated in and outside
the station, while my colleagues were hidden under
armed protection of the Indonesian police in a room at
the police station for their own safety.

Prior to the ceremony, my colleagues were
informed by a senior TNI officer that all the required
arrests had been made in the case of the 5 September
killing of the militia leader Olivio Mendonca, also
known as Olivio Moruk - a murder that occurred in
the middle of the night in a remote village. The same
officer informed my colleagues that there were still no
suspects in the case of the killing the following day of
the three UNHCR staff members - murders that
happened in broad daylight in the presence of 10
Indonesian police officers. Nor, for that matter, has any
one of the suspects been arrested for the killing of the
United Nations soldiers.

There could hardly be a more eloquent
demonstration of Indonesia's current inability to deal
effectively with the problem. This is impunity running
rampant. What is required is a coordinated, integrated
and comprehensive strategy on the part of the
Indonesian security forces, together with the necessary
will, to hunt down and break up the militias and bring
their leaders to justice. And for that we are still
waiting.

This self-evident reality - that the militias are
the problem - has, I regret to say, on occasion been
lost in some of our discussions on the situation in
Timor. The problem does not lie with the refugees, as
is sometimes said, for they are a product, not a cause,
of the crisis, nor is this in some sense a civil war
between East Timorese, as some in Indonesia
increasingly attempt to paint the problem. There have
been no crossings by armed elements from East Timor
into the west, as was last week asserted before this
Council. The threat faced is that of militias, operating
with impunity in West Timor, that are able freely to
launch armed interventions across an international
boundary into East Timor.

Nor does the solution lie with having joint patrols
of United Nations peacekeeping forces and TNI on the
border, as has been suggested on numerous occasions
by Indonesia, including in this room, because the
problem does not lie along the border. The problem is
not on the border but, as I have said time and again,
deep inside West Timor. We have agreed, however, to
coordinate our and TNI patrols on each side of the
border.

In his 19 September address to the Security
Council, Coordinating Minister Yudhoyono also
emphasized that reconciliation was a key requirement
to a lasting peace. I obviously agree with this. There
has, however, been some suggestion that neither
UNTAET nor the National Resistance Council of East
Timor (CNRT) has been working sufficiently hard to
encourage political dialogue with pro-integrationists.

This is inaccurate: I have made repeated efforts to
engage in discussion with the political leadership of the
pro-integration umbrella group, Uni Timor Aswain.
From the start, the National Consultative Council in
East Timor had three seats reserved for those parties
that voted against independence - one more than their
percentage of the vote strictly required - but only two
of these have ever been filled. Neither I, Xanana
Gusmao nor any other senior East Timorese leader has
received any reply to our overtures to engage in
genuine talks. Further, time and again, we have
organized what we call "look and see" visits by pro-
autonomy leaders to visit East Timor and assess the
situation at first hand. Again, the response to these
gestures has been poor, at best.

UNTAET and the CNRT will continue to
persevere in efforts for political dialogue and for
reconciliation. Nonetheless, the Council will appreciate
that a prerequisite to any talks is that our interlocutors
issue a public renunciation of the use of violence to
pursue political ends and condemn the recent murders
of United Nations staff. A line needs to be clearly
drawn between those political leaders with whom there
can be dialogue and the murderers for whom there
must be justice. I have appealed to the Indonesian
Government to help us urgently draw this clear
distinction between well-meaning pro-autonomy
representatives and thugs, such as Eurico Guterres,
who should be behind bars instead of being invited to
attend meetings with high-level Indonesian officials, as
was the case in Denpasar on 14 September.

With regard to the investigations into the
September 1999 abuses, the 1 September
announcement by Attorney-General Marzuki Darusman
of Indonesia of his first list of persons suspected of
perpetrating human rights violations in East Timor last
year was a very positive step. We are fully supportive
of his efforts, and I pass up no opportunity to meet with
him when I visit Jakarta. We look forward to
appropriate action being taken against all those listed,
as well as to the investigation's bringing its focus to
bear not just on the perpetrators of the violence, but
also on the commanders and architects who designed
and ordered the destruction of East Timor in the wake
of the popular consultation.

I turn now to the issue of security in East Timor.
We believe that there are between 80 to 150 armed
militias in up to 10 groups presently operating inside
the territory of East Timor. Their aim appears to be to
gather information relating to our military component,
to establish themselves and to attempt to gain the
loyalty of the local population in villages that are
believed to have voted for integration. The presence of
militias has caused the displacement of over 3,000
persons in recent weeks.

We have launched an operation - called
Operation Cobra - in Manufahi, the district with the
most significant militia presence. It is aimed at
inducing surrender, capturing or eliminating the
militias. This is not an easy task, given the suitability
of the terrain for insurgency activities and the limited
number of specialized troops we can dedicate to the
operation. Nevertheless, on 11 September, six militia
members surrendered and the active presence of the
peacekeeping forces is making it very difficult for the
remaining militias to continue to infiltrate and gain a
foothold in East Timor. This was evidenced by the
killing of one heavily-armed militia member three days
ago near the border in the New Zealand battalion area.

Turning now to political developments, the major
political event of the reporting period was the CNRT
Congress, held in Dili in late August. The Congress
focused on the future vision of the national unity body,
its relationship with its composite political parties and
a range of national policy issues in the economic,
social, security and political spheres. It also re-elected
Xanana Gusmao as its President and Jose Ramos-Horta
and Mario Carrascalao as its Vice-Presidents.

What also emerged during the Congress, and
which has developed in the days since, has been
friction between the main party, the East Timor
National Liberation Front (FRETILIN), and the smaller
Timorese Democratic Union, on the one hand, and the
CNRT leadership on the other. The Congress also
spawned the birth of a new Timorese party, the Social
Democratic Party, headed by Mario Carrascalao. This
has led to an intensification of political activity and
discord among East Timorese political leaders, which I
personally find quite normal, predictable and desirable
in the transition to multi-party democracy. There is
some sense, however - and we will have to see how
the situation develops - that this may lead to a break-
up of the umbrella organization and the commencement
of party politics proper. I have been attempting to
impress upon the FRETILIN leadership that open
political party activity is not incompatible with
continued membership in the pro-independence
coalition.

As to other key developments, since mid-July, as
Council members know, we have had a new cabinet
structure, with eight cabinet portfolios held by four
Timorese and four international UNTAET staff. The
cabinet sets policy and oversees its implementation on
behalf of the Transitional Administration. Thus far, it
has deliberated on a wide range of policies and, inter
alia, agreed to a framework for taxation, a criminal
procedure code, a public-buildings reconstruction plan,
the reopening of the University of East Timor, a one-
hour shift in time zone for East Timor and a plan to
develop legislation for the transport sector. It is
currently working out procedures to resolve land-
ownership and property disputes and is engaged in a
comprehensive budget review. The cabinet has also
endorsed a comprehensive joint-border arrangement
between Indonesia and the Transitional Administration,
later signed with Coordinating Minister Yudhoyono -
at that time Acting Foreign Minister, since Minister
Shihab was here in New York - in Denpasar on 14
September. The cabinet has also approved our
negotiating position in formal talks with Australia on
the future of Timor Gap petroleum, which are
scheduled to commence on 9 October.

In another important step towards "Timorizing"
the Administration, last Monday I appointed Timorese
District or Deputy District Administrators in all 13
districts of the country. Consultations are also well
advanced for the selection, through an independent
committee, of 33 members of the new, all-Timorese
National Council, which will replace the present
National Consultative Council, whom I intend to
appoint in the course of the month of October.

I wish to say a word now on the future defence
force. Importantly, the cabinet has also expressed its
support for establishing a defence force for East Timor
following the release of the King's College study, with
which members of the Council are familiar. This
decision was the result of intensive discussions, both
within East Timor and elsewhere, in which there was
broad agreement that East Timor required its own
defence capacity. The favoured model calls for a force
with a professional regular corps of 1,500, supported
by 1,500 volunteer reservists, the core of which would
be formed by re-trained fighters of the Armed Forces
for the National Liberation of East Timor, with the
remainder to be broadly and professionally recruited. It
is important that we proceed swiftly with this plan. The
creation of an East Timor defence force will be
undertaken within the provisions of resolution 1272
(1999) for capacity-building and the creation of an
effective administration.

Building on the King's College study, and with
the support of expertise from Australia and Portugal,
we are currently working on an elaborated budget and
development plan for the future defence force. Once
this plan is available as a draft, we intend to convene a
meeting in Dili to bring together those States that are
likely to want to contribute, either through the
provision of training, cash or in-kind contributions, to
the development of the defence force. At this meeting
we would seek concrete commitments that would, we
hope, allow training to be initiated before the end of
this year. I should stress that we have presently no
resources available for this purpose in the consolidated
budget of East Timor and would therefore very
much- in fact, entirely - be relying on fresh
contributions.

Finally, before I conclude, a word on the political
transition and the constitutional process. The major
elements of political transition are clear, and I have
already alluded to those in my last presentation, in late
June. As things currently stand, our plan is to hold
national elections in the second half of next year, with
a view to establishing the constituent assembly. This
assembly will be tasked with drafting the constitution,
choosing the members of the new transitional
government and serving as an interim legislature. Upon
completion of the constitution, the assembly would
become the new national assembly of an independent
East Timor.

The preconditions required for this exercise are a
civic education campaign, approval of a law on
political parties and the creation of a legal framework
in which to hold elections. We have already begun the
process in all these areas. We are now commencing
with the training of trainers for a nationwide civic
education programme. A draft regulation on the
establishment of political parties is being given wide
circulation for consultative purposes as I speak.

Let me now conclude. While I believe UNTAET
has made demonstrable progress in administering East
Timor in a strengthened partnership with the East
Timorese leading to what you tasked us to achieve,
namely capacity for self-governance, there are
growing, serious concerns regarding the security
situation, particularly in the western part of the island.
East Timor's future security is to a large extent
dependent on the stability of its relations across the
border with Indonesia. So long as West Timor houses
those who wish East Timor nothing but harm and who
have such a large number of refugees as captive
constituents, then East Timor's already considerable
struggles will be rendered that bit more arduous.

We seek the Council's continued strong support
to address this issue in an urgent manner. As we
approach the first anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1272 (1999), allow me to
reiterate today the invitation I made in late June for the
Council to visit East Timor and assess first-hand our
achievements as well as our shortcomings. By your
presence and concern, you would provide the East
Timorese and ourselves in UNTAET with strong
encouragement at a particularly critical juncture of the
transition we are conducting on your behalf.

