Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
dedicated to discussing the latest developments in the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question and the obstacles to achieving lasting peace
in that region. My delegation commends Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing, which
prompts several observations on the peace process and
the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

With regard to the peace process, in the light of
the latest developments C6te d'Ivoire notes with regret
that the hope of achieving lasting peace between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides is diminishing as the
crisis unfolds. The firing of rockets from Gaza into Tel
Aviv and the subsequent Israeli response raise fears of
an escalation of violence that could further erode the
prospects of a definitive solution to the conflict. Given
that alarming situation, C6te d'Ivoire reiterates its call
on all stakeholders to exercise restraint and to comply
strictly with the relevant United Nations resolutions
and their obligations under international law.

My country adheres to the international consensus
on the need for a resumption of the peace process,
which is an appropriate framework for finding mutually
acceptable solutions to key issues, such as the status of
Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade on Gaza and the
security of the Palestinian population in Hebron. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore calls on all parties involved to engage
with resolve in a constructive dialogue, while calling
on them to refrain from any unilateral action that could
undermine the international community's efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

In that regard, cote d'Ivoire supports all measures
and initiatives that could contribute to inter-Palestinian
reconciliation, in particular between Fatah and Hamas,
so as to enable the Palestinian Authority to exercise its
sovereign functions in both Gaza and the West Bank.
Lastly, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its commitment both to
the security of the State of Israel and to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
and reaffirms its strong support for the two-State
solution, with each State coexisting peacefully within
the pre-1967 borders.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, Cote
d'Ivoire remains concerned about the unprecedented
crisis in Gaza, characterized by increasingly difficult
access to health care, continuing water shortages, a very
limited electricity supply and the irregular payment of
civil servants' salaries, in addition to an unfavourable
socioeconomic situation marked by an unemployment
rate of more than 50 per cent of the working population.

In that light of that grim scenario, my country
calls once again on the Security Council to work in
cooperation with the relevant specialized United Nations
agencies and all partners to find the necessary means
to meet the basic needs of more than 5 million people
in distress. Here my delegation calls on international
partners to further mobilize in order to provide the
necessary financial support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. The goal is to help the Agency, which plays
a key role in the international humanitarian assistance
mechanism, obtain the resources necessary to close its
budget deficit, estimated at more than $200 million.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the financing obtained by
the United Nations, which should help, on the one hand,
to provide more of the fuel needed to provide electricity
to Gaza and, on the other, to support programmes
allowing for the creation of approximately 15,000 new
temporary jobs in Gaza. We thank the generous donors,
which are thus contributing to combating poverty
and food insecurity in Gaza and the other Palestinian
territories. Here I would commend the establishment of
the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism, whose activities
are carried out jointly by the Israeli Government,
the Palestinian Authority and the United Nations,
which gives grounds for hope for frank cooperation
between the key actors in the peace process and the
socioeconomic development process.

To conclude, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support for
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and wishes him every success
in carrying out his mission. We are convinced that there
can be no military solution to the various crises in the
Middle East, in particular in Palestine. My country is
of the view that only inclusive dialogue will be able
to bring about lasting peace and stability in a region
whose peoples have a legitimate aspiration to prosperity
and happiness.

