Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Our
profound thanks go to Special Representative
Zerrougui, Foreign Minister Malanji, Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed, Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo, President
of the Commission electorale nationale independante,
and Monseigneur Utembi, President of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO), for their
informative, important and timely briefings today. I
thank Ms. Zerrougui for the continued efforts of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to support the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, protect civilians and secure
areas for health workers who are responding to the Ebola
outbreak. We are especially grateful for MONUSCO's
work during the past week and throughout the electoral
process. We know that Ms. Zerrougui and her team
have repeatedly offered to support the Government and
have stood at the ready in case that call for support ever
came. We appreciate the Mission's efforts.

We want to acknowledge the millions of Congolese
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
exercised their right to vote last week after two years
of delay. Despite confusion, technical issues, inclement
weather and long lines, the citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo showed the world that they have
a voice. The United States stands with the Congolese
people at this historic moment. It is they who should
determine their country's future.

We take note of the provisional results of the
elections and await the clarification of questions that
have been raised regarding the electoral count. We look
forward to hearing more from the Electoral Commission
and CENCO about the data underlying their vote tallies.
We will continue to urge all parties to use the systems
and procedures in place to reach a final outcome,
and refrain from all violence. We remain prepared to
hold accountable individuals who threaten the peace,
stability or security of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or undermine its democratic process.

In the post-electoral phase, we must not forget
that the eastern areas of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are still confronting both increased armed-
group activity and the second largest Ebola outbreak
in history. While the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has cancelled presidential
elections in Yumbi, Beni and Butembo, we expect that
citizens will be able to vote for their provincial and
legislative representatives by March, as announced by
the Electoral Commission.

