Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Today I would like
to touch chiefly on the most salient aspects ofthe report
of the Secretary-General (8/2016/1109) that the Council
has before it and the main events that have occurred
since it was issued.

First - with regard to the situation on the
ground and since the announcement in September by
the Government of the Sudan of its forces' victory
in Jebel Marra, and therefore the end of the conflict
in Darfur - in the last three months of 2016 the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) saw only two clashes between the
Sudanese armed forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid. Because of the losses it sustained during
the Government's offensive in the first half of 2016,
the defection of some of its commanders and growing
internal dissension, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid is effectively maintaining a presence only in
areas to the east and south-east of Sarrong. That, by the
way, is the area where the two clashes I mentioned took
place, on 19 November and 4 December. Also according
to the Government, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid has no more than about 300 fighters, who have
been pushed back to various parts of the Jebel Marra
mountain range. However, UNAMID has not been able
to confirm that, because the Sudanese Government is
still restricting our access.

Security arrangements were made and
implemented by the Governors of the five states of
Darfur. Unquestionably, there was a more sustained
interaction in their dealings with the traditional chiefs
and indigenous administrations. All of that contributed
to a decline in intercommunal violence relative to that
of the previous years. Nevertheless, tensions among the
different communities persist. As everyone knows, they
continue to be salient because ofthe very long-standing
disputes tied to access to land, water and other resources,
including, more recently, clandestine gold mines. All of
that has been exacerbated by the proliferation of weapons
and an environment of impunity, thereby contributing
to intercommunal violence. Let us not forget that the
seasonal migration is currently taking place and that
there have been numerous clashes between herders and
farmers in the southern part of Darfur, resulting in 71
deaths during the quarter under consideration and the
theft of livestock in the more central and western parts
of Darfur.

With regard to the civilian population, including
the most vulnerable groups, such as displaced persons,
those people continue to be exposed to an elevated risk
of violence. Throughout the territory of Darfur, there
have been serious violations of their human rights. For
example, on 1 January, only a few days ago, members
of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the police who were
pursuing persons suspected of having been involved
in the killing of a soldier did not hesitate to open fire
inside camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Nertiti, Habad East and Straha. At Straha there were
no casualties, but at Habad East two displaced persons
died, 43 others were wounded and four police officers
were also injured. Subsequently, calm was restored, and
the Deputy Governor of Central Darfur arrived at the
scene. He promised to provide compensation and to pay

for medical care. All of that somewhat eased tensions,
but the situation continues.
(spoke in English)

As of today, humanitarian actors have verified
97,000 displaced persons as a result of the fighting
in Jebel Marra in 2016, while an additional 88,000
people have been reported but not verified as displaced
because we lacked access to the relevant locations.
Humanitarian work remains impeded by insecurity,
delays and denials of access and travel requests. The
past month, however, has seen some improvements
with the completion of a joint assessment mission
involving the agencies and Government in Gola in
Central Darfur, and the regulations governing military
access were eased by the Government's humanitarian
aid commission.

In that environment, UNAMID has continued
to provide physical protection through military and
police patrols to prevent, deter and respond to threats
of violence against civilians. They focused on large
areas of displacement such as Tawila and Sortony in
North Darfur. Following the attack on IDP camps in
Nertiti, UNAMID immediately deployed a police
verification patrol to the area and intensified military
and police patrols, coupled with the engagement of the
Government of Central Darfur and the IDP community
to defuse tensions. The mission further contributed to
the prevention and mitigation of intercommunal conflict
through constant engagement with local communities
within the framework of early-warning networks,
assessment and confidence-building missions and
targeted patrols, thereby facilitating dialogue between
sedentary farmers, nomads and other communities and
calling for the effective engagement of Government
and community leaders to resolve disputes.

Allow me now to say a word about the political
situation. There have been concerted efforts by
UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. Despite the initiatives taken by
other international actors, including the Presidents of
Chad and Uganda, as well as the Deputy Prime Minister
of Qatar, little tangible progress has been made in the
Darfur peace process. The engine of the process and
future political talks, which would be an agreement on
the cessation ofhostilities and humanitarian assistance,
has remained stalled because ofpersistent disagreement
between the parties on the modalities for the disclosure
of armed movement locations in Darfur, the release of

prisoners and the role of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur in future negotiations.

All those actors engaged with the parties in order
to bridge their differences. On 11 December 2016, the
Deputy Prime Minister of Qatar, the Government of
the Sudan, UNAMID and the United Nations Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan held consultations
in Doha to review the status of the negotiations and
outstanding issues. On 20 December, President Mbeki
met with President Al-Bashir and other Government
officials in Khartoum to discuss prospects for the
resumption of the cessation of hostilities and the status
of the National Dialogue. On 25 December, President
Museveni of Uganda engaged with the leadership of the
Justice and Equality Movement and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi in Kampala and discussed with
them their specific concerns on the remaining points
of disagreement. Finally, on 31 December, President
Al-Bashir announced a one-month extension of the
Government's unilateral ceasefire in Darfur and the
two Areas, which had expired at the end of the year,
and doubled down on that with the reiteration of his
call for opposition groups to join the National Dialogue.
President Al-Bashir also met with the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan
in Khartoum on 4 January and expressed readiness
to further extend the ceasefire and reiterated the
Government's commitment to implement the road map
agreement. As Council members are aware, the Abdul
Wahid faction remains outside of the peace process and
rejected any form of talks with the Government.

Following the conclusion of the National Dialogue
in October 2016, the Government took steps to
implement its recommendations. Accordingly, on
27 December, the National Assembly of the Sudan
adopted several constitutional amendments that
established a Government of National Reconciliation
and the position of Prime Minister, both to be appointed
by the President. They also included an increase in
the number of seats in the Assembly, so that there
can be greater representation and participation of
opposition groups, and the separation of functions of
the Attorney General and the Minister of Justice. But,
in the absence of an agreement with the Government
on the format and substance of the National Dialogue,
major opposition groups have continued to boycott
and criticize the process because they feel that it is
insufficiently inclusive. There have been reports of
arrests of opposition party members and political
activists, as well as the closure of media outlets that
were critical of the Government's austerity measures
aimed at preventing inflation. On the basis of that, the
opposition has also argued that the current situation in
the Sudan is not conducive to national reconciliation
and a free and inclusive political process.

Turning to my final point, concerning relations
with the Government of the Sudan, I am pleased to
report on essentially unobstructed customs clearance
of food shipments at Port Sudan, but not of contingent-
owned equipment. However, progress has been made
in the latter area. Progress has also been made in the
granting of visa requests for some of the mission's
personnel. I am hopeful that that spirit of cooperation
will be maintained to address the mission's remaining
operational challenges, including access and freedom
of movement restrictions, the clearance of military
and police equipment and delays and denials of visa
requests for the Human Rights Section, because that
does not contribute to carrying out the mandate.

As had been requested by the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the two
organizations held discussions with the Government
on the implementation of the UNAMID benchmarks
and on the exit strategy within the framework of the
joint working group, which convened in Khartoum
in October and November. These meetings were an
opportunity to review the implementation status of
the benchmarks, including the commendable progress
made on some points in this respect, and to identify what
remains pending. However, the joint working group
was not able to reach consensus on specific modalities
for the reconfiguration of the mission in the light of the
changes that have occurred on the ground. The United
Nations, in partnership, as ever, with the African
Union, will continue to engage with the Government,
including within the framework of the joint working
group, to address issues related to the benchmarks, the
objective being to adjust them as necessary, as well as
issues related to the UNAMID exit strategy.

In sum, the current situation in Darfur is
characterized by a significant decrease in armed
conflict, particularly as a result of the Government's
military successes against the armed movements and
the efforts of state governments to curb intercommunal
violence. Despite these improvements, however,
civilians remain exposed to significant sources of
insecurity: intercommunal conflict, criminality and the
activities of armed militias. Because of the widespread
proliferation of weapons and the inadequacy of rule-of-
law and justice institutions, this is not being mitigated.
Undoubtedly, long-term, comprehensive solutions
remain necessary to create the conditions for the
return or resettlement of the people who remain in
displacement in the region - I would recall here that
the figure is 2.6 million people - as well as for the
resolution of the deep causes of conflict: access to land,
water and other resources.

Now more than ever, we must call on all stakeholders
in Darfur to continue working with UNAMID and
the international community so that we can achieve
these goals.

