Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency of Poland for this opportunity to discuss the
activities of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
and the ways in which the international community
can support the Group's Joint Force. We would
also like to express our appreciation to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union, for their
comprehensive briefings. We congratulate Mr. Sidikou
on his new appointment and wish him every success in
the discharge of his office, for which he can count on
our full support.

Generally speaking, our delegation welcomes the
progress that has been made in mobilizing resources
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
We also commend the improved cooperation of the G-5
Sahel member States with the United Nations, African
Union and European Union, which has resulted in the
conclusion of the technical agreement. We believe that
making the G-5 Sahel Joint Force fully operational
will positively reinforce the joint efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the Malian national
security forces and other mechanisms to bring peace
and stability to the region.

However, the security situation in the Sahel
continues to deteriorate due to increased violence
by terrorist and extremist groups and their further
expansion to central Mali and northern Burkina
Faso. That insecurity is further aggravated by such
groups' alliances with others involved in transnational
organized crime, drug and human trafficking and arms
trading out of neighbouring Libya. We therefore support
the recommendations in the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2018/432) and would like to highlight some
observations for the Council's consideration.

First, the Joint Force has the potential to be a bright
example of an African solution to African problems.
However, to succeed, the Sahel countries need the
unanimous political support of the Council, the
technical expertise of Member States and predictable
and long-term sustainable funding from the donor
community. In turn, the G-5 Sahel States must speed up
the process of making the Joint Force fully functional
by resolving its command-and-control issues.

Secondly, we must ensure complementarity and
strengthened coordination between the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force with all the security forces in the region,
including MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
various regional frameworks, particularly the African
Union-led Nouakchott Process. The Joint Force should
find its place within the larger political and institutional
framework and strategy that we are planning for the
subregion, and that also calls for better coherence
between the Sahel countries themselves.

Thirdly, a military approach alone will not address
the instability in the region that has resulted from the
accumulation of problems, of which violent extremism
is only the most recent layer. The Joint Force's counter-
terrorism activities must therefore go hand in hand with
addressing the root causes of conflict and instability,
which can be resolved or minimized to a greater or
lesser degree by strengthening local governance,
reducing poverty and tribal rivalries, providing basic
services and improving job creation. Mitigating the
impact of climate change should be another priority.
Meeting these objectives will therefore require better
linkages between the Joint Force and the G-5 Sahel
Permanent Secretariat, whose capacities must be
reinforced in order to achieve a performance capable of
meeting these enormous challenges.

Fourthly, the situation on the ground requires
innovative policies for preventing and addressing
violent conflicts and scourge of terrorism. My country
therefore proposes using a three-pronged strategy
to resolve regional conflicts by strengthening the
security-development nexus, as Mr. Sidikou underlined
today, along with revamping the regional approach
and streamlining the United Nations system to
deliver as one. Such a comprehensive overall strategy
should be a very effective and sustainable tool for
addressing the common threats facing the Sahel and
neighbouring countries.

Finally, we strongly support the United Nations
peacebuilding programmes in the region in this regard
and call on the Organization to finalize its integrated
strategy for the Sahel. We also welcome subregional
efforts aimed at building resilience in human and
environmental systems and increasing peace and
prosperity in the region. We particularly commend the
initiative ofthe Alliance for the Sahel, which is expected
to bring in a total of €6 billion to finance development
projects for the next five years, such as the creation
of 1 million jobs and support for rural areas through
improved infrastructure and services. In joining the
multilateral action in this area, Kazakhstan remains
committed to helping the countries of the Sahel to fulfil
their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.

