Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Denmark,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

We would like to express our gratitude to Poland
for holding this open debate.

Practical measures to increase compliance with
international humanitarian law are of great importance
to civilians caught up in conflict. They can no longer
wait for possible future action. The lack of respect
for obligations under international humanitarian
law has long-term devastating effects on individuals
and communities. How people are protected, or not
protected, during armed conflicts has a major impact on
prospects for peace and reconciliation, reconstruction,
the restoration of basic services and civilian structures
and the return and reintegration of displaced people.

I would like to mention a few examples of the
practical initiatives and measures taken to increase
compliance with international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians, supported by the Nordic
countries. They are all examples of partnerships
among States, practitioners, civil society and
humanitarian organizations.

First, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) has systematically addressed attacks on health
care through the Health Care in Danger Initiative. It is
an excellent example ofbuilding a community of action
in the field, coupled with advocacy and cooperation
at the global level with States and other international
organizations. We encourage all States to support the
implementation of the recommendations emanating
from the initiative. Medecins Sans Frontieres,
Geneva Call, the World Medical Association and the
International Council of Nurses all play a key role
in awareness-raising, while also sharing knowledge
and best practices. We urge all States to support the
efforts of the World Health Organization to establish a
single, standardized surveillance system to collect and
disseminate high-quality data on attacks on health care.
As we marked the two-year anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 2286 (2016) earlier this month, we call for
its implementation.

Secondly, in June 2015, 37 States came together
in Oslo to launch the Safe Schools Declaration. It
includes a practical commitment to implementing the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict. That is part of our
commitment to protect children during armed conflict.
Civil-society organizations within the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack played a key role. We
are encouraged that 74 States have now endorsed the
Declaration and that States, international organizations
and civil society are committed to its implementation.
We urge all States to join and implement the Safe
Schools Declaration.

Thirdly, dialogue with parties to conflict is key to
enhancing the protection of civilians. States that are
in a position to influence the situation on the ground
should lead by example in that regard. We would also
like to highlight the work done in conflicts by the
ICRC, Geneva Call and others to engage armed forces
and non-State armed groups in order to make them
understand their obligations and act accordingly by
changing their practices. The Deeds of Commitment,
used by Geneva Call to engage armed groups to protect
civilians, are great examples of practical measures
based on knowledge and experience in the field.
Fourthly, the obligation for States parties to the
Mine Ban Treaty and the Convention on Cluster
Munitions to clear contaminated areas and destroy
stockpiles is a very concrete and efficient way to
contribute to protecting civilians after conflict. A total
of 29 States and one other area are no longer suspected
of being contaminated with landmines since the Mine
Ban Treaty was adopted, in 1997. Close partnerships
between civil society and States concerned about the
use of such indiscriminate weapons made that possible.

Fifthly, we should support the call by the Secretary-
General to avoid the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects in populated areas and to develop
policies on the use of such weapons to avoid civilian
harm. The report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on existing policy and practice
is an operational approach to the issue. We should aim
for a clear international standard of practice. We stand
ready to contribute to developing practical measures
and guidance on the basis of lessons learned.

Sixthly, those who commit atrocity crimes must be
held accountable in order to prevent future violations.
All States have a responsibility to investigate and
prosecute individuals who perpetrate atrocity crimes. In
cases where States are unable or unwilling to prosecute,
the Security Council should refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court.

Lastly, essential to the protection of civilians is the
recognition that women and girls are under particular
threat in armed conflicts and that the participation of
women in preventive action will greatly increase the
effectiveness of such action.

