Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Security Council, under the Peruvian
presidency, for convening today's important debate.

I would like also to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth, for her valuable briefing and tremendous efforts.
I further thank Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of
the independent progress study on youth and peace
and security (see S/2018/86), for his efforts and the
study's important conclusions and recommendations,
which will help support children's ability to achieve
international peace and security.

If we are to maintain international peace and
security, concerted international efforts are needed to
address the challenges and threats we face today as a
result of poverty, conflicts and wars. There is no doubt
that the 1.8 billion young men and women who make up
the largest portion of the population of many countries
throughout the world, in particular in conflict- and
war-afflicted regions, are capable of facing such
challenges and threats. They will make changes in their
communities only if they are supported in seeking to
achieve their ambitions and hopes and if such changes
will enhance their protection and rights.

The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) contributed
to an increased recognition of the important role of
young people in preventing conflicts and sustaining
peace and fighting violent extremism and terrorism.
The State of Qatar believes in the positive energy of
young people and their ability to make positive changes
in various areas, including international peace and
security. Therefore, it has spared no effort to put in place
policies and measures that can enhance the contribution
of young people to peace and development efforts.

In 2017, the Qatari Advisory Committee on Youth
was established in order to complement the efforts
of the State to promote the role of young people in
society and to implement the Qatar National Vision
2030. Twenty young men and women from various
Government and non-Government entities were elected
to the Committee, which seeks to enhance the culture
of dialogue and participation among young people,
enabling them to express their aspirations.

The State of Qatar acknowledges the importance
of addressing the root causes of the violent extremism
that leads to terrorism. In 2016, it organized a high-
level thematic conversation of the General Assembly
on children and youth affected by violent extremism.
Several Member States participated. Important
conclusions and recommendations were adopted with
regard to protecting children and young people from
violent extremism. Some States took measures to support
efforts in that area, leading to the establishment of many
institutions, programmes and initiatives in the fields
of education, employment, economic empowerment,
training and building the capacity of men and women
at the national, regional and international levels, in
particular in conflict-affected regions. Such initiatives
include the World Innovation Summit for Education,
the Upholding Education and Syrians Trust to educate
and train Syrian refugees, and the Education Above All
and Teach a Child initiatives, which all provide high-
quality education for millions of children and young
people around the world.

With regard to international cooperation, the
State of Qatar provides support and cooperates with
international organizations working on issues that
affect youth and combat extremism. We are a founding
member of the Global Community Engagement and
Resilience Fund, which supports local initiatives to
build capacity and provide a counter-narrative to the
ideology of violent extremism. The State of Qatar
works with youth civil society organizations, including
Silatech, a social organization, established in the State
of Qatar in 2008, that supports activities aimed at
providing job opportunities and enabling young people
to participate in socioeconomic development. On
18 September 2017, a memorandum of understanding
was signed between the State of Qatar, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and Silatech to
build the capacity of young people in the Arab and
Islamic region in the area of employment and to launch
projects that protect them from violent extremism.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that the State of Qatar is
committed to pursuing its efforts to create an enabling
environment to assist young people by providing
national, regional and international support to empower
them in peacebuilding, promoting the culture of peace,
tolerance and respect for religions. That will contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and benefit all peoples of the world.

