Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in the
deliberations on the situation in the Great Lakes
region. Let me take this opportunity to recognize the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Alexis Thambwe
Mwamba, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and of His
Excellency Mr. Karel de Gucht, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium.

My delegation welcomes the fourth special report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) (S/2008/728 and Add.1), and the
opportunity to reflect on the allegations against
Rwanda contained in the report of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/2008/773). Both reports have contributed to the
formulation of the new MONUC mandate.

While the Government of Rwanda welcomes the
Secretary-General's reports on MONUC, it is our
considered view that the new mandate for MONUC
should focus on addressing the issue of negative forces
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR, which is
the root cause of the conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic.

The continued presence of the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe/FDLR undermines stability in the region
and strains the relations between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. This group was
the central cause of the first and second Congo wars
and gave rise to the formation of various rival militia
groups in the Democratic Republic. It is in that light

that the current escalation of the conflict in North Kivu
is largely attributed to them. This ongoing conflict has
led to the killings of thousands of people, the
displacement of hundreds of thousands more, the rape
of women and the recruitment of child soldiers.

The Government of Rwanda would like to remind
this Council that MONUC was established in response
to the request by the signatories of the 1999 Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement that the United Nations deploy an
appropriate peacekeeping force in the Democratic
Republic of Congo to ensure implementation of the
Agreement and to act, under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, to track down all armed groups
in the Democratic Republic. That is set out in article
III, paragraph 11 (a), of the Agreement. Paragraph
8.2.2 of Annex A to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
concerning peace enforcement, states that the mandate
of the United Nations force shall include peacekeeping
and peace enforcement operations for "Tracking down
and disarming Armed Groups" - including the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe - "Screening mass killers,
perpetrators of crimes against humanity and other war
criminals" and "Handing over 'genocidaires' to the
International Crimes Tribunal for Rwanda".

Resolution 1291 (2000), in paragraph 7 (c),
commits MONUC to develop an action plan for the
overall implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement,
including the comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration of all
members of armed groups referred to in Annex A,
Chapter 9.1 of the Ceasefire Agreement, which include
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR. In its resolution 1355
(2001), paragraph 9, the Security Council emphasizes
that the disarmament and demobilization of, and
cessation of any support to, the ex-FAR/Interahamwe
are essential to the settlement of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, none of
the aforementioned recommendations were
implemented, as the ex-FAR/Interahamwe remains the
single greatest source of instability in the eastern
Democratic Republic.

It is important to note that there have been
several agreements and initiatives to resolve the issue
of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, including the Lusaka
Agreement of 1999, the Pretoria Agreement of 2002,
the Tripartite Plus mechanism of 2004, the Abuja
Declaration of 2004, the International Conference on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, the resolution adopted by the
African Union Peace and Security Council at its
meeting held on 10 and 11 January 2005 in Libreville,
Gabon, the Nairobi Joint Communique of 9 November
2007 and several United Nations resolutions.

In a presidential statement issued as document
S/PRST/2007/28 of 23 July 2007, the Security Council
asked MONUC to support the integrated brigades of
the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (FARDC) with a View to disarming recalcitrant
foreign and Congolese armed groups. Paragraph 3 of
resolution 1804 (2008) recalls MONUC's mandate to
facilitate the voluntary demobilization and repatriation
of disarmed foreign combatants and their dependants,
and to use all necessary means, within the limits of its
capacity and in the areas where its units are deployed,
to support operations led by the integrated brigades of
the FARDC with a view to disarming the recalcitrant
armed groups in order to ensure their participation in
the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration process.

In its various meetings, the Tripartite Plus
mechanism has been advocating for changing
MONUC's mandate to address the problem of negative
forces. Such meetings include the Tripartite Plus
meeting of Chiefs of General Staff held in Bujumbura
on 18 April 2007, the second Tripartite Plus Joint
Commission Ministerial Meeting, held in Lubumbashi
on 7 June 2007, the Ministerial Meeting held in
Kampala on 17 September 2007, and the third
Tripartite Plus Joint Commission of Chiefs of General
Staff held in Lubumbashi on 1 and 2 October 2007, and
so on.

In 2007, MONUC and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo designed an
operational plan to disarm negative forces in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but it failed to
materialize. All these agreements have not been
implemented, in part due to a lack of political will and
military capability on the part of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in part, due to
the divergent interests of the international community.

The presence of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo gave rise to
the formation of various rebel movements in the
eastern part of the country, notably the Congres
national pour la defense du peuple (CNDP) of General
Laurent Nkunda, which was formed in 2005. The
emergence of Nkunda actually reflects the failure on

the part of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to address the continued presence of the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR, who are systematically
exterminating Congolese Tutsis, as they did in Rwanda
in 1994. The threat they pose to the Congolese
minorities, and the failure of the FARDC to protect its
citizens certainly justifies Nkunda's claim of being a
protector of his Congolese Tutsi community to the
extent that members of his community view him as
their sole protector and hope for survival.

The problems caused by the presence of the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the emergence of Nkunda
are inextricably intertwined. The ex-FAR/Interahamwe/
FDLR has systematically been targeting Tutsis in the
region. They have caused the displacement of civilians
and committed all sorts of human rights violations,
including rape, killings and looting. They killed
Kinyarwanda-speaking Congolese whom they
identified as Tutsis at the Mudende refugee camp in
Rwanda in December 1997. Together with the
Burundian rebel group Palipehutu-Forces nationales de
liberation (Palip ehutu-FNL) , they killed 160
Banyamulenge refugees in August 2004 in Gatumba,
Burundi, and eight foreign tourists in the Bwindi forest
in Uganda, looted the villages of Bunagana in
southwestern Uganda on 8 August 2007 and forced
more than 45,000 Congolese whom they identified as
Tutsis into exile in Rwanda. Many others have fled to
Burundi, because their villages have been occupied by
this genocidal force.

Despite the signing of the Nairobi joint
communique between the Governments of Rwanda and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 9 November
2007 in Nairobi, the problem of the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe/FDLR persists. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
international community, through MONUC, made
many commitments that they have failed to honour,
including the establishment of strict border controls
and the prevention of illicit cross-border movements of
combatants. Consequently, the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/
FDLR has continued cross-border infiltrations into
Rwanda from their bases in the North and South Kivu
provinces.
MONUC was requested to support the military
operations of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR and bring to
justice the genocidaires, but this has not been done, as
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR units remain associated
with FARDC brigades in military regions 8 and 10,
deployed in areas close to the Rwandan border. The
ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR has, over the span of 14
years, continued to enjoy sanctuary, military support
and freedom of movement in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Under the Nairobi joint communique, Rwanda
agreed to increase border controls and take steps to
ensure that rebels do not receive cross-border support.
Rwanda also agreed to share a list of wanted
genocidaires with both the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUC and to
put a mechanism in place for the safe return and the
effective socio-economic reintegration of
ex-combatants. Rwanda has honoured all her
commitments, including the submission of the list of
genocidaires and an increase in border controls.

It is in this context that about 68 CNDP recruits
have so far been arrested and are currently being held
in Rwanda. In addition, Rwandan authorities
intercepted Colonel Mutebutsi and have kept him in
confinement in Rwanda since November 2007 to
prevent him from joining the CNDP.

Patient Mwendanga of the CNDP was declared
persona non grata in Rwanda. He came to Rwanda on
6 September 2007 and was subsequently arrested and
taken to court on 12 and 16 September 2007
respectively. He won the case and continues to travel to
Belgium, where he is a citizen, and to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Rwandan authorities in October this year
informed the Group of Experts on the arms embargo
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the
seizure of military uniforms imported from the United
States of America and destined to the CNDP.

The Government of Rwanda takes this
opportunity to once again reject the allegations by the
Group of Experts that it has helped the CNDP. As
detailed in Rwanda's response to the report of the
Group of Experts of 15 December 2008, the
Government of Rwanda strongly recommends that the
United Nations withdraw the unfounded allegations
against Rwanda and instead fully engage in supporting
the implementation of ongoing bilateral, regional and
international initiatives to resolve the conflict in the
region.

The Government of Rwanda intends to fully
engage and participate in all initiatives in this
direction, including a joint Rwanda/Democratic
Republic of the Congo military operations plan to
disarm the genocidal forces in the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe/FDLR in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the resumption of diplomatic relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda;
and the revival of the Economic Community of the
Great Lake Countries, which is comprised of Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
The international community should stop using
Rwanda as a diversion from its own failure to disarm
and repatriate the FDLR in accordance with
outstanding agreements and instead support the
ongoing efforts to resolve this problem.

Above all, the Government of Rwanda would like
to take this opportunity to request the Security Council
to give MONUC a robust mandate to effectively disarm
the ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR, since that genocidal
force remains the epicentre of the security problems in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
in general. Otherwise, the group's prolonged presence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue
to be a source of conflict in the region, and MONUC
will not be able to deliver on its prime purpose, despite
the enormous resources at its disposal.

The Government of the Republic of Rwanda
believes that the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) should, in accordance with the provisions of
the various agreements and initiatives, be amended to
address the issue of negative forces. Rwanda believes
that with an appropriate mandate and a complete shift
in political will, the Forces Armees de la Republique
Democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUC could
effectively carry out operations against the ex-Forces
Armees Rwandaises (FAR)/Interahamwe/Forces
Democratiques de la Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR).

Unwavering support for the full implementation
of the latest bilateral engagements between Rwanda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
renewal of MONUC's mandate to dismantle the
ex-FAR/Interahamwe/FDLR is the only solution to the
current crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There is urgent need for an honest and credible
display of military force by the international
community, through MONUC, to push the ex-FAR/
Interahamwe/FDLR high command to disarm. The
Government of the Republic of Rwanda remains
committed to finding a lasting solution to the problems
of the Great Lakes region and, in particular, the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

