Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution 2513 (2020) and that it was unanimously adopted. Today Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture. The Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, of 29 February, and the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America and the Taliban together mark a significant moment in the pursuit of peace. Now is the time for all parties to seize this opportunity for peace by entering into direct and fully inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations. Through the resolution adopted today, the Security Council has set out the way for all parties to get to that point, and we expect further confidence-building measures, including further reductions in violence. We expect President Ghani, who was inaugurated yesterday, to unify the country and form a truly inclusive and diverse national negotiating team that includes women. We welcome the opportunity to work with him and his Government. We call upon all Afghan leaders to uphold their commitments to prioritizing inclusivity, unity and peace. Like the United States, we appreciate Mr. Abdullah's statement on his commitments. We are strongly against the establishment of any parallel administrations or Government structures, and we call on all concerned to come together and resolve differences constructively. I should like to emphasize points about the role of women. This morning Afghanistan and the United Kingdom co-hosted a high-level event of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan. Many members who are in the Chamber today were there to attend and to speak, and we heard from leading Afghan women in politics and civil society. The Security Council has sent a clear message in this regard. We expect to see the effective and meaningful participation in the peace process of women as well as young people and other minorities. While any peace deal is ultimately for Afghans to decide upon, we affirm that it should protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of all. Like Germany and others, we have a strong role in Afghanistan, both in military terms and in our development, political and economic work, and we are ready to support a peace deal and to stand by the Afghan people.
