We would like to thank Martin Griffiths and Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. Since our previous meeting (see S/2020/313), the situation in Yemen has deteriorated considerably. Let me turn first to the political context. The Southern Transitional Council declaration regarding a state of emergency and self- administration throughout the south is cause for concern that a new civil war will erupt in that part of the country. We know that it has been met with dismay from leaders of most southern governorates. Apart from aggravating the already-volatile situation and complicating the country's response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the announcement raises serious concerns regarding the management of important institutions such as the Central Bank and port of Aden. Yemen does not need further political fragmentation. Therefore, we reiterate that all parties need to scale up efforts to fully implement the Riyadh agreement. Fighting continues in north and central Yemen, and the Ma'rib region continues to be threatened. We urge all parties to the conflict to cease hostilities and get back to the negotiating table without further delay. Secondly, let me turn to the pandemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports full-blown transmission of the virus in Yemen, with the disease spreading undetected among a population with some of the lowest levels of immunity to disease as compared with populations in other countries. Testing capabilities are inadequate, and we would like to echo WHO's call to local authorities to transparently report confirmed cases. We are also aware that the ability to care for patients has been hampered by credible threats and perceived risks targeting certain international health-care workers. This is unacceptable and a clear violation of international humanitarian law. Yemen urgently needs a unified response to the potential ramifications of the pandemic. This includes both an increase in health-sector spending and short-term fiscal policies that will mitigate the impact of a lockdown. Furthermore, given the spread of COVID-19, authorities on both sides of the front lines should work to release political detainees, including all journalists held by the Houthis. Another effect of the pandemic relates to the stigmatization of, and xenophobia towards, migrants in Yemen as "transmitters of disease". Xenophobia and scapegoating campaigns are leading to retaliation against those vulnerable communities, including physical and verbal harassment, forced quarantine, denial of access to health services, movement restrictions and forced movements to front-line and desert areas, leaving them stranded without food, water or essential services. The Special Envoy has said that Yemen cannot fight on two fronts - the war and the pandemic. I would venture to say that there are not two but four fronts, if we include climate extremes and the locust plague. Significant gains have been made against desert-locust encroachment in Yemen, which is proof of what can happen when the authorities and the international community join efforts and work together. Still, the battle is a long one and is not yet over. According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, more people are at risk of losing their livelihoods and of worsening food security in the coming months. We would like to express our full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy and his goal of fully including women and young people at all stages of the peace process. Voices such as that of Olla Al-Sakkaf, the young Yemeni peacebuilder, must be heard. In her briefing to the Council last month, she made the point that in her short life she has attended more funerals than weddings. Discussions on the future of Yemen must include the presence and input of younger generations. Finally, we urge all parties to cease hostilities immediately and work together to rebuild their country. The Dominican Republic stands ready to support all efforts towards that goal, which is the only possible way to achieve the peace and progress that Yemenis want and deserve.
