Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Given that this is the first formal meeting
being convened in the Chamber since Peru assumed
the presidency of the Security Council, our delegation
congratulates His Excellency Ambassador Meza-
Cuadra and his entire team. We similarly commend
Kuwait for the outstanding work it carried out during
its presidency in June.

We also warmly welcome Ambassador Nicolas
de Riviere among us. We furthermore pay tribute
to Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu for the constructive
contributions he has always made at the Council and
the very strong ties of friendship and cooperation that
our two delegations have always enjoyed. We wish him
every success in his new functions.

Allow me to commend the Peruvian delegation for
including this most relevant open debate in the agenda
of its presidency, as it is a highly important topic within
the Security Council's efforts to maintain international
peace and security. We are also grateful for the three
illustrative briefings made by Mr. Fedotov, Ms. Coninsx
and Ms. Makarenko, which help us to contextualize the
existing threats, risks and collective efforts in order to
understand and address the links between international
terrorism and organized crime, especially since the
Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001) and, more
recently, resolution 2195 (2014).

I take this opportunity to reiterate once again, as we
have been doing, that the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
categorically and unequivocally condemns organized
crime and terrorism and their consequences. In that
regard, we extend our condolences to, and express our
solidarity with, those in communities throughout the
world who have been the victims of terrorism, either
directly or indirectly.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the
increasing links between international terrorism and
organized crime - whether by land, sea or air - and
their impact on the sustainable development of countries
are extremely worrisome. Recent reports confirm that
terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, the
Al-Nusra Front, Da'esh and the Taliban, to name but a
few, use international crime and its methods to finance
a greater number of their terrorist activities, benefiting
especially from environmental crime, trafficking in
drugs, weapons and persons, and piracy.

From that perspective, we recognize the need
to sharpen the focus on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism through resolution 2462
(2019), a French initiative co-sponsored by Equatorial
Guinea, in order to ensure that the response to terrorist
threats by the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and States is more effective and efficient.

During a recently held Arria Formula meeting on
this issue, which focused on the Caribbean and was
led by the representative of the Dominican Republic,
we were able to demonstrate that all countries have a
role to play in the prevention and elimination of the
links between organized crime and terrorist groups,
especially in terms of drugs and weapons trafficking,
and the risks posed by such activities to the maintenance
and advancement of sustainable development. In that
regard, in order to identify and obstruct those links
more effectively, we believe it is essential that the
international community focus on three areas while
supporting the initiatives of States.

First, we require more in-depth investigation in
collaboration with regional organizations to help us
identify blind spots, safe havens, the main risks and
routes used; strengthen the fight against financial
terrorism; focus our efforts and support on training in
the countries and regions that need it; and ensure that
collective efforts do not result in the strengthening of
one country or region at the expense of others.

Secondly, the levels and volume of weapons
possessed by terrorist and criminal groups, as well as
lone wolves, are a source of great concern to us. For that
reason, with regard to environmental smuggling and
arms trafficking, we believe it is important that States
demonstrate their commitment to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and small arms and
light weapons, as well as to promote and enforce arms
embargoes by ensuring that non-State groups cannot
access them by any other means. Unfortunately, it
is usually only State actors that are monitored and
sanctioned for violating embargoes.

In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes that African countries should firmly
commit to the principles of the Treaty of Pelindaba,
with the total prohibition of direct and indirect
supply or commercialization of mineral resources
from African soil - specifically uranium and
plutonium - for purposes that entail the production,
employment, manufacture or research of weapons of
mass destruction, including military activities.

With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
believe it is essential to eliminate the illegal trafficking
of military equipment, armed unmanned aerial vehicles
and improvised explosive devices to terrorist groups,
armed groups and mercenaries. States must also commit
to interrupting supply lines.

Thirdly, in order to effectively combat terrorism
and transnational crime and the links that unite them,
which are multidimensional issues, developing States
must be able to focus on achieving sustainable and
inclusive development. To do so, they must receive
fair and necessary support, including an opportunity
to participate in the international economy and global
trade, thereby allowing developing States to better
focus their attention on preventing efforts to radicalize
and recruit young people and other vulnerable and
susceptible groups.

Two days ago in Niamey, His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, ratified the African
Continental Free Trade Agreement, an instrument
to strengthen development and sustainable growth in
Africa. Of course, the success of the treaty is closely
linked to an improvement in our ability to control
our own borders so as to prevent the initiative from
effectively failing into the hands ofterrorists, criminals,
mercenaries and other non-State actors. Therefore, we
call on the international community to support African
States and the African Union in implementing that
leap forward for Africa, as well as supporting African
efforts and institutions in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime and maintaining peace and security.

Finally, we would like to acknowledge the role
played by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
and its Executive Directorate; the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban; as
well as their analytical support and monitoring teams
and panels of experts. We also acknowledge their
increasing cooperation and collaboration with other
United Nations entities in support of States, such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the Office of Disarmament
Affairs, among others, as well as with regional and
subregional organizations. We encourage the further
strengthening of that cooperation.

Equatorial Guinea can be relied upon to support
this important work as far as possible. In that context,
we commend and support the Peruvian initiative to
submit a draft resolution on this issue.

