Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate on a topic so relevant to the work of
the Council. We also wish to express our appreciation
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representativeof the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Herve Ladsous; Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and Mr. Forest Whitaker for
their participation and their valuable contributions to
today's debate. We would also like to thank Ms. Sandra
Uwiringiyimana for her statement, which motivates us
to work even harder.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/339), which is the basis for our deliberations,
and express our special appreciation to the delegation
of Luxembourg for chairing the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

It is of great concern to our delegation that the
information provided in the annexes of the most recent
report nof the Secretary-General, which includes eight
new groups that recruit or use children; kill or maim
children; commit rape and other forms of violence,
including sexual violence, against children; and
attacks against schools and hospitals. These attacks on
schools and hospitals or their use for military purposes;
the serious violations of the rights of girls and boys,
including their right to education; and the murders not
only of children, but of teachers and staff working in
school buildings, are unacceptable.

We are concerned about the emergence of new and
more radical armed groups, the fragmentation of armed
forces and the increase of other more violent groups,
such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham and
Boko Haram, which have been changing the landscape
of armed conflicts and forging alliances, as well as
the appearance of other structures, some in opposition
to Governments and others associated with them.
We therefore believe that the focus should evolve in
accordance with changing circumstances.

We consider it necessary to strengthen national
capacities and to support security and justice sector
reform, as well as the creation of special tribunals
and mixed courts to combat impunity for those who
commit serious violations of the rights of children,
especially persistent perpetrators, who should not be
offered any kind of amnesty or hold office in their
respective Governments or armed forces. We emphasize
humanitarian principles in order to provide a broad and
effective protection, even against the kidnapping of boys
and girls affected by conflict or who are in situations
of concern. We also deem the complementarities of
international judicial bodies, such as the International
Criminal Court, to national mechanisms to be equally
important in bringing to justice those responsible for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
committed against children.

We are alarmed at the resurgence of conflict and
the escalation of hostilities that have led to widespread,
grave violations of children's rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and northern Nigeria, to mention but a few cases. We
are deeply concerned by the humanitarian situation that
has been created in that region, where the Boko Haram
group has intensified its attacks on schools. Guatemala
continues to give high priority to address the situation
of children caught up in armed conflict, as well as to
strengthening provisions for the protection of boys and
girls in all relevant mandates of special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers, as appropriate.

We have supported and will continue to support
the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We thank
them for their updates on the effects of the campaign,
which has been undertaken in collaboration with other
agencies and funds of the United Nations system, to end
by 2016 the recruitment and use of child soldiers by the
armed forces of the Governments listed in the annexes
to the annual reports.

We believe that field visits of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict are very useful
in apprising us of each case. Our delegation had
the privilege to participate in the visit to Myanmar
in December 2013, which allowed us to assess the
political will of the Government to end the recruitment
of children into its armed forces and its renewed
commitment to extend the action plan. We encourage
such visits to continue.

In conclusion, we have an obligation to future
generations in countries affected by armed conflicts.
Violations of the rights of children compromise future
prosperity and the ability of countries to achieve
a lasting peace. We must pledge to do everything in
our reach to prevent heinous violations and rise to the
challenge of protecting the world's children.

