Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my country, I would like to welcome you,
Sir, and say that we are deeply honoured to see you
presiding over this very important meeting, the topic of
which was so wisely decided upon the Croatian
delegation. Burkina Faso wished to participate at a
high level in this meeting, but since it coincides with
our national holiday, we were not able to do so.

The search for lasting peace and effective
collective security was at the very heart of the concerns
and hopes of the founding fathers of the United
Nations, who were firmly resolved to spare mankind
the horrors of war and to build a community of nations
the main orientations of which would be solidarity and
cooperation. Over 60 years later, alas, that search
remains an aspiration and a challenge that the
international community must take up, given the many
ongoing threats to the world.

One of the most serious threats today is certainly
the threat of terrorism, which has managed to insinuate
itself into and strike fear in the hearts of our lives and
our societies, as the most recent attacks in Mumbai
unfortunately demonstrate. I would like at this time to
extend the sincere condolences of Burkina Faso to the
families of the victims and to the Government and the
people of India.

I would like to congratulate and thank you, Sir,
most deeply for bringing us together today to discuss
this issue, the importance of which the General
Assembly recognized by inscribing it on its agenda in
1972 and has been considering every year since 1993.
3

This scourge by its very nature, methods and
expressions, has shattered of many our certainties, and
the international community has mobilized to find a
swift and appropriate response. It is true that, for a
variety of reasons, differences of View that are often
deep-seated have sometimes hindered effective
cooperation among States. However, we have to
recognize that significant efforts have been made by
the General Assembly, the Security Council and other
institutions such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the International Maritime
Organization, which have developed and strengthened
many instruments, the latest being the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and its Plan of Action, adopted by
the General Assembly.

We cannot pass over in silence the significant
contribution made by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and its Terrorism Prevention Branch,
which to date has provided technical assistance to over
115 States in the ratification and implementation of
those instruments and in strengthening their national
institutions in the prosecution and application of the
law. The General Assembly should continue its efforts
to strengthen the legal framework by finalizing the
draft comprehensive terrorism convention, which has
languished for a number of years.

For almost 10 years, the Security Council has
initiated its activities, particularly after the unjustifiable
attacks of 11 September 2001. The adoption of
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
in particular, and the establishment of the committees
pursuant to those resolutions and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate are
part of these activities. The work of the committees
and their expert groups have helped, inter alia, to
initiate and strengthen efforts system-wide.

Despite these initiatives, we have to recognize
that threats to peace and security caused by terrorist
acts have not abated much less been eliminated.
Terrorist acts spare no continent, country or people. On
several occasions, the United Nations itself has been
targeted by terrorists. Given that situation, additional
emergency measures are required.

With respect to strengthening the legal
framework, the review of the implementation of the
Global Strategy on 4 September this year highlighted
the need for a comprehensive convention that would
bring together all of the instruments in force, provide a
clear and precise definition of the concepts and
encourage non-selective implementation of those
instruments, for terrorism is a common challenge to us
all.

From a practical standpoint, ensuring consistency
in the efforts of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and all other bodies and institutions through
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
established by the Secretary-General is essential.

We must honestly recognize that States shoulder
some responsibility. Unfortunately, they have not always
demonstrated the necessary political will to fight this
scourge. Worse, they have not always had the courage to
recognize that the root causes of terrorism are to be found
in extreme poverty, selfishness and our own conduct
resulting from intolerance and exclusion. As long as that
situation continues, our efforts will be in vain.

Burkina Faso belongs to the African region of
West Africa. The region was long regarded as having
been spared by the terrorist threat, but it now directly
faces a number of networks of organized crime,
including terrorist networks, which the States of the
region do not have the necessary resources to address.
Widely intermingled populations, porous borders and
the lack of infrastructure and monitoring bodies make
these States, already fragile and weakened, particularly
vulnerable.

I would thus appeal once again to our partners for
substantial financial field and capacity-building
assistance, in close cooperation with subregional and
regional organizations. As with other aspects of
maintaining international peace and security, the
comparative advantage of these organizations, which
are closer to realities on the ground, is real and cannot
be ignored if we want to succeed.

In order to conquer terrorism, we must remain
united and resolute. Our common strategy must
therefore take account of the greatest values of
humanity and respect human rights and all religious
beliefs. It is also important that the great evils of
poverty and social inequality be taken into account so
that they are not exploited by terrorists. Burkina Faso
strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and stands ready to continue supporting
all efforts of the international community to combat
this scourge.

Accordingly, from 20 to 22 March 2007, we
hosted the fourth Conference of the Ministers of
Justice of Francophone African Countries on the
ratification and implementation of international
instruments against terrorism. The participating
countries were able to consider the progress that they
had made in adopting at the domestic level the legal
instruments to which they are party as well as the
submission of their reports to the various Security
Council committees.

The Ouagadougou Declaration, which was
adopted at the end of the meeting, stressed in particular
the role of international cooperation as an important
element in preventing and combating terrorism in
accordance with obligations under international law,
particularly the Charter of the United Nations, and
other relevant instruments, particularly those relating
to human rights, the rights of refugees and
international humanitarian law.

Burkina Faso believes that, in taking up the
global challenge of terrorism, we must make every
effort to strengthen cooperation for development,
including technical assistance.

Lastly, we would like to thank the Croatian
delegation for submitting a draft presidential statement,
which we, of course, fully support.

