The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of South Africa.

We, too, thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing
on the report before us, as well as the representative of
the United States, Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, for
his briefing on the activities of the multinational force,
the MNF-I.

We note with concern that, despite improvements
in the general security situation towards the end of
2007, there has been a recent deterioration and the
overall political and security situation in Iraq remains
fragile.

We reiterate that any resolution to the conflict in
Iraq has to include an all-inclusive political process
and national reconciliation, as well as constructive
dialogue with all neighbouring States. The adoption of
legislation such as the Amnesty Law and the Justice
and Accountability Law is welcome as a step towards
reconciling the different parties. It is our hope that the
Iraqi parties will continue to find ways to further
reconcile. We note that the adoption of the Amnesty
Law, for example, has led to the Sunni-Tawatuq block
agreeing to return to the cabinet after a long boycott.

We support the call by the Secretary-General in
his report for influential public figures and parties to
work towards political dialogue, compromise and "the
recognition that Iraq's future depends on its leaders
pursuing the Iraqi national interest rather than party,
ethnic or sectarian interests" (S/2008/266, para. 65).

The role of regional actors cannot be
overemphasized. My delegation supports efforts aimed
at addressing the matters of violence, internally
displaced persons and refugees. We positively view the
series of discussions, including the recently held
meeting in Kuwait, between Iraq and all of its
neighbours working in partnership to ensure stability,
security and economic reconstruction in the region.
Regional cooperation is necessary in ensuring stability,
not only for Iraq, but for the entire region.

We continue to be concerned about the human
rights situation in Iraq. We call on all parties, including
the MNF-I, to ensure that human rights are respected
and international humanitarian law is applied,
especially in regard to the use of force and the holding
of detainees. We are disturbed by the reports of the
treatment of detainees, as outlined in the latest human
rights report of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI).

My delegation supported the adoption of
resolution 1790 (2007) renewing the mandate of the
MNFI, because the Iraqi Government is of the view
that its continued presence would be necessary for
security. We note the Iraqi Government expectation
that this could be the final mandate renewal of for the
MNF-I.

Resolution 1790 (2007) extended the mandate of
the International Advisory Monitoring Board (IAMB).
South Africa welcomes this decision but remains
concerned that repeated findings of serious
irregularities with regard to the disbursement of funds
from the Development Fund for Iraq and the oversight
of oil fields and contractors have not been acted upon.
We were told that there would be a Security Council
meeting to discuss the findings of the independent
auditors attached to the IAMB. This meeting is long
overdue, and we call for it as soon as possible.

We conclude by reiterating that, notwithstanding
the event that led to the current situation, the Security
Council has a responsibility to ensure that the powers
granted to the MNF-I are exercised in a manner
consistent with the decisions of the Council, that Iraq's
natural resources and the funds in the Development
Fund for Iraq are used for the benefit for the Iraqi
people, and that international law and human rights are
upheld and respected by all parties.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

