Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on progress
in the implementation of resolution 2046 (2012), which
concerns outstanding bilateral issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan and the conflict in the states of
South Kordofan and Blue Nile.

As relations between the two countries have
continued to be tense, it was hoped that the meeting
between Presidents Al-Bashir and Kiir that was planned
to take place in Khartoum during the reporting period
would provide guidance on the way forward, at least
on the stalled implementation of the 2012 agreements.
But that meeting did not materialize, at least during the
reporting period.
The internal conflicts in the Sudan and South Sudan,
coupled with the mistrust between the two countries,
have continued to impede the proper implementation
of the agreements and the normalization of their
bilateral relations. At the extraordinary meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, held in
Addis Ababa from 14 to 15 May, both Governments
recommitted to the resumption of regular meetings and
to the implementation of the decisions taken at their last
meeting, held in Khartoum a year earlier.

However, the ordinary meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism agreed to be held at the end
of June did not take place, after both Governments
once again exchanged accusations of harbouring each
other's rebels. An extraordinary Joint Political and
Security Mechanism meeting convened by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel is expected to
take place on 1 November. In my engagement with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I have
reiterated that the agreements on security arrangements
and border issues cannot be implemented without
regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, the main bilateral mechanism empowered
to take decisions regarding security and the border.

The monitoring of the border remains critical to
peace efforts, as border violations have the potential
to be a flashpoint of military confrontation between
the countries. In line with the July 2011 agreement
on the border monitoring support mission, both sides
acknowledge the importance of border monitoring. If
fully implemented, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism can help them prevent violations
and cross-border incursions by armed groups, contain
the cross-border circulation of weapons and assist in
building mutual trust, particularly in the light of the
mutual accusations of harbouring rebels. It can also
serve to protect the flanks of the Abyei Area.

While there has been limited progress on security
and border issues, the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan have continued to show more appetite
for sustained bilateral cooperation in the oil sector.
In September, the Ministers of Petroleum of the two
countries agreed in Khartoum on the resumption of
oil production in the Unity state oilfields, which had
stopped with the outbreak ofthe war in 2013. The Sudan
would provide technical assistance and electricity and
accommodate oil workers at its base camp in Heglig.

In line with the agreement on trade and trade-related
Issues, the two Governments agreed in September
to boost border trade and approved the export of 54
Sudanese products to South Sudan through five border
crossing points yet to be identified. It is expected that
a meeting of customs and immigration officials will be
organized to operationalize the agreement, while the
branch of the Sudan's central bank at Kosti has been
identified to facilitate transactions. The contemplated
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting at
the end of this month is intended to expedite the
establishment of the first crossing points.

The Sudan also continued to facilitate the provision
of humanitarian aid to South Sudan by allowing the
World Food Programme to deliver food assistance on
5 October to Aweil.

With the lifting of United States sanctions on the
Sudan, South Sudan has expressed interest in a joint
approach to the international community, including a
creditor outreach strategy arrangement as contemplated
in the agreement on economic matters, which has not
yet been implemented. In my future engagement with
the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I will
encourage them to build on their sustained cooperation
on oil and their interest in enhancing their economic and
commercial cooperation to implement the agreements
on security arrangements and border issues in the
same spirit.

Since the independence of South Sudan, the
most prominent outstanding territorial issue between
the Sudan and South Sudan has been the question of
sovereignty over the Abyei Area. After an interval
that followed the upsurge in violence in Abyei in 2011,
resulting in the displacement of the population there,
and following the independence of South Sudan later
that year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2046
(2012), which urges the parties to cease all hostilities
and withdraw their forces. The main concern of the
members of the Security Council then was to avoid the
risk of greater conflagration and, in the words of the
United States representative,

"returning to the horrors of the past and [taking]

the entire region with them" (S/PV6764, p. 1).

Today, thanks notably to the sustained and fruitful
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), for which Ethiopia should be
commended, the risk of relapse into conflict between
the Sudan and South Sudan is low. The stabilizing
role of UNISFA, described in detail in the briefing by
my colleague Assistant Secretary-General Alexander
Zouev, should inform any decision the international
community takes regarding Abyei and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by UNISFA
and its engagement with both communities to foster
dialogue and reconciliation have also been critical in
averting an escalation of tensions.

In my view, the enabling role of UNISFA is crucial
for any future progress on the implementation of the
transitional agreements and the arrangements on the
border, as well as the resumption of talks about the
final status of Abyei. In my continuous engagement
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, I
have urged them to build on the relative improvement in
their relationship, including through bilateral meetings
between President Al-Bashir and President Kiir, to
take concrete measures to achieve progress on the joint
administration of Abyei and to resume discussions
about its final status.

Turning my attention to the conflict in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile, if fully implemented, the road
map agreement brokered last year by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel can lay the ground
for lasting peace in the Sudan, as it contemplates a
comprehensive solution to the conflicts in Darfur
and the two areas through peace negotiations and
national political dialogue resulting in a new, inclusive
social contract.

Humanitarian aid delivery to the territories under
the control of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North (SPLM-N) remains a major contentious issue and
a road block between the Government of the Sudan
and the SPLM-N. The Government of the Sudan has
reiterated readiness to implement the so-called United
States proposal on humanitarian access, which consists
of the United States delivering medicine from within
the Sudan to South Kordofan Blue Nile states by air.
The new SPLM-N leadership stated that the position of
the Movement on the matter has not changed and that
it sticks to the delivery of a certain percentage of the
humanitarian assistance directly from a neighbouring
country to the areas under its control. In my future
engagement with the parties, I intend to urge them to
build on the current unilateral cessation of hostilities
declared by both sides in the two areas and to resume
talks on the basis of the United States proposal on
humanitarian assistance, under the auspices of the
High-level Implementation Panel.

