Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate on a topical
issue, and I would like to thank the briefers for sharing
their valuable insights with us.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and with
the statement just delivered by Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

On a daily basis, we are confronted with horrific
news about killed, wounded, maimed, raped and
tortured civilians. Almost 60 million people worldwide
are displaced. Many of them have fled from violence.
It is a sad fact: civilians pay the highest price in any
armed conflict. An aggravating cause of the suffering
of civilians is the shocking disrespect for the relevant
international law by many parties to armed conflicts.
Terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Syria and the
Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab target civilians
on purpose in order to demoralize their opponents.
And in some instances, even States do not refrain from
such abhorrent tactics either, as has been demonstrated
by the Syrian Government's use of devastating barrel
bombs against its own people.

The deliberate blocking of humanitarian aid,
indiscriminate attacks on residential areas, markets and
schools, starvation of civilians as a method of combat
and even the use ofpoison gas, the killing and torturing
of prisoners as well as enforced disappearances - all
this has become a cynical trademark of the Syrian
conflict, which for too long has been plaguing the
civilian population. It is not just a question of non-State
armed groups flagrantly violating international
humanitarian and human rights law; States' awareness
of their obligation to comply with these legal regimes
also needs to be strengthened. The prevailing lack
of accountability further fuels the disrespect for
international law in conflicts.

It has been expressed by other speakers before
me but it cannot be reiterated often enough - the
international community must redouble its efforts to
strengthen compliance with international law by parties
to conflict. With its unique mandate and power, the
Security Council has a primordial role to play in this
respect. The world expects the Council to take action
when civilians are slaughtered in conflicts or when
their life and health are in danger and to bring those
who are responsible for these acts to justice, if other
mechanisms fail. At the same time, it is evident that our
priority must remain to prevent crimes against civilians
in the first place, and we should continue to spare no
efforts in doing so.

Germany welcomes the efforts to improve the
protection of civilians in conflicts throughout the
United Nations system. The reports of the Secretary-
General on the future of peacekeeping, his regular
reports on the protection of civilians and the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) provide valuable guidance to that effect. In
this context, I would also like to express our continued
support for the Secretary-General's Human Rights up
Front initiative.

Ten peacekeeping missions already have mandates
to protect civilians. In one of them, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), protection of
civilians has become a particularly pressing issue. The
challenges are tremendous, the environment is complex
and the resources are limited. Some 1.6 million people
are internally displaced and around 200,000 have found
protection in the Mission's bases. Germany welcomes
the comprehensive and inclusive approach by UNMISS
designed to better protect civilians. The promotion of
dialogue and the engagement with local communities
at the grass roots level are crucial elements of
reducing tensions and violence. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the UNMISS staff for their
dedication and tireless work aimed at keeping the
civilian population safe.

A particularly repugnant aspect of many armed
conflicts is the use of sexual and gender-based violence
as tactics ofwarfare. This is, unfortunately, also the case
in South Sudan. Germany strongly supports the special
attention that UNMISS attaches to these crimes, which
have such a disastrous effect on societies. Assaults on
the physical and psychological well-being of women and
their dignity cannot be tolerated anywhere in the world.
We are glad that, since October 2015, we, Germany,
have been able to contribute highly specialized police
officers to a team that will help UNMISS and the
South Sudanese society fight sexual and gender-based
violence.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the unfailing
German commitment to the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. As in the past, it will remain one of
our main priorities.

