Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Criminal
terrorist attacks have struck at the heart of the
international community this morning in Istanbul. We
convey our most heartfelt condolences to the families
of the victims and to the peoples of the United
Kingdom and Turkey.

The holding of this special meeting on the
situation in the Great Lakes region under the
presidency of your country, Angola, Mr. President,
demonstrates the interest that the Security Council has
always taken in recovery and stability in this sensitive
part of Africa. My country pays tribute to the
Secretary-General for his statement at the beginning of
our work and for his tireless efforts and dedication to
consolidate peace and development in Africa.

The active involvement of the High
Representative of the countries of the Great Lakes
region and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the special envoys of the current Chairman of
the African Union and of the President of the
Commission of the African Union with a view to
discussing and examining, together with Council
members, ways and means to concretize, within the
timetables established, the international conference on
the Great Lakes is a source of efficiency and coherence
in our common undertaking and mutual obligations.

Similarly, the resolute commitment of the
European Union, as expressed so eloquently by the
Permanent Representative of Italy, is a source of true
satisfaction. My delegation hopes that from this
interactive dialogue relevant elements may emerge
better to define the efforts for the holding and success
of the upcoming international conference on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region.

To better understand the true scope and outlines
of the future international conference, a brief review of
the context of conflicts and their political, security and
socio-economic impact is necessary.

Several studies of the conflicts in the region have
concluded that those conflicts are engendered by the
interaction of often complex internal factors and cross-
border problems, as well as problems related to
population movements, poverty, unemployment, easy
access to light weapons and questions pertaining to
governance, as well as by the activities of dissident
irregular forces used by political and military actors
pursuing solely their own interests. It is deplorable that
these conflicts have led to the forced displacement of a
large part of the population, sometimes serving as
human shields and as sources of combatant recruitment
for rebel groups.

After more than a decade of conflict and more
than 2 million civilian deaths - a terrible toll,
unfortunately far from being the largest among
contemporary conflicts, according to several sources -
my delegation now welcomes the fact that today in the
Great Lakes region we can see a glimmer of hope on
the horizon.

Against that background we repeat our full
satisfaction at the conclusion, some months ago now,
of several bilateral and multilateral peace agreements,
and principles of good-neighbourliness and
cooperation, which undoubtedly will provide
benchmarks for the international conference that we are
defining.

We are convinced as of now that the letter and
spirit of those agreements will be reflected in the
deliberations of the international conference in order to
restore peace and security, ensure integrated regional
development, and consolidate the process of national
reconciliation and democratic construction in countries
emerging from conflict or in post-conflict situations. In
this regard, my delegation would express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the
information contained in his report of 17 November
2003, a comprehensive report which gives rise to the
following comments.

Regarding participation and in order to guarantee
the success of the conference, my delegation would
stress the need for involving, inter alia, all of the
States of the Great Lakes region and neighbouring
States in every stage of the forthcoming conference.
This expansion would lead to a consensus on cross-
border issues, ensure application of recommendations
agreed upon, and facilitate international assistance that
will be required.

In the preparatory process, we would note that
assessment of the implementation of previous political
agreements and their harmonization at the national
level and by sector, would contribute to normalizing
inter- and intra-State relations. In that perspective, the
adoption of a regional programme for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former irregular
forces should take priority. This indeed is the essential
precondition for restoring peace and security, which in
turn is needed for any policy of sustainable growth and
poverty reduction. Moreover, despite the vulnerability
of the security sector, far-reaching reforms are needed
and call for the cooperation of all actors.

If indeed security, especially a structured
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme, would contribute to largely reducing
poverty, nonetheless we should note that certain non-
trivial obstacles remain at the core of the concerns of
post-conflict situation countries, prominent amongst
which we would note the fear that restructuring and
reducing the size of armed forces might in turn affect
national security, the difficulty of proceeding with
DDR with armed groups outside the borders, the near
absence of opportunities for economic reintegration
within latent conflict situations, and the reluctance of
donors to provide funds for an unstructured regional
programme.

My delegation hopes that the preparatory process,
as noted in the report of the Secretary-General, will be
examined carefully in depth by all parties concerned at
the national and regional levels. For example, it might
lead to the conclusion of a regional stability pact and
provide a complete framework in several areas:
security, social and economic and humanitarian.

My country gives its full support to the
endeavours of countries of the Great Lakes and Central
African regions, and the sustained efforts of the
African Union and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, to bring about
the success of this conference. We urge bilateral and
multilateral donors, the entire United Nations system,
non-governmental organizations and other development
partners to strive together and make every effort to
make this event everything its initiators hope it will be
in response to the expectations of the peoples of the
region.

I cannot conclude without reaffirming that
conflict prevention and peace-building in the Great
Lakes region are the underlying bases of a
comprehensive regional approach to the establishment
of a secure environment, the promotion of socio-
economic well-being and the effective participation of
the Governments of the region in our common
endeavours.

