Mr. Diarra (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, and all other members of the
Security Council who have spoken of my country.

I noted that there were 13 speakers; the problem
of Cote d'Ivoire is clearly of concern to the
international community. I would like to say that, as
consensus Prime Minister, I was appointed by
President Gbagbo following consultations with all of
the political forces of Cote d'Ivoire. I am not a
politician. I am a former ambassador who now, in his
retirement, is thrust into the limelight. I am trying to
bring together the people of Cote d'Ivoire and
encourage them to work for development - in
particular in combating poverty.

I am working with a view to ensuring good
governance, the rule of law, human rights and the
restoration of State authority. We need to move forward
in that direction together, and everyone must respect
the rules of the game that have been established.

Since my appointment as Prime Minister, it has
been my concern to present a Government
programme- the Marcoussis programme - that is
also the programme of all the political forces of Cote
d'Ivoire. That is what I am talking about - this is not
the Prime Minister's programme; it is the programme
of the political forces who signed the agreement. The
parliament has taken due note of that programme, and
we have set to work to apply that programme up to
2005, trying to identify the decrees, laws, bills and
regulatory texts that will determine Government action
week by week until 2005. Our entire programme is
well organized chronologically, and the first bill will be
before through the parliament on 6 August.

That draft law was debated in the Council of
Ministers, and all the ministers from the various parties
accepted it as it was. The President of the Republic has
accepted it. There is now a separation of powers, and
that bill will come to the parliament. We expect it to be
adopted, because it will provide a platform for the
peaceful coexistence that is now beginning. It would be
no use starting off by leaving aside some of the people,
who would then feel that they were excluded from the
management of the country. I believe that, with the
adoption of that bill, a new, decisive stage in the future
of Cote d'Ivoire will undoubtedly begin.

Council members asked a number of questions.
With regard to the appointment of the ministers for
defence and for security, the Council is aware that,
following the Accra II Agreement, a 15-member
national security council was established, presided over
by the President. I am a member, as are the political
parties signatories to the Agreement. From the
beginning, I did not want to be involved in the
appointment of the ministers for defence and for
security. I sought to deal with that issue by making two
temporary appointments, and I am working with those
individuals. I left the President and the political parties
to continue their consultations. Last week, before
leaving Abidjan to come to New York, the President,
with whom I met, asked me to deal primarily with the
appointment of those two individuals. I also met with
several political figures who asked me to take various
initiatives in that regard, and upon my return I will be
making a number of proposals to the President and the
national security council, which is empowered to make
the appointments. I think that these two weeks of
intensive consultations will help to take a number of
initiatives. That is what I wanted to say to reassure the
Council about the appointment of those two
individuals.

I believe that much progress has been made with
regard to the end of the division of the country into
northern, southern and western areas. The regular
defence forces, as well as the Forces nouvelles, have
agreed that the war is over. We have already sent
missions to the north and the west of Cote d'Ivoire. I
can tell you now that the west has been completely
pacified by the Operation Licorne forces and those of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We can now say that there are no more
weapons in those areas and that we can move about
safely.

We are seeking above all to bring the population
back to those areas to resume their normal activities. In
the north of Cote d'Ivoire the situation is still normal.
In general, the population stayed in place, although
some people were displaced. But in the west, because
of the proximity to Liberia, the people had to flee the
carnage. That area has now been pacified. Upon my
return in August, I propose to undertake a three-week
programme of travel throughout those areas, with the
various forces involved in cote d'Ivoire, so as to
reassure the population and enable them to return to
work.

I truly believe that once we have begun the first
important stage of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme - the regrouping - we
will be able to say that Cote d'Ivoire has been pacified
and made secure, and officials will be able to return to
their tasks and duties in those northern and western
areas. It should also be pointed out that last week,
when I was in Brussels, the President met with the
prefects and sub-prefects and asked them to return to
their posts. However, everything has been destroyed.
There are no more services for the prefects, and no
buildings for the sub-prefects - at least in the west
and north. The administrative structure will have to be
completely rebuilt. That was the purpose of my
meeting with the European Commission in Brussels, as
well as with the Belgian authorities, which are
providing financial support to help us to set up the
administration. We have prefects who have been well
trained; we have teachers; we have doctors. Everyone
is in place; we need only the resources with which to
get down to work. With regard to the prefects, we also
need mobility. Before leaving Cote d'Ivoire, I placed
an order for vehicles so as to enable those high-level
people within the administration to carry out their
tasks.

By the end of September, therefore, we will have
succeeded in putting the prefectures in place, as well as
the teachers and doctors, so that, by the beginning of
the school year in October, children will be able to
return to school and resume their studies. I believe that
all of that has been well planned.

The beginning of the school year has been set for
October in all parts of Cote d'Ivoire. We have obtained
assistance from the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and a number of
non-governmental organizations to help the children
from conflict zones who were unable to take
examinations to catch up so that they will not be
penalized by a war for which they were not
responsible.

That is what I wanted to say with regard to the
appointments, the partition of the country and the
regrouping and cantonment. The regrouping is
important because I think that it enables us to bring
about complete security throughout the territory. The
soldiers will return to their quarters, the forces that
were in the north will return to their regrouping areas.
That will enable us to control all the thoroughfares and
prevent armed attacks. Even when war is over, and
even in Government-controlled areas, a soldier
wandering about can be dangerous. The imperatives of
security therefore require us to regroup them in such a
way as to promote peace so that people and goods can
move from Cote d'Ivoire as far as Burkina Faso, Mali
and Niger. This is being done at the moment through
the economic corridor that has been put in place and
that is functioning very well.

The Ambassador of Germany asked about my
assessment of the situation in Liberia. We have a long
border with Liberia. For years now it has been a
turbulent area. We have succeeded thus far in keeping
the problem under control and in preventing the war
from spilling over into Cote d'Ivoire. Events, however,
have been such that we have had to deal with fronts in
the north and the west - a great deal for an army that
was not ready to wage war.

Thanks to the forces of France, the Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Forces armees
nationales de cote d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles,
we are today together exercising control over the
western border. We are doing so while embracing
humanitarian issues, that is to say, by welcoming those
who are seeking refuge in Cote d'Ivoire. Again, I think
we have attempted to attach importance to the
humanitarian aspect. We have for years even welcomed
many non-Ivorian adults to Ivorian schools, many of
whom have been employed in Cote d'Ivoire or joined
its public service. However, what we are saying is that
we do not want people to cross the border with
weapons. In that regard, I believe the Government has
given orders to prevent anyone entering the country
with weapons. I also believe that it was our duty to do
so in order to reassure the people of cote d'Ivoire.

We have to believe that the situation in Liberia
will be resolved through the contacts that the Council
has. That problem can only be resolved in the
subregional context, and with the support of the
international community. We in C6te d'Ivoire do not
have the capacity to address it ourselves. ECOWAS
countries, working with Ghana's President Kufuor,
have certainly taken steps in that regard, but they too
need financial and political support from the Security
Council and States with interests in Liberia. We still
believe that without that we will remain vulnerable to
the situation in that country. We are making efforts.
Much progress has been made. But that is not all there
is to it. There must necessarily be involvement on the
part of the international community, especially from
States with interests in Liberia. ECOWAS forces are
ready to deploy, but logistical and financial problems
remain. Everyone knows that this is a very expensive
undertaking. I therefore call upon the international
community and the Member States of the Organization
to quickly bring the Liberian war, which is disrupting
the entire subregion, to an end. That is what I wanted
to say with respect to the overall situation.

Let me also say that the goal of the Government's
programme is the holding of fair, transparent and open
elections by 2005. We therefore make an additional
appeal to take the necessary steps to ensure that the
elections take place under normal conditions. We have
in place in C6te d'Ivoire what we refer to as the
national electoral commission, which is an independent
body comprised of all political parties. That provides
one guarantee. But we will also strengthen the role of
the independent commission in order to avoid any sort
of exclusion, so that once the elections are held we will
be able to say that there is stability in the country, that
there is a future for it and that everyone in Cote
d'Ivoire is able to express himself.

I must also add that, like some other countries,
Cote d'Ivoire is also a melting pot - a special country.
Regardless of who wins the election, we must ensure
that we involve the non-winning minorities. That too
will ensure the country's stability. In the end, the
people of C6te d'Ivoire - the body politic - has
always wanted to take part in the running of the
country. Democracy cannot prosper unless those who
lose the election are included in the running of the
country to some degree. I believe that the body politic
should gradually be formed in that manner, so as to
bring about unity, stability and inclusiveness. That is
the most important thing: to avoid exclusion in our
country.

That is what I wanted to say to the Council. Let
me say how much my delegation appreciates this
morning's meeting. It is very important to us that 13
out of the 15 members of the Council - I believe that
number is correct - have spoken. I want in particular
to thank the Security Council for having sent a mission
to Cote d'Ivoire. I also want to thank everyone who has
participated in settling the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire. We
wish to demonstrate to the international community
that we will emerge from the crisis quickly and that we
will return to, and improve upon, the level we had
reached in the past. We have the ability, manpower and
land to do so, including those who have chosen to live
with us. That too is our goal. Reconciliation in Cote
d'Ivoire will take place not only among Ivorians; it will
also include all of our neighbours and the entire
international community.

