Mr. Moreno Charme (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to thank Lithuania for having
taken the initiative of convening this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The rule of law is the basic guarantee of very
society, protecting the right of each citizen to exercise
his or her rights responsibly. In addition, it is a limit to
arbitrariness, both in relations between the State and
individuals as well as in relations among States.

Multilateral action in this area in linked to the duty
to cooperate. That is why Chile has contributed to all
United Nations efforts to achieve universal acceptance
of the rule of law, which is a topic of legitimate
interest to the international community. That was the
meaning of the commitments of the Heads of State and
Government made in 2005 and the 2012 Declaration of
the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
(General Assembly resolution 67/1).

Chile is convinced that the rule of law should be at
the centre of the post-2015 development agenda.

The rule of law, human rights and democracy
are fundamental United Nations values that are
mutually reinforcing and form an indivisible whole.
Internationally, the rule of law is founded on the
Charter of the United Nations, as demonstrated by the
fact that by virtue of its Article 103, the Charter takes
precedence over other agreements of Member States.

The linkage between the rule of law and the
maintenance of international peace and security
is today indisputable. That is evident from the
increasingly important role of the rule of law in the
multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping missions
and operations, designed to facilitate the creation
or reconstruction of the public institutions of a State
emerging from conflict, particularly in the areas of
justice, policing and the prison system and, of course,
support for constitutional and legislative reforms.

This issue arises regularly in the Security Council,
be it in the framing of mandates, at the stage of practical
implementation or at the stage of lessons learned.
However, the ultimate goal is usually the same: to help
to create the conditions for sustainable peace in order to
prevent the country from reverting to a state of conflict.

Here the United Nations plays a role of facilitation
and accompaniment rather than that of a stand-in for
the parties. In addition, mandates with rule-of-law
elements must adopt a comprehensive and systematic
approach. In that connection, I should like to share
some brief thoughts with the Council.

First, mandates must respect the principle of
national ownership. In other words, States and their
societies must lead their own peacebuilding processes,
with the assistance of the international community and
of the United Nations. Accordingly, mandates must
respond to local needs. It is the local situation that must
determine the content of the mandate, rather than vice
versa. There is no one size fits all in this connection.
Mandates must be clear and precise not only with respect
to the goals sought but also to means of attaining them
and obtaining the resources to do so.

One particularly important aspect is the
strengthening of the judicial system, especially in
societies that are going to apply transitional justice in
the post-conflict period. Chile also emphasizes here the
importance of reparations for the victims of violence
and violations and abuses of human rights. Reparations
promote the healing process and the reconciliation of
society.

Mandates must also facilitate accountability,
either before national courts or before the International
Criminal Court, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity, The Security Council must
actively follow up the cases examined and refer to the
International Criminal Court cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Chile believes
that this is an effective way of helping to end impunity
for such atrocities.

Similarly, where appropriate, programmes should
include the concept of the responsibility to protect in its
preventive aspect, in other words, in its first and second
pillars. Mandates on the rule of law must address the
gender issues that arise and ensure adequate legal
protection for children in armed conflict. It is also
important to consider greater involvement on the part
of regional organizations in this exercise, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The physical
proximity of such organizations to the countries in
question and the community of cultural, historical and
political ties give these bodies considerable legitimacy
as an instrument. The goal is thus to incorporate the
regional dimension of the rule of law and to make the
most of obvious comparative advantages.

The United Nations system as a whole should involve
itself in those processes in a coordinated and coherent
manner, avoiding potential duplications. We welcome
the progress made here regarding coordination.

Lastly, we would simply like to add that we
appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General to
mainstream the rule-of-law perspective in the work of
the United Nations, and we encourage the Organization
to continue working to establish indicators and to
measure the progress made as regards the rule of law.
Probably the greatest practical challenge facing us
today is the need to develop the ability to evaluate the
rule of law as incorporated in mandates.

