Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Iwould like to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Council for taking the initiative to
convene this debate, as well as for the special emphasis
placed on the question of strengthening multilateralism
and the role of the United Nations in maintaining
international peace and security in the face of the
emergence of new challenges and threats. We are also
grateful for the briefings by the Secretary-General;
Ambassador Al-Thani on behalf of the President of the
General Assembly; Ms. Inga Rhonda King, President of
the Economic and Social Council; and the President of
the International Court of Justice.

Argentina firmly believes in the value of
multilateralism and the fundamental role that the
United Nations can and should play in the maintenance
of international peace and security in order to generate
and maintain a stable and inclusive global order based
on the pillars of peace, sustainable development and
human rights. The global order we aspire to build begins
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, which gave rise to the Organization
more than 70 years ago and are now more applicable
than ever before.

Protecting the rules-based international order was
and is a shared responsibility, and the maintenance
of international peace and security is increasingly
threatened by serious new challenges such as organized
crime, cybercrime and terrorism, which require
effective and efficient responses based on dialogue,
consensus, cooperation and multilateralism, which
no individual State in the international community
is able to provide on its own. In that regard, today
more than ever the role of leadership is fundamental
to protecting and maintaining the international order
that we have been able to build over the past decades,
in order to achieve peaceful, inclusive, equitable and
sustainable societies.

One pillar of multilateralism in the international
order is conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. In that regard, the support of the United
Nations in seeking peaceful solutions, in accordance
with international law and the parameters established
by the Organization, represents a valuable contribution
to a more just world. In that context, we emphasize the
power of the General Assembly, the most democratic
and representative organ of the United Nations, to make
recommendations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, including by granting a mandate to
the Secretary-General to mediate or exercise his good
offices with the parties to any dispute.

In that regard, my country deems it relevant to
stress that the ability of any mediation effort, mission
of good offices or other means of peaceful settlement to
achieve its goal and purpose depends on compliance in
good faith with the obligations incumbent on the parties
to those procedures. When called on to negotiate by
the organs of the United Nations, the parties involved
must do so in good faith, refraining from acts that could
hinder their obligation to settle the dispute by peaceful
means. Likewise, States that are not parties to a dispute
must contribute to its peaceful resolution and abstain
from any conduct that could frustrate the settlement
of the dispute. All of that is also part of a genuine
commitment to multilateralism.

Likewise, we would like to highlight the value
of regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The development of
multilateralism at the regional level has also proven
to be highly effective in the prevention and peaceful
resolution of conflicts.

In the framework of the Charter, the International
Court of Justice plays a central role as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. In that regard,
at the international level the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court is one of the most
significant achievements of multilateralism and plays a
central role in the fight against impunity. Consequently,
it constitutes an essential element of the rule of law at
the international level, and we therefore advocate for
its universality, reaffirming the prevalence of law and
justice over force in international relations.

Similarly, Argentina commends the efforts of the
Organization to develop capacities and provide support
to Member States in order to strengthen multilateralism
based on the rule of law. My country values the use
of South-South cooperation as an effective and
efficient tool for capacity-building and the exchange
of experiences acquired in the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the promotion of justice.

Finally, we believe that the implementation of the
shared responsibility to strengthen multilateralism
should include the reform of the Security Council in
order to make it more democratic, representative,
transparent and effective, which would undoubtedly
contribute to the strengthening of the multilateral
system and the role of the Organization in the
maintenance of international peace and security. To
that end, we believe that we must redouble our efforts
to reach a solution based on consensus with the highest
possible degree of political support.

