Mr. Kolby (Norway): I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
and to assure you of my delegation's full support. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Tafrov and his
staff for the excellent presidency last month.

Let me seize the opportunity to thank
Ambassador Greenstock for his excellent leadership of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the remarkable
achievements so far. Equally, I thank his staff, the
Secretariat and the team of Committee experts. The
tasks they perform greatly facilitate the effective and
uniform implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
the Member States.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has now been
in operation for a year and is embarking on its fifth 90-
day work programme. The Committee has received and
managed to review an impressive number of
implementation reports submitted by Member States.

However, while being mindful that there remains
more to do before global standards against terrorism
are uniform and fully implemented, we should not
underestimate the significance of what has been
achieved up to now. Information obtained so far
suggests that terrorist groups are already finding it
increasingly difficult to receive funding through
international channels.

Indeed, the Committee's emphasis on
cooperation, dialogue, partnership and transparency
seems to have paid dividends, as has the strategy of
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations on promulgating best
practices, seeking synergies of approach and the
provision of assistance to Member States requiring
technical support.

The legitimacy of and global adherence to the
Committee's work is clearly demonstrated by the
number of reports submitted to it. We look forward to
reports by all Member States.

Dialogue and partnership is required in order to
attain a broad follow-up of resolution 1373 (2001).
States must put in place national legislation that covers
all aspects of the resolution and the appropriate
executive instruments to go with it. This is no small
task.

International terrorism can be defeated only
through a sustained and comprehensive approach that
involves the active participation and collaboration of
all Member States. International terrorism is a global
threat. No State alone can protect itself from terrorism.

Almost a year ago to the day, Norway adopted a
provisional ordinance containing the necessary
provisions to implement Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). On 28 June 2002, a new bill entered into
force in Norway that establishes effective and
permanent legislative measures against acts of
terrorism and the financing of terrorism. Other
Norwegian legislation has been reviewed to ensure that
the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) are fully
met.

The new legislation also fulfils the relevant
requirements of the 9 December 1999 International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Norway ratified the Convention on 15 July
this year. We have thereby joined the group of States
that have ratified all 12 international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism.

We are mindful of the technical difficulties that
some Member States may have in implementing the
legal and financial measures envisaged in resolution
1373 (2001). This situation raises concerns that we
must seek to reduce through positive and coordinated
action. Our chain will not hold if it has weak links. It is
essential that all Member States implement the same
measures and observe the same standards. The
establishment of the CTC has added extraordinary
value to the universal implementation of the legal
obligations of United Nations Member States in the
fight against terrorism. We appreciate the efforts of the
Committee to assist States in strengthening their
capacity to fight terrorism by implementing resolution
1373 (2001).

Norway will act in support of the CTC and offer
suitable programmes to assist States lacking capacity to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) and to report to the
Committee. We have submitted information to the CTC
about available Norwegian experts in relevant fields
and we are ready, within our resources, to assist
countries that have requested help in their efforts to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). We are currently
looking into how that commitment can be transformed
into concrete assistance to States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001).

Norway attaches priority to cooperation with
African countries in combating terrorism. We support
the African Union's work towards effective and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by its Member States. Similarly, we are
supporting a project aimed at strengthening the
capacity of countries in the Southern African
Development Community region to follow up the
specific measures of this resolution.

International terrorism is a threat to international
peace and security. It undermines global stability and
prosperity, threatens social and economic development
and endangers and violates basic human security.
Terrorism is, not least, a threat against human rights.
There is no contradiction between the measures set
forth in resolution 1373 (2001), on the one hand, and
the protection of human rights, on the other. We
wholeheartedly support the CTC's determination to
remain in close contact with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello. The
effective implementation of anti-terrorist measures at
the national level should not be perceived by anyone as
an excuse to disallow fundamental rights and freedoms.
Upholding and reinforcing the rule of law must stand
out as a centrepiece of our strategy to combat
terrorism.

