Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Sometimes we hear that, given the numerous
other crises, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has lost
its significance in the context of efforts to maintain
international peace and security. We categorically
disagree with that point of view. Efforts aimed at
solving the Palestinian-Israeli issue should be bolstered.
We believe that the primary task today is to create
conditions conducive to the revival of the negotiations.

The situation on the ground remains tense and
fraught with new spates of violence. Since October
2015, there have been more than 200 Palestinian
victims and more than 30 Israeli victims of the
confrontations. Against that worrisome backdrop, the
Israeli Government has continued its policy of faits
accomplis, building settlements, confiscating land,
demolishing Palestinian homes and jeopardizing the
two-State solution.

In that context, it is more important than ever that
the international community send a clear message
to prevent the unleashing of new spirals of violence
and to underscore the need for a swift resumption
of the negotiations. The leading role in guiding the
situation back to the political-diplomatic front should
be played by the international mediators of the Middle
East Quartet.

The ministerial meetings of the Quartet held in
Vienna in October 2015 and in Munich in February
2016, which were convened upon Russia's initiative,
were aimed at bringing the parties back to constructive
actions so as to normalize the situation and make
progress in the achievement of sustainable and
mutually acceptable agreements based on well-known
international law. We hope that the upcoming report
of the Quartet will provide an objective analysis of the
situation on the ground and recommendations to the
parties. We also hope that it will help to defuse tensions
and provide a political horizon for a settlement.

Neither can we forget about Gaza. The humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip remains exceedingly difficult,
and at any time it could slide into another dangerous
crisis. If progress cannot be achieved in resolving the
problems in the Gaza Strip, overcoming the embargo
and rebuilding the infrastructure destroyed by Israel in
the summer of 2014, repeat clashes cannot be ruled out.
The issue of achieving Palestinian unity is
particularly important in reviving the peace process.
We welcome the meetings among representatives of
Fatah and Hamas held in Doha and Cairo in February
and March to discuss the formation of a Government
of national unity and the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections. Despite the difficulties
in the negotiations between Fatah and Hamas, we
continue to lend our assistance in overcoming the
inter-Palestinian split.

We appreciate the efforts of all members of
the international community aimed at achieving
a comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. However, such steps and
initiatives must be clearly calibrated and aimed at
specific results. The primary criterion for assessing the
usefulness of such efforts to restart the negotiations is a
clear understanding of their added value.

We share the deep discomfort of most members
of the Security Council with regard to the Council's
inaction in our efforts to settle the crisis between Israel
and Palestine. Indeed, the most recent Security Council
document on that issue was presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/14, adopted upon Russia's initiative in
2009. In 2011, there was a veto by the United States on
the draft resolution contained in document S/2011/24,
on the issue of settlements, and, in 2014, there was
an abstention - or hidden veto - on the draft
resolution contained in document S/2014/916. On the
latter occasion, there were two votes against and five
abstentions, but essentially what happened was that
everything was done to block the draft resolution and
to not allow the Security Council's view on that topic to
be heard. In each ofthose cases, the Russian Federation
voted in favour. Of course, that is not a very impressive
result in the Council's work. The Council must do
more, including to implement Russia's initiative on the
organization of a Security Council visit to the Middle
East.

With regard to Syria, we believe it is necessary to
use the cessation of hostilities in the country and the
inter-Syrian dialogue in Geneva under United Nations
auspices to reach a lasting political settlement. In that
context, we are pleased with the launching of a second
round of talks, mediated by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
We will continue to provide assistance to the Syrian
armed forces in countering international armed
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We attach great
importance to the activities of the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) task forces on the ceasefire and
humanitarian access.

We believe the statement delivered today on this
matter by the representative of the United States was
unbalanced, unobjective and counterproductive.

We believe that success can be achieved through
an ongoing and productive inter-Syrian dialogue,
in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva
communique of2012 (S/2012/522, annex), the decisions
of the ISSG and resolution 2254 (2015). All sectors of
Syrian society who have not dirtied their hands with
terrorist activities, including Kurds, should participate
in the dialogue. We once again underscore the need for
the delegation of the opposition in Geneva to be truly
representative and not to base its participation in the
negotiations on preconditions. We believe that there
should be a comprehensive, objective and de-politicized
approach to humanitarian issues. That is the only way
they can be solved in an effective and lasting manner.

We call for the establishment of a comprehensive
ceasefire in Yemen among all the parties to the conflict.
We think that the new round of negotiations should begin
without unjustified delays. We consider it important
to ensure unhindered humanitarian access and to lift
embargoes of any type. The swift normalization of the
situation with regard to entry points for commercial
cargo, first and foremost carrying food, water and
medicine, will significantly alleviate the suffering of
the Yemeni people.

The situation in Libya remains complex and
uncertain. Efforts to restore unity, based on the Skhirat
political agreement, are moving too slowly. That is
no surprise, recalling that foreign intervention clearly
dealt a hard blow to Libya's statehood. Meanwhile,
terrorists are expanding into strategically important
regions of the country, and the socioeconomic
and humanitarian problems are becoming worse.
Nonetheless, the solution can only be Libyan-led. That
requires the continuation of the patient work carried
out under the auspices of the United Nations to garner
the participation in the dialogue of all influential forces
from all regions of the country. That is why we were
puzzled by the recent decision of the European Union to
include on its sanctions list some key participants in the
political process. That approach could further entrench
inter-Libyan antagonisms.

In order to effectively assist Libyans, including in
countering the burgeoning threat of terrorism, there
is a need for due coordination of initiatives with the
full participation of regional players. However, some
information suggests that certain international partners
might have a hidden agenda in Libya. There is a need
to help, but only within the framework of international
law, so that in the years to come we do not have to regret
the mistakes made.

The difficult situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, political and military turbulence, deep social
and economic strains, as well as the widening sphere of
influence of terrorist groups and worsening standards
of living for the masses, require calibrated collective
work to be carried out in order to stabilize the region.
The Security Council should play the most important
role in those efforts.

