Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Malaysia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and I align
Egypt's statement with that delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation. We take note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/409) and commend
Ms. Leila Zerrougui for a job well done in preparing
the report. We also congratulate Chad on having been
delisted from the 2014 report and on its full compliance
with its action plan. We call on the parties currently on
the list to exert greater efforts to ensure their delisting
from the coming report.
The Security Council's resolutions provide the
United Nations and the international community with
tools for effectively addressing the six grave violations
against children in armed conflict, starting with the
Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict and ending with the creation of the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Despite the pivotal role those tools
play in protecting children in armed conflict and ending
the impunity of perpetrators, there are some persistent
challenges to their achievement of their full potential
in that task.

This year's report succeeded in enlightening us
with regard to the heinous violations committed against
children all over the world, including those committed
in Syria, Iraq and Africa by terrorist groups such as
Daesh, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Boko Haram. Regrettably, however, it failed to make its
annexes fully reflective of the facts stated in the report.
According to the mandate given to the Secretary-
General, any party that commits one or more of the
six violations against children should be listed in the
annexes to the report. The aim of that listing is to start
a dialogue with the listed parties on the development of
concrete, time-bound action plans to halt and prevent
violations against children.

According to the report, Israel is believed to have
been involved in three of the six grave violations by
killing Palestinian children, targeting schools and
hospitals, and denying humanitarian access to the
Palestinian people. However, Israel was not listed in
the annexes to the report. According to another report
(S/2014/650) of the Secretary-General, on the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine, at least 2,104
Palestinians have reportedly been killed, including
at least 495 children. In that context, we are against
preferential treatment being granted to any party,
since that would constitute an apparent case of double
standards. In that regard, Egypt calls on the Secretariat
to rectify that deficiency in the next report.

This year, as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1612 (2005) and the first anniversary of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, we should fulfil
our commitments to protecting innocent children in
armed conflicts and refrain from any action that could
exacerbate their suffering.

