The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by the lead of the Security Council mission to
Ethiopia, namely, Ethiopia.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Ethiopia.

It gives me great pleasure to brief the Security
Council on the successful conduct of its mission to
the African Union (AU), which took place from 5 to
9 September in Addis Ababa. Allow me to take this
opportunity to extend my thanks to Under-Secretary-
General Haile Menkerios, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the African Union, and the
Secretariat for their full support and assistance during
the preparation and holding of the Council's visit to
Addis Ababa.

As stated in the terms of reference of the mission,
the purpose of the Council's visit to Addis Ababa was
to strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
in the areas of peace and security. It was undertaken
within the framework of cooperation between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

During the delegation's stay in Addis Ababa,
members of the Security Council held discussions with
the AU Peace and Security Council for the eleventh
joint annual consultative meeting, which took place on
8 September. The consultative meeting was preceded
by an informal meeting between the two Councils,
which took place on 7 September. Both meetings
were co-chaired by the Chairperson of the African
Union Peace and Security Council and Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the African Union,
and myself.

Both Councils had lead members to introduce each
topic or respond to introductions made by a designated
member of the other Council. Both the informal meeting
and the eleventh joint consultative meeting provided an
opportunity for the two Councils to exchange views on
matters related to peace and security in Africa. The
meetings were conducted in a frank manner, while the
discussion was also substantive and very enriching. I
believe that I reflect the sentiments of Council members
who took part in the mission when I say that we found
the meetings to be very useful and that they enabled us
to better understand the positions of the African Union
on some of the issues that are of great importance to the
work of the Security Council.

During the informal meeting, the two Councils
held discussions on three thematic issues: partnership
between the United Nations and the AU, funding for
African peace and security activities, and post-conflict
peacebuilding. The informal meeting was found to be
very meaningful to both sides, as it provided them with
an opportunity to hear the views of the other side on
some of the issues on which there are diverging views,
such as on the issue ofthe funding of AU peace-support
operations. Here, one noted the deep disappointment of
the African side - justified or not - with respect to
what, in its view, has been a huge deficit in burden-
sharing, the effect of which has been to give short shrift
to the sacrifices made by the African side. That was
also stressed in a notably passionate manner by the AU
Commissioner for Peace and Security.

During the eleventh joint consultative meeting, the
two Councils exchanged views covering three country-
specific and regional issues: the situations in Somalia,
South Sudan and the Lake Chad basin. The discussion
demonstrated that there are many points of convergence
between the two Councils, especially on most aspects
of the situation in South Sudan and some of the issues
concerning Somalia and the Lake Chad basin.

On South Sudan, both Councils expressed their
concern on the continued violence and suffering of
the South Sudanese people; urged the parties to the
conflict to respect the ceasefire and implement the
2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan; commended the leading
role played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in helping to stabilize the
country; expressed support, including for the latest
IGAD initiative to revitalize the 2015 peace Agreement;
underlined that there is no military solution to the
problems in South Sudan; and urged the parties to
commit to peaceful dialogue, while also calling for the
urgent deployment of the Regional Protection Force.
On the Lake Chad basin, the two Councils stressed
the need to address the underlying cause of the conflict
in the subregion, including challenges resulting from
climate change, underdevelopment and unemployment,
among others; recognized the regional dimension of
the security threats and their cross-cutting nature,
and called for an integrated approach; commended the
crucial role being played by the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the resulting progress achieved thus far
in fighting Boko Haram.

On Somalia, both Councils recognized the key
role played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in degrading the capabilities ofAl-Shabaab;
underlined the importance of supporting the capacities
of the Somali National Army so that it can take over
from AMISOM; and called for concerted efforts among
the United Nations, the AU and subregional countries
to help address the fragile situation and bring last
solutions to Somalia.

The meeting that members of the Security Council
held with the Prime Minister ofEthiopia, His Excellency
Mr. Hailemariam Dessalegn, and senior officials of the
African Union Commission was also extremely useful.
The Prime Minister briefed Council members on the
latest developments in the peace and security issues in
the Horn of Africa, and an exchange of views was held
on situations including Somalia and South Sudan.

Finally, I should like to raise a point about the
outcome of the joint consultative meeting. Last year,
it took the two Councils one year to agree and adopt
a joint communique. We had originally hoped that we
would be able to avoid such an unnecessary delay this
year. Although negotiations were undertaken among
the experts of the two Councils, there are some pending
issues in the draft joint communique that are subject
to further negotiation, and it is my hope that it will be
finalized as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

On behalf of the Council, I should like to express
appreciation to all of the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the
mission for the manner in which they discharged their
important responsibilities.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
