Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany has always been
supportive of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and its troop contributors. We commend
the Mission, which operates under very difficult
circumstances and has sacrificed and achieved a lot. It
is the determination and commitment of these African
Union forces that have improved the security situation
on the ground in the past months. We will continue to
provide support to AMISOM. in the framework of the
United Nations, the European Union and bilaterally.
Furthermore, my country actively engages in the
European Union training mission for Somali security
forces and international efforts to combat piracy off
Somalia's coast.

Resolution 2036 (2012) recognizes the support
provided to Somalia by bilateral partners and regional
organizations. I would like to recall once more the
substantial contributions made by the European Union,
currently and in the past, and I call on all States
members of the United Nations and regional
organizations, and especially those that have not
contributed so far, to join in these efforts. In adopting
resolution 2036 (2012) on the eve of the important
London conference, the Council has shown its
commitment to and ongoing support for AMISOM. and
the Somali people. The members of the Council are
willing to seize the opportunity on the ground and to
enhance their support for the African Union in a
considerable manner.

As has been said before, all international efforts
will fail if the Somalis themselves fail to reconcile, to
move towards better governance, and to build new
Somali institutions that provide for peaceful and decent
lives for the Somali people. Therefore, in resolution
2036 (2012) we urgently call on the Somali actors to
comply with the road map and to speed up its
implementation. We call for the speedy establishment
of Somali security forces and administrative structures,
especially in those areas that have been secured by
AMISOM. Finally, we recall that action must be taken
against the spoilers of the peace process.
12-23786

For Germany, the ultimate goal of all efforts
remains a united and functioning Somali State.
AMISOM. cannot continue indefinitely. The current
situation calls for the establishment of security and of a
responsible and representative Somali Government that
promotes the political process and the delivery of basic
services to Somali citizens.

All of this requires a solid framework. The
adoption of a new, legitimate constitution would be a
very important step in this direction. Only such steps,
implemented by responsible Somali actors, can lay the
basis for a State in which AMISOM. would be able to
leave after having successfully fulfilled its tasks.

