The President: I thank the representative of the
League of Arab States for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Amadou
Kebe, Permanent Observer of the Organization of African
Unity to the United Nations, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Mr. Kebe (Organization of African Unity)
(interpretation from French): The Organization of African
Unity, which I represent, is very honoured to see you, Sir,
presiding over this very important meeting of the Security
Council. I wish also to express respect for the victims of
Pan Am flight 103 and, on behalf of the organization I
represent, compassion for their families, who are here
with us in this Chamber. Their sorrow, which has lasted
too long, means that all the parties concerned must make
the necessary concessions so that all light can finally be
shed on this tragic case.

When the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity held its
thirty-third session in Harare, Zimbabwe, last June, it
considered the dispute between the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the United States of America and the
United Kingdom. The Conference declared:

"We take note of the fact that the Libyan
Government has accepted the initiative of the
League of Arab States, supported by the OAU, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference,
recommending a just and fair trial of the two Libyan
suspects by Scottish judges and in accordance with
Scottish law, at the headquarters of the International
Court of Justice. We remain convinced that this
initiative, if accepted, constitutes a practical solution
and should guarantee a just and fair judgment
whereby all the interests of the concerned parties
would be considered."

The dispute between Libya and the United States
and the United Kingdom is a constant concern for the
Organization of African Unity, in particular because of
the time that has been devoted to it and the painful state
of waiting in which the families of the victims of Pan Am
flight 103 find themselves, as well as the suffering the
sanctions have caused and continue to cause to the Libyan
people.

This dispute between Libya and two permanent
members of the Security Council falls under Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations, which states:

"The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful
means of their own choice.

 

"The Security Council shall, when it deems
necessary, call upon the parties to settle their disputes
by such means."

The Organization of African Unity (OAU), which has
always been and remains firm in its condemnation of
terrorism and all acts of terrorism, is profoundly convinced
that a rapid and just settlement of this dispute in accordance
with international law will make it possible for to bring
about the justice to which we aspire.

The consistency of the OAU in this matter is rooted in
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
current Chairman of the OAU, His Excellency Mr. Robert
Mugabe, President of Zimbabwe, and the Secretary-General
of the OAU, His Excellency Salim Ahmed Salim, have
emphasized in this very Chamber the urgent need to find a
settlement to this dispute.

In his address of 25 September, 1997, President
Mugabe called for Security Council action to resolve the
dispute. He said:

"I would be remiss were I not to raise another
matter of concern to the African continent that
requires the attention of the Council and that was
debated at the last summit meeting of the Organization
of African Unity, namely, the need to find a solution
to the dispute between Libya, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom over the Lockerbie
tragedy. In addition to the families of those who lost
their lives, many other innocent third persons continue
to suffer as a result of the sanctions imposed on
Libya. Now that Libya has agreed that the two
accused Libyans can be tried under Scottish law, by
Scottish judges but in a third country, or at the
International Court of Justice, we feel that this offer
should receive your serious consideration so that
matters can move forward." [S/PV.3819, p. 4]

In his address, Secretary-General Salim complemented
President Mugabe's appeal by drawing attention to the
distinctive consequences of the sanctions imposed. He said:

"The Organization of African Unity has
consistently expressed its concern over the continued
sanctions imposed on that country, with their
humanitarian consequences on the ordinary people,
and has called for a fair trial of the suspects according
to acceptable requirements of justice and international
law. The Security Council may wish to give serious
consideration to the proposals jointly presented by the
OAU and the League of Arab States aimed at
seeking a just and equitable solution to the crisis."
[ibid., p. 5]

The OAU wants to see a speedy resolution of this
dispute and the immediate lifting of the harsh sanctions
measures imposed against the people of Libya. The three
options that the OAU and the League of Arab States have
submitted to this Council have the support of the Non-
Aligned Group. These three options signal the willingness
and flexibility of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to seek a
peaceful settlement of this dispute. It is therefore up to
the Security Council to choose one of these options.

The first calls for the trial of the two suspects to be
held in a third and neutral country to be determined by
the Security Council. By the second, the Security Council
would decide that the two suspects be tried by Scottish
judges at the International Court of Justice at The Hague,
in accordance with Scottish Law. By the third, the
Security Council would establish a special criminal
tribunal at the seat of the International Court of Justice at
The Hague to try the two suspects.

At a time when some Member States are insisting on
their sovereign right to try at home their nationals charged
with crimes committed in other States, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has in good faith accepted the three options.
At this meeting, it is therefore important that the Security
Council take Libya's flexibility into account.

The Security Council has an almost sacred place in
the Charter of the United Nations. The important
responsibility that it has in the maintenance of
international place and security derives from the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. The Security
Council owes it to the people of Libya, who have
suffered over the past five years, and to the relatives of
victims of Pan Am flight 103, who have long sought
justice, to accept one of the three options before it.

Paragraph 2 of Article 24 of the Charter enjoins the
Council to act

"in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of
the United Nations".

With respect to these purposes and principles, paragraph
3 of Article 2 reminds us that:

"All Members shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that

 

international peace and security, and justice, are not
endangered."

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has responded to this moral
edict by accepting the three options now before the
Council.

It is precisely the element of justice that the OAU, the
League of Arab States and Non-Aligned Group want to see.
Our participation at this meeting underscores the importance
which the OAU attaches to this matter. What we seek from
this Council is action - action that would, first of all,
establish the truth about this dispute and, in the process,
render justice to the relatives of the victims of Pan Am
flight 103 and to the Libyan victims of the sanctions
imposed by this Council.

This Council cannot continue to watch the suffering
and death of people affected by the sanctions. While no
one - certainly not the OAU - can excuse terrorism or
acts of terrorism, no one should condone what has been
happening to the people of Libya since 1992. Those found
guilty of the terrorism that caused the tragedy of Pan Am
flight 103 will have to face the consequences of their
actions. International law demands that justice be done and
this Council must see to it that justice is done for and on
behalf of the relatives of the victims of flight 103 and of
the people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Organization of African Unity for his kind words addressed
to me.

The next speaker is Mr. Mahamadou Abou, Deputy
Permanent Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, to whom the Council has
extended an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

Mr. Abou (Organization of the Islamic Conference)
(interpretation from French): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your outstanding guidance of the
Council's debate. I should like also to pay a well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Dangue Rewaka,
for his many successes during his term of office.

I also welcome Mr. Muntasser, the Secretary of the
General People's Committee for Foreign Liaison and
International Cooperation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

I should also like to express the compassion of the
entire Muslim world for the families of the victims of Pan
Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772.

The dispute between certain countries and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is of abiding concern to the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). Our
organization, pursuant to the principles of its charter with
respect to solidarity among its member States, and to the
United Nations Charter, in particular Article 33 of
Chapter VI - which states, inter alia, that

"The parties to any dispute shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,

conciliation ...[and] judicial settlement"

- remains convinced of the need to arrive speedily at a
solution that will allow the immediate lifting of the
embargo imposed on Libya.

Our Organization is concerned by the suffering and
material and human harm being experienced by the
Libyan and neighbouring peoples because of the sanctions
imposed in implementation of Security Council
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993). The dignity of the
Libyan people has been violated, and they resent the
injustice of this collective punishment, the more so
because no court of law has yet established their guilt in
any form whatsoever. The presumption of innocence,
which is the golden rule of all systems of justice, seems
to me to have been disregarded in this case. Similarly, the
principle of collective punishment - which brings back
grim memories - is not one of the universal principles
of justice.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has shown remarkable
flexibility and a sincere desire for cooperation. It has
adopted a responsible and courageous attitude and has
repeatedly put forward honourable proposals to settle the
issue. The rejection of these proposals is harmful for
international peace and security.

However, the international community is totally
mobilized behind Libya. We have clear proof of this in
the statements of those who have spoken before me in
this Chamber. In addition, to mention just the most recent
instances, we have the final proposal adopted by the Non-
Aligned Ministerial Conference in New Delhi, the
declaration of the thirty-third Summit of the Organization
of African Unity in Harare, the resolution of the Council
of Ministers of the League of Arab States at its one

 

hundred and eighth session and the relevant resolutions and
declarations of the OIC.

This mobilization by the international community,
reinforced by the recent Judgment rendered by the
International Court of Justice, should make this body look
at the question before us today in a radically new way. We
cannot disregard the Court's decisions, the content of which
I shall review briefly.

The Court has stated that it does have jurisdiction in
this case on the basis of article 14, paragraph 1 of the
Montreal Convention. It thus rejects as ill-founded the
objections raised by the other side with regard to the
character of resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993).
Whatever interpretations various people may make of this
Judgment, this is nevertheless a new element that should be
taken into account in the next sanctions review.
This decision by the Court is a moral victory for
Libya. It is legal confirmation of the feeling expressed by
the international community that this matter may and should
be reasonably resolved in the appropriate forums, far from
any media hype. A solution should be found that is in
keeping with international law, a solution that respects the
sovereignty and dignity of Libya and its right to get on
unimpeded with the job of improving the living conditions
of its people. Those conditions are difficult, as is clear from
the Petrovsky report, which highlights the humanitarian
plight of women and children. The report has been
confirmed by the many eyewitness reports from the many
distinguished visitors who constantly visit the country.

Many proposals to ease the population's humanitarian
plight have been put forward by the OIC and other
organizations, but without result. However, the
humanitarian proposals, despite their importance, have been
overtaken and are now inadequate in the light of
developments in the case. Only bold, courageous measures
should be on the agenda now.

Today the new situation created by the Court's
decision and the positions expressed by the various
international forums show that the only action worth taking
to stay within the spirit of the Court's Judgments is
suspension of the air embargo. Such a decision, which
would be both just and humane, could not but strengthen
the credibility of the approach taken by the Security
Council pending a complete lifting of the embargo.

The Secretary-General of the OIC hopes that this
measure will be considered at the next sanctions review.


The President: I thank Mr. Abou for his kind words
addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the United
Kingdom, speaking on behalf of the European Union, on
whom I now call.


