The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2348 (2017) and is pleased
to sponsor this important text. We are grateful to all
involved and will particularly highlight the roles played
by France as penholder and by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.

This is a crucial resolution that has come at a crucial
time for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
political agreement of 31 December 2016 brought hope
to the people of the country for the first-ever peaceful
transition of power. Sadly, that hope is beginning
to fade. We continue to see worrying delays in the
implementation of that agreement - in turning words
into action. We continue to see increasing tensions and
insecurity throughout the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We also continue to see a clear link between the
escalation of local conflicts and national politics. It is
essential therefore that the Council remain focused on
developments in the country during this fragile period
and that it be prepared to respond to developments.

Vulnerable civilians, who have already endured far
too much, continue to bear the brunt of this instability
and uncertainty. The resolution sends a clear message in
response. In particular, we welcome the fact that it does
the following three things. It gives clear priority to the
essential tasks of protecting civilians and supporting
the implementation of the political agreement; it
reaffirms the importance of human rights, including
monitoring and reporting on human rights in the context
of the elections; and it retains the robust mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to tackle armed groups in order to protect civilians,
including through the Intervention Brigade.

We all know that mandates are only as good as
the brave men and women delivering them. So this
resolution also puts in place measures to increase the
effectiveness and the efficiency of MONUSCO. It
places an emphasis on the importance of performance
and calls for a full strategic review of the Mission.
It also includes a reduction in the number of troops.
This is not about doing more with less, but about
using MONUSCO's vast resources in a better, more
focused way.

Finally, the killing of the two members of the group
of experts is a tragic reminder ofjust how challenging
and complex the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo still is. The United Kingdom would like
to underline our gratitude to all those who serve in
MONUSCO and in the group of experts, and to send
our heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of
Michael and Zaida. We pledge to uphold their legacy by
carrying on the essential work they were doing when
they were so tragically killed.

I now resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

