Mr. Gonzalez Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2015/289), I also
thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
Mr. Karamoko Diakite from Cote d'Ivoire for their
respective briefings. On behalf of the Republic of
Paraguay, allow me also to congratulate you, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, making possible this open debate on an issue
that is currently of crucial importance to many societies
around the world.

For us, the fact that the Security Council has decided
to organize an open debate onthis matter clearly indicates
that there is a need to complement and coordinate
efforts with initiatives being taken by Member States
in this high-level political decision-making forum, and
to link it with other, broader areas, such as the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The serious scourges that are devastating a number
of countries around the world - such as terrorism, drug
trafficking and organized crime, among others are
closely linked to the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Therefore, the mechanisms established under
the United Nations Programme of Action and other
complementary mechanisms are of crucial importance
in efforts to counter that threat in a timely manner and
to facilitate cooperation among States.

 

The biennial report of the Secretary-General
on small arms and light weapons (S/2015/289) is a
commendable effort to synthesize the joint efforts
taken by the international community to progressively
eradicate the illicit trafficking in those weapons. While
there are various examples of progress towards the
gradual elimination ofthe illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, Paraguay believes that it is necessary
to redouble efforts in the control of transfers, marking
and tracing, the regulation of brokering and trafficking
in border areas. In that regard, role of international
cooperation and assistance is vital, as is the setting
up of a mechanism to build trust between States and
cooperating entities.

In addition, special mention should be given to
the recent entry into force, in December 2014, of the
Arms Trade Treaty, to which my country is one of the
almost 70 States parties. In our view, recognition of this
instrument by States is a sign of commitment in the
area of disarmament, and in particular, the elimination
of illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and the
serious consequences of their use.

There is virtually no disagreement among
members of the international community on the tragic
consequences of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. There is also a high level of agreement on the
predominant role that these weapons play in eroding
and destroying societies. They increase armed violence
and they undermine respect for human rights in general,
and international humanitarian law in particular. The
figure of over half a million deaths per year as a result
of violent acts - many of them cases in which small
arms and light weapons play a role - could continue to
grow if corrective measures are not taken.

Paraguay therefore considers it important
to improve stockpile security systems as well as
warehousing for firearms, ammunition and explosives
in accordance with international standards. We also
believe that existing mechanisms should be enhanced to
encourage the destruction of obsolete and confiscated
weapons and ammunition, for which it is necessary to
have technical assistance from specific organizations
and cooperating countries.

In conclusion, we must remember that most of the
victims related to small arms and light weapons come
more from situations in which ordinary, everyday acts
of violence are committed than from war situations,
which makes us once again urge the international
community to focus not only on conflict and post-
conflict situations, but on the causes that allow
significant sectors of our societies have access to a huge
variety of small arms and light weapons with the tragic
consequences that affect our citizens on a daily basis.

