Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I wish,
Sir, to welcome you to the Security Council. It is an
honour that you and Minister Akufo-Addo are here
today. We would like also to thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, as well as Mr. Chambas for their presence,
and, of course, the French presidency for its efforts to
bring the important question of regional cooperation in
West Africa to our attention.

We heartily endorse the Secretary-General's
desire, as expressed in his report, to focus on concrete,
practical solutions to the region's problems. We hope
that this meeting and any follow-on discussions will
adopt "concrete" and "practical" as words to watch for
and to continue to stress. The report should be an initial
step in a process of serious sustained engagement in
problem-solving on the issues that face West Africa.

The report comes shortly after a decision by the
Security Council to authorize a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We now have
several United Nations peacekeeping operations in
three neighbouring countries in West Africa. There can
be question of the Security Council's commitment to
peace in the region, and there can be no more
fortuitous time for the States of the region to take
advantage of a genuine opportunity to ensure lasting
peace and security.

The three contiguous peacekeeping operations
also present a precedent-setting opportunity for
comprehensive and creative approaches to some of the
cross-border problems highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report. We also have the opportunity to
achieve increased efficiency in the use of United
Nations resources in combating the problems that
plague the region. Representatives of the region are
addressing today in the Council these problems in
greater detail, and we will need to continue to discuss
them. But I would note that, among the more important
issues, of course, are the movement of arms, the
question of child soldiers and the movement of foreign
combatants across borders.

Thus far the United Nations missions in West
Africa have taken positive steps towards enhanced
cross-border cooperation. The Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and Force Commanders are
gathering and consulting on a frequent basis. We
applaud and support these efforts.

In addition, we would like to see the Security
Council discuss with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Governments concerned
how to authorize United Nations missions in West
Africa to take the next steps in combating cross-border
problems by carrying out and conducting cross-border
military operations and air patrols. This is critical for
stopping the cross-border movement of rebels, arms
and resources and will make the three United Nations
peacekeeping forces far more efficient.

Of course, this idea must be thoroughly vetted.
There are many issues involved. But efficiencies,
synergies and mission successes will result. We
propose, as a first step, both within the United Nations
and in capitals, to engage with DPKO and interested
Security Council members to consider mechanisms and
protocols that could begin to govern such operations
and are prepared to support consideration of an
enabling Security Council resolution on this subject.
We would welcome further thought from missions in
the field that could usefully inform us and ground these
discussions.

There are a number of key cross-border and
subregional problems that directly threaten the peace
and security of the States in the region, but I would like
to focus in particular on the question of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR),
which is so critical for the success of post-conflict
transitions. National DDRR programmes must consider
the cross-border dimensions of conflicts and the variety
of nationalities among combatants. That task is not
easy, but it is critical if we are to succeed.

We are concerned about issues such as competing
stipend packages in different countries that may
actually influence combatants or appear to be in
competition with one another, since the perceptions of
the combatants will be key in that regard. We urge the
relevant United Nations missions and agencies in the
region - along with the World Bank - to consider
how disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) programmes are structured in
neighbouring countries and how they can be
harmonized. We would also note the importance of
attention to the particular needs and contributions of
women in DDRR programmes. Given that DDRR is
central to ensuring that hostilities do not resume and
that there is a basis for the re-emergence of civil
society and of a functioning economy, we urge the
commencement of DDRR in Cote d'Ivoire and in
Liberia as quickly as possible.

In Cote d'Ivoire, we are disappointed that the
decision of the Security Council to authorize a
peacekeeping operation has been followed by increased
tensions and perhaps an uneven approach to the Linas-
Marcoussis implementation process. We ask all of the
Ivorian parties to take the steps necessary to ensure
that, in a few weeks - when the operation is formally
established - there will be a peace to keep and a
political process to keep on track. We are disturbed and
saddened by the violence that resulted in the death of a
number of Ivorians in Abidjan just last night.

We call on the Government and on the leaders of
all parties to rise above partisan interests and to
immediately demonstrate the spirit of flexibility
essential to full implementation of the commitments
already made and reflected in the Linas-Marcoussis
accords. It is essential that all sides now engage, on a
specific time frame, to move ahead on all issues
addressed in the accords, including legislation, DDRR
and electoral issues. Ivorians must realize that the time
to achieve peace and reconciliation is now, and that
senseless violence serves the interests of no one and
can quickly spiral out of control.

In Liberia, we would like to see DDRR resume as
quickly as possible. We recognize the enormous
impediments, including limited infrastructure, too few
staff and difficult security considerations. But, until
fighters are disarmed and demobilized and until they
enter programmes for their reintegration and
rehabilitation, the threat to Liberia's stability remains
palpable. We encourage the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) to move forward as quickly as
possible and to set a date by which DDRR will resume.
However, responsibility lies with national as well as
international actors, and we likewise encourage
Monrovia's National Commission on Demobilization,
Disarmament and Reintegration to meet and to act.

On Sierra Leone, we echo the representative of
the United Kingdom in welcoming the recent report on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the commitment therein to follow up
on the report with regard to potential cross-border
operations. We also note the recommendation of the
Guinean Foreign Minister that UNAMSIL be extended
until 2005. We assure him that the Council has begun
to consult on that very issue as a way of ensuring that
the successes we have achieved are not reversed.

In closing, the two issues I have emphasized -
cross-border operations by peacekeeping operations
and DDRR - are only two of the critical West African
problems that were noted in the Secretary-General's
report and that are worthy of United Nations attention.
We look forward to addressing these issues here today
and in the coming months, especially as the United
Nations peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Cote
d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone change in shape and size.

