Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): In the
course of this year, we have seen important positive
developments on the Korean peninsula. The situation
has returned to the track of dialogue and negotiations.
Seizing the opportunity of the Pyeongchang Winter
Olympics, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea have been able to
turn their relations around and open a new chapter of
reconciliation and cooperation.

In April, the entire world watched as Chairman Kim
and President Moon took a first step together across
the Military Demarcation Line. Last week again, we
heard the good news that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea held
their third summit this year and issued the Pyongyang
Joint Declaration. The two Koreas have thus achieved
an overall improvement and development in their
relations and jointly undertaken to make the peninsula
a peaceful place free of nuclear weapons and nuclear
threats. China applauds the political decisiveness and
courage demonstrated by the two leaders. China firmly
supports the two countries in turning their leaders'
consensus into concrete actions, in building mutual
trust and in advancing reconciliation and cooperation
on the peninsula.

At their historic summit in Singapore in June, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United
States reached important common understandings on
comprehensive denuclearization and the building of
a peace mechanism on the peninsula. That serves the
shared interests of all parties, including the United
States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
and meets the need for regional peace and stability. It
is also what the international community hopes to see.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
United States are actively preparing for their second
summit. China supports their efforts to continue the
dialogue, meet each other halfway and secure more
deliverables at the meeting.

China's position on the Korean peninsula issue is
consistent. China is committed to denuclearization,
peace and stability on the peninsula and to resolving
issues through dialogue. China has devoted great
efforts and energy to that end. The recent positive
developments on the peninsula are exactly what China
has been working for over the years. At this juncture,
we believe that the Security Council has a duty and
need to send a clear and united message and accelerate
the process of political settlement.

All parties need to work together for a peaceful and
stable peninsula. That is an aspiration shared by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Korea and all other countries of the region.

The peninsula issue is essentially about security. To
secure peace there, it is critical to address the legitimate
security concerns of all parties in an appropriate and
balanced manner. The Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has suspended its nuclear and missile tests and
gradually dismantled relevant facilities. The United
States and the Republic of Korea, for their part, have
suspended large-scale military exercises. Building on
that, a timely release of declaration ending the war
would dispel the spectre of war on the peninsula and
manifest the political resolve to forsake war. It will help
build basic trust, further facilitate denuclearization
and put in place the conditions necessary for a final
peace accord.

In China's View, a wise political decision must
be taken on this. All parties need to work together
for a completely denuclearized peninsula, which is a
prerequisite for lasting peace. It is what we must do
to uphold the nuclear non-proliferation regime, which
is the shared objective of concerted global efforts.
China believes that the most effective way to advance
denuclearization is in parallel with the building of
a peace mechanism on the peninsula so that the two
tracks can support and reinforce one another and be
settled together.

The main players in that process are the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the United States, but
all stakeholders are obligated to play their part. The
Six-Party Talks have played an important role and will
remain an indispensable multilateral platform. The
Security Council should also form consensus in a timely
manner to provide a driving force and international
guarantee.

All parties need to work together for a peninsula
of mutually beneficial cooperation. Denuclearization
is ultimately aimed at bringing a better life of greater
prosperity, peace and happiness to the people of the
peninsula and the region.

Over the past decades, cooperation around the
peninsula has stalled due to various disruptions, but
this year the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has made a major decision to shift its focus to economic
development. That decision deserves to be welcomed
and supported by the international community.
As the denuclearization process moves forward,
on the condition that they do not violate Council
resolutions, all parties can gradually foster practical
cooperation whenever where conditions are met as as
to improve people's well-being. We hope that the day
denuclearization is achieved will also be the day that
development and revitalization come to the peninsula.

In carrying out its mandate under the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council has adopted
several resolutions related to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. As long as those resolutions remain
valid, they must continue to be fully, completely and
accurately implemented. China firmly believes that
pressure is not the goal. Implementing sanctions and
promoting political settlement are equally important
under Council resolutions. Neither can be neglected,
replaced by the other or opted for alone.

There is a provision in Council resolutions that the
Council is prepared to modify the sanction measures
in the light of compliance by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Given the positive developments
in the inter-Korean relations and those between the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea-United States,
as well as the important pledges and actions taken
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on
denuclearization, China believes that the Council will
need in due course to consider invoking that provision
in order to encourage the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and other relevant parties to further
advance denuclearization.

This year marks the sixty-fifth anniversary of the
Korean Armistice Agreement. China's consistent goal
and the objective of the international community has
been to realize complete denuclearization and build
a peace mechanism on the peninsula. China calls on
all parties to demonstrate political courage, advance
dialogue and negotiation, and together work for lasting
peace. China will continue to make its due contributions
in this regard.

