Ms. Franceschi Navarro (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, let me thank the presidency of
the Security Council, in the person of the Ambassador
and Permanent Representative of Nigeria, for convening
this debate on the nature of current challenges to global
security and the role that regional organizations and
subregional organizations can play in the maintenance
of international peace and security. This debate could
not be more relevant. The global economy is more
interconnected than ever, making global security a
particularly relevant issue. What is therefore required
is a certain minimum of security, stability and
predictability at the global level so as to ensure that
the flow and interconnectedness of the economy can
guarantee well-being and prosperity for all.

In that context, regional conflicts or tensions
resulting from interreligious or intercultural disputes,
or drug trafficking, loss oflives as a result of terrorism
and infectious diseases such as Ebola, and natural
disasters, among others, affect the supranational flow
of goods, services, people and capital that characterizes
the global economy of our times. Allow me to share
just two figures that reflect that impressive flow and
interconnection. In 2005, the number of migrants,
globally, was estimated at 191 million people. In terms
of capital flow, global remittances were estimated at
$406 billion in 2012.

In that context, the maintenance of international
peace and security are key factors and prerequisites for
the progress and prosperity of humankind. As Tavares
has said, peace seeks to manage violence, while
security seeks to manage threats. Therefore, the post-
2015 development agenda, "Transforming our world:
the 2030 agenda for sustainable development", which
will be adopted in September, envisions that its goals
and targets will lead to a world free of poverty, hunger,
disease, free from fear and violence, where all people
can realize their potential. In particular, the target of
goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
is to substantially reduce illicit flows of weapons,
promote the return of seized assets and combat all
forms of organized crime, inter alia, by 2030.

We therefore reaffirm that peace and security will
be strengthened to the extent that there is inclusive
development to support the health of our ecosystems
and promote equality and respect for all human rights,
democracy, human development, gender equality and
the participation of women. Facing that challenge
requires a commitment to conflict prevention,
constructive dialogue, cooperation and collaboration,
mutual respect and education as the primary tools for
guaranteeing the international peace and security that
we all desire.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as has been mentioned by several speakers, notes that
Member States shall make every effort to peacefully
settle local disputes through agreements or regional
agencies or arrangements. To that end, regional
agencies and organizations can play an important
role in prevention and early warning of situations that
undermine global peace and security in different parts
of the world.

In the Latin America and Caribbean region, we
highlight the role played by regional entities in the
struggle for security and peace among neighbours. It
is important to clarify that in this region, sustainable
economic and political progress is threatened not by the
existence of weapons of mass destruction and nuclear
weapons, but by inequality, the unmet needs of people,
insecurity and the presence of organized criminal
networks that are strengthened by drug trafficking
networks in the region. According to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, 36 per cent of homicides
globally occur in the Americas.

We note, for example, that the Organization of
American States, the longest lasting regional entity,
consisting of 35 States members, is a robust advocate
of democracy, strengthening electoral systems and
modernization of the State. With respect to crisis
management, it promotes dialogue among the parties.
We also stress the role of the States members of the
Caribbean Community in decisively supporting United
Nations efforts to stabilize Haiti, the only country in
the Americas with a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. We further note the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, which was created
in 2011, has 35 member States, and represents a new
political dialogue and integration mechanism, with the
primary objective of integration and peace. We also
point to the Union of South American Nations, which
is composed of 12 South American States, whose South
American Defense Council is an innovative space for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in the field of peace and security.

Overall, we believe that there is no single model
for relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations in promoting peace and peacebuilding.
Some regional institutions focus primarily on
cooperation for security, yet not necessarily on peace.
They should take into account the experiences of each
region and the various decision-making processes,
which point to the need to strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations within the purview of each regional
organization.

It is important to build capacity in those
organizations and to strengthen both their conflict
prevention mandates and their capacity to implement
solutions within the aforementioned principles of
non-intervention and national sovereignty. They must
have the tools, funding and expertise to implement
their mandate. Above all, they should strengthen their
legitimacy and credibility in the region.

The Security Council enjoys pre-eminence in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
a mandate to consider measures and promote closer,
more effective cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in the areas
of early warning and conflict prevention. The daily
reality of emerging conflicts and the demands facing
multilateral organizations are in constant flux. Threats
to international peace and security have changed in form
and substance from those that led to the establishment
of the Security Council in 1946, when the first meeting
was held.

That is why we consider it timely to resume the
discussion on the reform of the Security Council, and
to integrate a broader representation of nations to
enrich our understanding of the threats to international
peace and security. I reiterate that the cost of not
doing so is too high for the sustainability, legitimacy
and effectiveness of the multilateral system. Panama,
like other Member States, has created a proposal to
gradually achieve, in two successive stages, coinciding
with the centenary of the United Nations, a Security
Council of 25 members. In that Council, all members
would be equal and elected for three years, with the
possibility of consecutive re-election.

Finally, we need to work together to halt the spiral
of insecurity that is buffeting the world. Highlighting
the interests of all of our societies will ensure our
ability to build a future of peace and security for all.

