Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me thank
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her very informative
and comprehensive briefing. I also congratulate her on
her appointment.

Since this is the first meeting on Iraq for Indonesia
as a Council member, I would like to congratulate the
Government and the people of Iraq on the completion
of their national election last year. We have observed
the situation in Iraq very closely and hope that our Iraqi
brothers and sisters will soon achieve what they fully
deserve - enduring peace, stability and prosperity.
Indonesia is certain that the new Government can build
on the important progress made in recent years in order
to achieve durable harmony and peace. Allow me to
highlight some key issues from the briefing.

First, with regard to the political situation, Indonesia
commends Iraq on the formation of the new Government
within the constitutional time frame and looks forward
to the appointments to the remaining ministerial
positions. We are confident that the appointments to
the Cabinet will be completed soon. We commend
the sustained efforts made under three presidencies
to facilitate compromise and work constructively to
that end. We also welcome the election held last year
in the Iraqi Kurdistan region and the progress made in
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We encourage
Iraq to capitalize on that positive trend and to resolve
all outstanding issues through dialogue and consensus,
based on the Iraqi Constitution.

Secondly, security challenges must be addressed
effectively. Despite the remarkable progress made
recently, we note that terrorism remains a serious
challenge. The members of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) remain active in a number of
Iraqi provinces, hiding in areas that are hard to reach.
We laud the tireless work of the Iraqi security forces in
their ongoing clean-up of areas that have been cleared of
explosives and other dangerous materials, as well as for
their persistent search for ISIL remnants, who threaten
security and advancement in the country. There is a
need for a comprehensive approach to addressing the
security challenges and ensuring durable peace. In that
regard, enhanced regional and international cooperation
is critical. We commend the Iraqi Government for its
continued efforts to reach out to neighbouring countries
and other international partners to strengthen relations
and advance mutual political and security interests.

Thirdly, the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) remains vital.
We applaud the essential work conducted by UNAMI,
which is perceived positively and favourably in various
areas of Iraqi society, such as the public sector, electoral
assistance, human rights and the rule of law. We also
welcome UNAMI efforts to help enhance bilateral
relations between Iraq and countries of the region, such
as Kuwait, on the settlement of remaining bilateral
issues. The proper discussion and completion of the file
on the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property will further strengthen the
already very good bilateral relations between the two
brotherly countries.

It is very important that UNAMI continue to lend
and enhance its support to the new Government of Iraq
as it embarks on implementing its new programmes
to resolve the many complex and difficult challenges
it faces and put the country firmly on the path to
sustainable peace and development. Indonesia stands
ready to support the brotherly country of Iraq in
achieving that goal.

