Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this meeting focusing on the security
situation and drug control issues in Afghanistan.

Despite the measures taken by both the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to eradicate the poppy crops, it is
anticipated that, again in 2003, Afghanistan will be the
world's largest opium producer. This means that a large
amount of drugs will be illicitly exported from
Afghanistan, resulting in many criminal actions and a
huge number of victims in various parts of the world.
In addition, it means that the restoration of public
security and the consolidation of peace in Afghanistan
will be jeopardized. Poppy cultivation and the drug
business enrich provincial warlords and provide them
with bases from which to challenge the authority of the
central Government. This is a very grave problem. We
need to have effective counter-narcotics measures that
will contribute to the establishment of the authority of
the central Government by undermining the financial
foundation of the warlords, thereby contributing to the

improvement of security and the consolidation of
peace.

In this regard, I would like to make the following
points. First, we strongly support the lO-year National
Drug Control Strategy set out by the Government of
Afghanistan. We also welcome the initiative of the
United Kingdom, as the lead nation in this effort.
Successful drug control depends not only on effective
programmes for growers and on capacity-building for
law enforcement, but also on the reduction of poverty,
because poverty can often lead to drug problems. In
order to improve the overall economic situation of the
country, especially in rural areas, which we believe will
help to enable farmers to overcome their dependence
on poppy cultivation, Japan, for its part, is steadily
implementing a Comprehensive Regional Development
Plan - the so-called Ogata Initiative. Under this plan,
projects are being carried out in such spheres as
income generation, medical care, sanitation and
capacity-building for education and labour-intensive
infrastructure rehabilitation.

Secondly, in addition to promoting poppy
eradication and combating the drug trade within
Afghanistan, it is also necessary to address the
problems from a regional perspective. The drugs
produced in Afghanistan are illicitly exported by land
to markets abroad. It is, therefore, essential for the
neighbouring States to effectively control their borders
and cut off the trade route within their territory. We
commend the various initiatives and measures taken in
this regard by neighbouring States, such as Pakistan,
Iran and Tajikistan. Japan has supported and
contributed to the activities of the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) in
these countries.
Thirdly, the control of all drugs must be
strengthened globally. Unless the supply and demand
for drugs is controlled worldwide, it will be impossible
to control the trafficking of drugs. What is required,
therefore, are more thorough exchanges of information
among customs authorities and greater cooperation
among law enforcement and investigative agencies.

Fourthly, as I mentioned at the outset, drugs
affect public security; it stands to reason, then, that
measures to enhance public security will also lead to
effective counter-narcotics measures. In this sense,
success in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants, as well as the
establishment of a credible Afghan national army and
police force, will enhance the effectiveness of drug
control efforts.

In this context, I wish to underscore the
importance of support for the DDR process, which
President Karzai announced will start on 22 June. It is
encouraging that he has also committed himself to
completing the disarmament and demobilization
process by the time the election is held in June of next
year. Japan and the United Nations are taking the lead
in this process and are making great efforts to ensure
its success. Among the challenges we are facing are:
ensuring the neutrality of the mobile disarmament unit;
establishing an international verification system;
ensuring public security; reforming the Ministry of
Defence; and strengthening the reintegration project.
We highly appreciate the cooperation of the countries
that have sent, or are ready to send, provisional
reconstruction teams to the provinces. We urge the
international community to extend full cooperation to
the DDR process, which is indispensable for the
improvement of the overall public security situation
throughout the country, for the consolidation of the
peace process and for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of Afghanistan.

As other new, urgent issues come up in other
areas, such as Iraq and the Middle East, there is
concern over the tendency for the international
community's attention to be distracted from
Afghanistan. But we should be aware that failure to
secure the peace in that country could seriously affect
the peace process in other areas, as well. Now, as the
peace process in Afghanistan approaches an extremely
delicate stage, with the forthcoming Constitutional
Loya Jirga and the election next year, the public
security situation remains very precarious. Our support
for the peace process must not consist simply of
gestures made at those times when the situation in
Afghanistan is the focus of world attention. We must
honour the commitments we have made until a free,
democratic and peaceful Afghanistan is achieved.

