The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, which was, as usual, smart and visionary.

It is now my pleasure to deliver Italy's
national statement.

The focus oftoday's Security Council meeting is on
an issue of worldwide implications. The Mediterranean
is a small sea, almost the size ofa large lake when seen
on a map. However, it is where much of our global
security is at stake. It is a fact that a great number
of the world's crises originate in the Mediterranean
basin - the spread of Da'esh, Libya's instability, the
Syrian war, new tension in Lebanon, the dangers posed
by foreign terrorist fighters, the fragile situation in the
Western Balkans, the migration crisis, and the list goes
on and on.

Although the Mediterranean amounts to only
approximately 1 per cent of the world's surface, a
significant part of our global stability and security is
played out in that Sea. Italy, located at the centre of the
Mediterranean, is bearing the brunt of that insecurity.
Our strategy has been to combine solidarity and
security. For example, in the course of the migration
crisis, we have proved that it is possible to save more
than half a million lives at sea and, at the same time,
counter fundamentalism and extremists who despise
the values of our open and democratic society.

However, we need to do more together as global
partners to control the routes that today could be
taken by foreign terrorist fighters, following the defeat
of Da'esh in Iraq and in Syria. The global coalition
against Da'esh has neutralized the safe havens in
which terrorists could mastermind attacks against
all of us. Italy has done its part as the second-largest
contributor to that coalition in Iraq. We have trained
almost 30,000 military and police units, but we must
remain ever-vigilant against the spread of Da'esh in the
Mediterranean and the concrete risk of foreign terrorist
fighters returning to North Africa and to Europe.

Therefore, we must deepen information-sharing
among our intelligence agencies in order to identify
jihadists and halt them in their quest for destruction.
Our commitment against terror must be extended far
and wide, including in the Sahel, where instability
directly affects the security of the Mediterranean. In
Libya, after being forced out of Sirte, Da'esh remains
a threat, with its roots also in the Sahel. That too is
a reason that Libya remains a key challenge for
the Security Council. However, in order to further
emphasize the moral burden of improving the lives of
refugees and migrants who are exploited by criminal
organizations in Libya, we must take on greater shared
responsibility, with more humanitarian assistance and
long-term development.

On the political process in Libya, I will not repeat
what I said yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.8104).
However, I will stress once again that it is crucial
for all of us to support the action plan of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. If we miss
that chance, all of us, not only Libyans, will pay a
heavy price.

The tragic story of Syria should be a reminder to
the Libyans that a negotiated solution is vital, and that
there is no military short cut. Regional tensions and
brutal actions by the Al-Assad regime have made peace
in Syria difficult for far too long. Our key objective
should always remain the same - to support the
political process led by the United Nations. We call
on the countries around this table and on the entire
United Nations membership to redouble their efforts to
encourage a genuine commitment by the Syrian parties
to engage in negotiations.

We are also concerned by the latest developments
in Lebanon, where Italy has invested deeply in peace
and stability, especially in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon peacekeeping mission. We call on
all parties to respect the independence and integrity of
Lebanon's democratic institutions. There is no role in
Lebanon for any foreign forces or militaries other than
the legitimate security forces of the Lebanese State.

In an interconnected world where stability and
security are tested by gross violations of human rights
and a humanitarian crisis, it is the responsibility of the
international community to react. Our reaction must be
built upon more political dialogue and more security
cooperation, as well as more cultural collaboration.
Italy considers culture to be a key pillar of sustainable
development. In order to create lasting political solutions
in the Mediterranean, we are convinced that we need
to invest in human capital, especially in the education
of youth. Preserving cultural heritage is also a way
to tackle extremism. That is why Italy, together with
France, promoted resolution 2347 (2017), which was the
first of its kind on the destruction of cultural heritage
in armed conflict. Terrorists who destroy cultural sites
want to erases peoples' identities. We should therefore
always protect such rich and moderate identities, which
have shaped a common culture of dialogue and mutual
respect in the Mediterranean for millenniums.

In the interest of the security of the Mediterranean,
it is also crucial to defend religious freedom and protect
religious minorities. If religious freedom is protected,
the rule of law and security can be asserted. If such
protection is absent, the consequence is instability. For
fanatics, religion is only a pretext. They want to hold
God hostage to their evil ideologies. Therefore, we
must do more to separate those who join their hands in
prayer from those who take up arms.

We also recognize that more women have to be
protagonists in the Mediterranean. In October, in Rome,
we launched the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network. It is important to strengthen preventive
diplomacy through the greater involvement of women
in mediation.

The Mediterranean may be troubled by numerous
challenges, but it is also a sea of many opportunities. It
is a market of 500 million consumers. It makes up 10 per
cent of the global gross domestic product (GDP). That
GDP grows at approximately 4.5 per cent annually. It is
also where 20 per cent of maritime traffic and 30 per
cent of the oil trade take place.

Will the Mediterranean region evolve into a meeting
place of cultures that trade freely and cross-fertilize
civilizations as it did once before? Or will it devolve
into a region of terror, social despair and unrest? The
answer very much depends upon the willingness and
capacity of the international community to strongly
confront all security challenges and simultaneously
promote a pluralistic society that does not marginalize
its youth, women or minorities. Those are the values
that inspired the Charter of the United Nations. They
are values that still ensure stability and development
all across the world. In a region that connects Europe,
Africa and Asia, the dividends of peace and security
are huge and global. It is up to us to seize them.

I now resume my function as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

