Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2397
(2017), which marks a significant step in strengthening
sanctions against the North Korean regime. We thank
the United States, China and each of the Council
members for their resolute commitment. I would like
to thank my American colleague Mrs. Nikki Haley
in particular. Her commitment contributed greatly to
this result.

Today's vote is commensurate with the gravity
of the issue and the magnitude of the threat to peace
and security today. This year, North Korea accelerated
its irresponsible, even methodical, race towards the
development of an operational nuclear arsenal, at the cost
of sacrificing its own population. Its many destabilizing
actions have fuelled a serious rise in tensions in the
region, from intercontinental ballistic missile launches
to the nuclear test carried out in September, not to
mention the two flights over Japanese territory. Beyond
that - and let us make no mistake about it - the North
Korean threat is a threat to everyone's safety, because
every country is now affected by the range of North
Korean missiles.

The Council was able to respond in a unified
manner to each of North Korea's actions, effectively and
firmly. Our response to this direct threat to regional and
international peace and security, which is also a blatant
attack against the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
speaks to our credibility. That is why the day after
the ballistic missile launch on 28 November, France
advocated the strengthening of sanctions. That is what
we have done today with today's adoption of resolution
2397 (2017), which allows us to send an unambiguous
double message about unity and determination.

The resolution complements the arsenal of measures
reinforced by resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017),
adopted this summer. It sanctions the actors at the heart
of the operation of the regime. It also sharply increases
the constraints on the resources of the North Korean
regime, particularly North Korean workers, as well
as those placed on oil exports to North Korea. We are
strengthening the tools at our disposal to prevent the
circumvention of sanctions, particularly in the maritime
field. Finally, the Council is committed to adopting new,
appropriate and targeted measures on oil should North
Korea conduct a new nuclear test or pursue the path of
developing intercontinental ballistic capabilities.

By way of the provisions I have just recalled,
resolution 2397 (2017) targets the regime, its actors and
its resources in order to change North Korean strategy
and policy. The resolution is therefore part of the

maximum pressure that we wish to exert on the regime
with a view to returning it to the negotiating table.
Indeed, the necessary firmness that we are expressing
today serves the only political strategy that can put an
end to the North Korean crisis.

France is of course in favour of resumed dialogue,
and the sooner the better. However, we are still
impatiently awaiting concrete signs from the North
Korean regime of its own willingness to engage in such
dialogue. France is of the View that applying maximum
pressure on the North Korean regime is our best means
of enabling the dialogue that itself is the condition for
a political settlement. To put it simply and clearly, the
firm resolve that we have shown unanimously today is
our best antidote to the risks of war and our best chance
for paving the way for dialogue and, therefore, for the
political solution we are seeking.

