Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and its delegation on their leadership of the
work of the Council during the month of February, and
thank them for convening this open debate and for the
concept paper before us (S/2016/103, annex).

In my statement, I shall raise three issues. First,
I reiterate the importance that Colombia attaches
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
Organization. Those purposes and principles are not a
mere listing of general values and aims; they are the
very cement holding the structure together and the
foundation of the Organization, so that Member States
can collectively work to promote a peaceful, prosperous
and fair world.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence, non-interference in the internal affairs
of States, the prohibition of the use or threat of use
of force and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes are the fundamental pillars underpinning
international law and international relations. They are
as valid today as they have been over the past seven
decades. My country's views were expressed by our

representative Alfonso Lopez in the general debate on

30 October 1946,
"With that same optimism we felt during all the
initial stages of the organization of the United
Nations... we are now ready to support any initiative
tending to establish once and for all throughout the
world the triumph of reason over force, of right
over arbitrariness, and of liberty over slavery in
any form" (A/PV43, p.867-868).

The second issue I would like to address is the
Organization's need for flexibility and adaptability. In
the last 70 years, the world has continuously experienced
the turbulence of events and the undeniable evolution
of, and increase in, conflicts and their complexity.
Those conflicts permanently defy the adaptability and
responsiveness of the United Nations to the new threats
to international peace and security and the growing
need to ensure comprehensive sustainable development
and the protection of human rights.

Finally, I would like to refer to the need to rely
on the tools provided under Chapter VI of the San
Francisco Charter with greater frequency. There is
an old Spanish proverb that "prevention is better than
cure"; and in diplomacy, as in health, identification
and early-warning systems are essential to preventing
the multiplication of conflicts and the increase in
peacekeeping operations authorized under Chapter VII.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and of the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) concur
on the primacy of political authorities responding
adequately and appropriately to situations of conflict
from their initial stages. That approach does not neglect
the proportionate use of force in cases where such is
urgent and unavoidable. However, we must remember
that peace cannot be imposed, but must come from
the players themselves and should respond to the
particularities of each environment and each society so
that it can become truly sustainable.

My country, which has suffered the ravages of a
conflict that has lasted for more than 50 years, has
valiantly chosen to achieve peace. That is why we
highlight the Council's decision, reflected in resolution
2261 (2016), of25 January, which establishes a political
mission in Colombia, in which this body expressed its
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes. As
expressed by Foreign Minister Maria Angela Holguin
Cuellar on the occasion of the adoption of the resolution,

"It is an opportunity for the United Nations and
the international community to enjoy success
as they are being asked for their support in the
implementation of an agreement in a conflict that
is being resolved by national stakeholders through
negotiation and dialogue.

"I would like to convey to the members of the
Council that their willingness to work with
Colombia on this matter will be essential to the
success of the process. We know that by remaining
focused on our mandate we will achieve conclusive
and definitive results for peace in Colombia."
(S/PV7609, p. 10).

With that, as 70 years ago at the dawn of the
Organization, and as we have been reiterating since,
Colombia reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.

