Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their briefings.

When it comes to South Sudan, we have heard lots
of promises. We hear promises from South Sudan's
leaders that they will finally get serious about pursuing
peace. We hear promises that they will allow aid to
reach the starving and the sick, as well as promises that

humanitarian workers will not be harassed when they
try to do theirjobs. And on the basis of those promises,
the Security Council waits and waits. We wait for things
to change in South Sudan, but nothing is changing in
the country. The violence continues. Horrific atrocities
are reported so often that they become almost routine.
People continue to flee across South Sudan's borders to
neighbouring countries. United Nations peacekeepers
continue to face obstacles in carrying out their mandate
to protect civilians. And humanitarians are blocked
from delivering life-saving assistance.

For the people of South Sudan life is worse than
ever before. The Council needs to hold the parties on
the ground accountable for their broken promises.
Consider first the violence - the Council has been
calling for a ceasefire in South Sudan since the
fighting escalated more than a year ago. In May, the
Government declared a unilateral ceasefire but, rather
than hold their fire, Government forces have been
opening up new battlefronts. Those military operations
are forcing thousands of people from their homes. The
fighting has forced dozens of humanitarian workers to
be evacuated, leaving even more civilians without any
help. It is a travesty, truly a travesty.

Commitment to a ceasefire is just one broken
promise and the protection of civilians is another. A few
weeks ago, United Nations peacekeepers tried to reach
an orphanage to help get 250 kids out of harm's way.
The United Nations was doing its job, but authorities
would not allow the peacekeepers to pass. It is hard to
believe, but it is true. Fortunately, the United Nations
was eventually able to get there after a delay, but
thousands of other civilians cannot be reached. They
remain trapped by fighting and are unable to receive
any assistance whatsoever.

Humanitarian aid has eased famine in certain
parts of the country, but the overall trend is getting
worse, not better. Hunger in South Sudan has reached
unprecedented levels. More than 6 million people are
now severely food insecure - half of South Sudan's
population. A total of 1.7 million people are on the
brink of starving to death because of the inability of aid
agencies to reach them. According to United Nations
statistics, June was the worst month for access by aid
workers so far this year. Despite promising to stop, the
Government is still asking humanitarian groups to pay
high fees just to continue operating in the country. The
humanitarian community is in a position to help, but
the Government and fighters on the ground need to
allow them to get to the people in need.

In short, another month has passed with no
improvement on the ground. In March, the Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/4)
with a number of specific demands. We called on the
parties to stop fighting, commit to a political process
and allow for unfettered humanitarian access - but
virtually none of those steps happened. The Council
must be prepared to hold the parties accountable for
their inaction and for the continued suffering of South
Sudan's people. The Council must put real pressure
on the parties to change their behaviour. That should
start with additional targeted sanctions and an arms
embargo. Those measures would show that the Council
is serious about pushing for an end to the fighting and a
return to the negotiating table.

The United States appreciates that the region has
appointed a new Special Envoy and will convene a
high-level revitalization forum to support a ceasefire
in a political process. The forum has broad support
from South Sudan's international partners, including
endorsement from the African Union. Tragically,
the support for a new forum shows that international
partners do not have confidence that South Sudan's
leaders are taking meaningful steps to live up to their
obligations as signatories to the 2015 peace Agreement.

It is high time for action. The revitalization process
is the last chance for salvaging the peace Agreement.
The United States very much hopes that it will lead to
a realistic and meaningful outcome. If South Sudan's
leaders do not participate in the high-level forum
in good faith and stick to its deadlines, the United
States will need to review its position and priorities
with regard to support for the peace agreement and its
implementing bodies. The bottom line is that we want
this regional mediation to succeed, and we need to see
South Sudan's leaders truly engaged in it at long last.
The people of South Sudan deserve leaders who live up
to their promises.

Even facing extreme hardship, the people have not
given up hope of something better. There is one town
a few hours south of the capital where 70 per cent of
the population reportedly fled after fighting broke out.
But a small group of children, including many orphans,
stayed and found shelter at a local Catholic school.
At that school, according to a report from the United
Nations, 14 teachers are volunteering to help the kids.
The school's motto is: we cannot surrender.

When those young kids were asked what they
wanted, one child put it very simply:

"I want to beg our leaders, let them bring peace to
South Sudan, so that South Sudanese children will
enjoy their life like the one of long ago".

Those kids are facing impossible challenges,
and they have not given up on a dream of peace for
South Sudan. Neither can we. We in the international
community can and must act to make the promise of
peace a reality.
