Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (Spoke in Spanish): Cuba
endorses the statement made by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. In my national capacity, I wish to highlight
some aspects relevant to the matter at hand.

This is the second open debate this year on the
Middle East region held at the Security Council
without achieving any progress. It is unfortunate that
the situation in the region, especially in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, has seen no
progress. The region is still marked by instability and
insecurity.

The main political problem in the Middle East is
the systematic aggression by Israel against Palestine.
The Security Council must play its role in defence
of international peace and security and immediately
adopt concrete practical measures to compel Israel to
end its abuses and illegal policies and practices against
the Palestinian people. Israel's behaviour deliberately
contravenes UnitedNations resolutions and international
law, poses a threat to regional and international peace
and security, and violates the human rights of an entire
people by means of flagrant, systematic and inhumane
abuses that should be condemned by this organ. Israel's
illegal occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories remains the major obstacle to achieving a
just, lasting and comprehensive solution in the Middle
East region. There will be no peace in the Middle East
as long as those aggressions persist and the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people are not taken into
account.

The General Assembly adopted the historic
resolution 67/ 19 when a majority of its members
granted Palestine non-member observer status in the
United Nations. Cuba supported that resolution, in
accordance with its long-standing position in support
ofthe cause of the Palestinian people and the defence of
its rights. However, such action constitutes an interim
step towards the eventual accession of Palestine to the
United Nations as a fully fledged Member State. The
Security Council must consider and approve, without
further delay, the request made by Palestine in 2011 to
be recognized as a United Nations Member State.

Today, the situation in the region is tense and
explosive, due to the increasing number of illegal
Israeli settlements, the harsh and distressing reality
of Palestinian prisoners and the blockade to entry of
goods, humanitarian aid and fuel in the Gaza Strip.

Palestinian prisoners lack rights to essential
goods and services, namely, water, food, medical care,
education, visits and legal defence. In addition, they
are subjected to continous physical and psychological
abuse. The recent death of a 64-year-old prisoner due
to medical negligence by the occupying Power has led
to violent clashes in East Jerusalem, Hebron and other
localities of the occupied territory, where Israel's use of
excessive force has injured dozens of people and killed
two Palestinian adolescents.

Only an end to the settlement policy, the release
of Palestinian prisoners and the lifting of the blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip will make it possible to
launch a significant political process that will bring
peace to the region.

Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their legitimate and just struggle for self-
determination and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Cuba calls upon Israel to comply with international
law and to put an end to its occupation of all Arab
territories, and reiterates once again its support for a
just and lasting peace for all the peoples of the Middle
East region.

Cuba is closely following the situation in Syria
and its international impact, aware of the fact that
the information available is frequently manipulated.
The calls made by those who promote regime change
in Syria and rely on the use of force and violence are
alarming. They should instead contribute to dialogue
and negotiation between the parties.

The Security Council was not conceived as an
instrument to be used by certain Powers to provoke
regime change in selected countries. There is reason
to be concerned about intentions to promote Security
Council actions and declarations aimed at increasing
violence, undermining a sovereign Government,
generating insecurity and leading a nation to a social and
humanitarian crisis with unforeseeable consequences.

The obligation of the Security Council is to
promote peace, not violence; to prevent destabilization,
not to finance, arm and train those involved in
destabilization; and to protect the innocent, not to use
and manipulate them for geopolitical purposes. That is
also the responsibility of the Organization as a whole.

Cuba objects to NATO's maneuvering to have the
Security Council approve the aggression in Syria. It
also rejects the complicity of the mass media, which
are accustomed to distorting reality and to not being
answerable for their actions.

Cuba shares the concern about the loss of innocent
lives in Syria and elsewhere in the world. It also
condemns the acts of violence being committed against
defenceless civilians by all those involved in that or any
other conflict.

A civil war in Syria or a foreign-force intervention
would have serious consequences for international
peace and security, especially for the Middle East
region. We reject attempts to turn the alleged protection
of human lives into an excuse for foreign intervention,
either directly or through support for irregular armed
groups, including the use of mercenaries, who only sow
destruction and multiply the number of deaths.

Cuba reaffirms the right of the Syrian people to the
full exercise of their self-determination and sovereignty,
without foreign interference or intervention of any kind.
The role of the international community, in this time of
difficulty for a State Member of the United Nations, is
to offer its assistance in order to safeguard peace and
stability in that country.
Finally, Cuba reiterates its rejection of the double
standard prevailing in the Security Council. On the
one hand, it can be very flexible and tries to ensure,
through all kinds of pressure, that certain situations
are considered in the Council. On the other hand,
when the situation does not suit the interests of certain
countries, it is slow to act, or simply fails to act, as
in the case of Palestine. After dozens of resolutions
by this organ, there has been no progress in achieving
the establishment of a Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It has shown its inability to
grant Palestine its well-deserved status of full United
Nations Member and does nothing to stop the ongoing
violations committed by Israel, the occupying Power,
against the Palestinian people.

