Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate which is very well timed, as it allows us to go
further into issues that were discussed a few weeks
ago at the Geneva Conference on Preventing Violent
Extremism and at the high-level debates organized
by the President of the General Assembly. It will also
provide useful inputs for the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his briefing and extend my thanks to
Mr. Mohi El-Din Afifi and Mr. Steven Crown. I express
my condolences to the Egyptian presidency and the
Iraqi delegation, in particular, over the recent victims
of terrorism in their countries.

The concept note (S/2016/416, annex) that was
circulated encourages us to discuss possible elements
of a comprehensive strategy for countering the
narratives of terrorist groups, which would contribute
to the work to be undertaken until April 2018 by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. A
central element of that effort should be ensuring that
the international community does not overlook the
underlying causes of terrorism, including exclusion,
marginalization and discrimination. Terrorist groups
such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, the Al-Nusra
Front and Al-Shabaab have been attracting recruits
by offering them a sense of purpose, belonging and
identity that they probably failed to acquire elsewhere.

It is equally important not to lose sight of the fact
that no country is immune to this phenomenon. It is
widely reported that foreign terrorist fighters have
been recruited even in the most prosperous countries.
Promoting inclusion should be at the basis for any
narrative aimed at countering extremist ideologies.

We must take a critical look at measures that
could be inconsistent with respect for diversity and the
acknowledgement of our common humanity, such as
discriminatory laws enabling the profiling of particular
groups. Certain responses to the refugee crisis are
of concern, as they might be increasing rather than
decreasing the risks associated with violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. The credibility of any narrative
depends on its coherence. For example, we cannot
uphold a responsibility to protect civilians plagued by
terrorist attacks and human rights violations in regions
distant from our homes and then ignore the victims'
plights when they knock on our doors seeking refuge.

Our efforts should also contribute to dispelling the
stereotypes that have tended to associate terrorism with
specific cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We must
be wary of rhetoric that fuels xenophobic prejudice.
I commend those Governments around the world
that have rejected such attitudes. Promoting genuine
dialogue among religions and cultures is pivotal for
creating much-needed environments of tolerance and
mutual respect. Initiatives such as the Alliance of
Civilizations have made positive contributions in that
regard and should be acknowledged.

Consistency is another necessary feature of
counter-radicalization narratives, or "positive inclusive
narratives" as suggested by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands. Part of that challenge lies in
the need to avoid selectivity. It is our duty to condemn
terrorism and to prevent its spread, wherever and
whenever it may strike. Victims in one country are no
less deserving of our attention than those in another.
Civilian casualties resulting from counter-terrorism are
no less tragic, from a human perspective, than those
generated by other causes. Furthermore, the potential
of certain measures to fuel increased radicalization
should not be underestimated. Terrorist groups seek to
provoke Governments into over-reaction, so as to exploit
narratives of abuse and oppression. Unfortunately,
many Governments have fallen into that trap.
Conformity with international law is a prerequisite
for the effectiveness of our efforts against terrorism
and violent extremism. If measures are implemented
in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, or
other texts of international law, including human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, their legitimacy will have
been compromised, rendering them counterproductive.

The use of the Internet and social media by
terrorist groups illustrates the evolving nature of the
challenge that we are facing. Having been conceived
to bring people together, those platforms are also being
used to incite hatred and recruit. While acting against
those trends, we must guard against transgressions
with respect to the freedom of expression and the right
to privacy. We should simultaneously foster digital
inclusion since the Internet and the social media are
powerful tools for disseminating challenging messages
of respect and dialogue.

The limitations of counter-terrorism strategies
solely based on repressive measures have been
demonstrated in tragic ways. Today, terrorism is
more widespread and claims more lives than 15
years ago. It is encouraging, therefore, to identify the
growing recognition of the centrality of prevention,
as demonstrated by the support for the initiative of
the Secretary-General to present a Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).

Brazil expects the Security Council to translate
such concerns into practice by recommitting to
diplomatic efforts as a privileged vehicle for promoting
peace founded on justice. Let us not lose sight of the
protracted conflicts that directly or indirectly fuel
terrorist agendas. Our collective failure in dealing with
the ongoing crisis in the Middle East, including Israel
and Palestine, is an obvious case in point. Reaching
a durable solution to that conflict would represent
a powerful action in our efforts to undermine the
narratives of terrorist groups. Let us not prevent the
Security Council from getting involved in prevention.

There can be no justification for terrorism. Brazil
reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional
response to that threat and remains convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance our capacity to achieve the results that we
need. We will only succeed ifwejoin efforts on the basis
of shared values and enhanced multilateral cooperation.

