Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): For the
second time, Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and Motoc
have addressed the Security Council at the same
meeting, to report to it on their activities and efforts as
the heads of their respective Committees. I wish to
congratulate them most sincerely for their efforts and
their excellent briefings.

This debate could not be more timely. Although
terrorism has been weakened and attacked on all fronts,
this Vile beast continues to strike with unbearable
brutality, as we witness daily the mangled bodies of
dozens of Iraqi civilians or the attacks that have thrown
the United Kingdom capital into mourning. In fact,
faced with the relentless attacks by terrorist groups on
civilian populations, we need to tighten our ranks
further, strengthen our cooperation in all areas of the
anti-terrorism campaign, redouble our Vigilance and
ensure that our legislation on political asylum will no
longer be abused for criminal purposes.

Moreover, I wish to say that my delegation shares
the View expressed by Ambassador Mayoral regarding
the three distinct components of Al-Qaida and agrees
that it is important for the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee
to focus its efforts on the third category, terrorists who
have never left their countries but who are linked to
Al-Qaida because they are inspired by the same
ideology as it is. We therefore would like the Security
Council to broaden the scope of the concept associated
with Al-Qaida in the draft resolution now under
consideration so that the sanctions regime can be better
adapted to keep pace with the terrorist threat.

We agree with Ambassador Mayoral that
briefings for Member States and other institutions by
the Committee are extremely useful, and we would like
more such briefings to be organized. We congratulate
Ambassador Mayoral on his first visit to selected
countries, a visit in which my delegation played an
active part. We encourage greater use of this effective
instrument in order to ensure the implementation of
sanctions, to understand the concerns of States in this
regard and to strengthen dialogue with them at the
political level.
Moreover, we congratulate Mr. Richard Barrett
and the Monitoring Team, as well as the Secretariat
members, for the assistance they provide to the
Committee. The Monitoring Team's submission of its
third report and the quality of that report are a sign of
the team's professionalism. We support the
Committee's future activities to further strengthen the
sanctions regime and thus to create an environment
hostile to the threat of Al-Qaida.

My delegation supports the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's (CTC) sixteenth programme of work,
which covers the period from 1 July to 30 September
2005. We welcome the dialogue that the CTC and its
Chairman and Executive Director have established
with Member States, and we encourage them to
persevere in these efforts. Strengthening the
methodology for identifying States' needs in the area of
technical assistance is also to be encouraged.

We welcome the fact that the CTC, through the
Executive Directorate, has carried out three additional
visits, in accordance with resolution 1535 (2004). We
would like to see a road map prepared for future Visits,
although we do understand the present difficulties of
the CTC - namely, that the Executive Directorate is
not fully staffed nor fully operational.

The question of delays in the submission of
reports by Member States is an ongoing concern that
must be resolved by dialogue, so that Member States
comply with their obligations in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001). We support the CTC and its
Chairman in the future work to be done by this body,
and we encourage them to continue to strengthen the
dialogue with both Member States and international
and regional organizations.

Considerable efforts carried out by Member
States through the submission of national reports, in
accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004),
reflect the full interest of the international community
to face collectively the threat posed by the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
My delegation welcomes the fact that 118 Member
States have complied with the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004), which we adopted just over a year ago.
We hope that countries that have not yet submitted
their reports will do so as soon as possible in order to
allow the Committee to respect the April 2006 deadline
set for it so that a comprehensive situation report on
the implementation of that resolution can be submitted
to the Council.

With this in mind, it would be appropriate for the
Committee to establish at this point a suitable
framework, enabling it to provide assistance to States
so requesting assistance in the implementation of
actions set forth in resolution 1540 (2004) in the best
possible conditions.

Finally, my delegation supports the presidential
statement to be made at the end of this meeting.

