Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening this debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his detailed and informative update. We
are very glad to see Ms. Sima Samar, Chairperson of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
and Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, here in the Chamber, and I would like
to thank them for their valuable interventions.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/493)
provides a realistic assessment of and important insights
into the situation in Afghanistan, with which we
concur. It also highlights the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which deserves the
full support of the international community.

Despite the sincere and effective measures taken
by the Afghan Government and the international
community, the security situation in the country
remains fragile.

Kazakhstan is concerned about the increase in the
number of civilian casualties due to the large-scale
attacks by anti-Government forces and terrorists,
especially using improvised explosive devices and
suicide bombers. We are alarmed by the worsening
humanitarian situation due to conflicts and natural
disasters, which led to an increase in the number of
temporarily displaced persons. Unfortunately, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continues to recruit
new adherents, which poses a threat to all the countries
of the region.

Taking into account the upcoming presidential
elections in late September, we consider it important
to draw lessons from the ballot in the autumn last year
so as to safeguard credible elections and the legitimacy
of the political system. A successful electoral outcome
will have a profound impact on the future positive
dynamics of Afghanistan's development.

We welcome the efforts of the stakeholders to
advance the peace process and conduct relevant
negotiations with the Taliban. At the same time, a
speedy direct dialogue between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban is of vital importance.

The difficult economic situation in Afghanistan
is of great concern to all of us. In that regard, it is
necessary to further develop regional cooperation
and enhance Afghanistan's economic integration with
neighbouring States in implementing infrastructure
development, trade, investment, transit and transport
projects. Those numerous initiatives will clearly create
new jobs and help to reduce youth recruitment into
terrorist activities.

We believe that it is important to closely coordinate
United Nations efforts to assist in the peaceful
reconstruction of Afghanistan and provide humanitarian
assistance. It is key for us that Afghanistan's interaction
with the States of Central Asia becomes a practical and
tangible model of partnership, based on best practices,
for peace and sustainable development for other regions,
as well as around the world.

We also call on donors to increase their contribution
to peace and development in and around Afghanistan. To
that end, Kazakhstan is continuing to work to establish
in Almaty a interregional hub for the Sustainable
Development Goals under the auspices of the United
Nations. That structure will contribute to coordinated
support for countries in the region and beyond in
order to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Last month, in Almaty we opened the
House of International Organizations, where 16 United
Nations agencies are now housed under one roof. It will
contribute to the overall United Nations reform process
on the ground through close regional and interregional
coordination and collaboration based on a One United
Nations, whole-of-system approach.

Kazakhstan is deeply committed to giving women
and youth a central place throughout the entire
cycle of conflict - from prevention to resolution
to peacebuilding and recovery. In this regard, we
welcome the continued efforts of the Government
aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of women
and their participation in the peace process. This is
best exemplified by the second phase of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan. For its part,
together with the European Union and other partners,
Kazakhstan continues to co-finance the education
programme for Afghan citizens.

In conclusion, Iwould like to pledge that Kazakhstan
will continue to work to assist our brotherly country
in all forums of the United Nations, in particular the
General Assembly, in regional organizations and
also bilaterally.

