Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate the delegation of South Africa on
presiding over the Council throughout October. I also
thank the Russian Federation for successfully presiding
over the Council last month.

Despite resolutions and agreements adopted at the
international level, including at the United Nations,
the Palestinian people are still waiting for the Israeli
occupation to end and to exercise their legitimate right
to establish an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Under His Majesty King Mohammed
VI, Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Kingdom of
Morocco calls on all parties to refrain from any acts
of violence and unjust policies against the unarmed
Palestinian people, including settlement policies,
the demolition of houses and any other practices that
constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
the Fourth Geneva Convention and international
humanitarian law and that stand in the way of the two-
State solution. The Kingdom of Morocco condemns the
latest announcement to annex the Jordan Valley and
northern Dead Sea. Such announcements constitute a
grave escalation and, if implemented, would represent
a new violation of international law and international
resolutions and jeopardize all efforts under way to find
a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict.

The Kingdom of Morocco also rejects any attempt
to alter the legal and historic status of Jerusalem.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI has launched
several serious and practical initiatives to serve
the Jerusalemites and Palestinians in general. In
cooperation with His Holiness Pope Francis, and in
the context of his visit to Morocco on 30 March, at the
invitation of His Majesty, the King called for measures
to be put in place to serve the people of Jerusalem. His
Holiness and His Majesty agreed that it was important
to maintain the current status of Jerusalem as the
common heritage of humankind. Its special character
as a multi-religious city must be preserved. All its
inhabitants of the three monotheistic religions must
have access to the religious sites.

In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco, during
a reception that His Majesty King Mohammed VI
organized for His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein during his visit to Morocco on 28 March,
launched a joint initiative with the sisterly Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, aimed at defending the holy city
and protecting it from any attempts to change its
historic, legal and political status, as well as its Islamic
and Christian religious and cultural landmarks. The
Kingdom of Morocco stresses the importance of the
historic Jordanian custodianship of the Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.

It is incumbent upon the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities and to find a way out of
the stalemate that we have been witnessing ever since
the interruption of negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis, leading to more Violence and tension.
That is why the international community must take
the lead and bring Palestinians and Israelis back to the
negotiating table to implement the two-State solution
along the borders of4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine. These negotiations
must be based on genuine foundations of goodwill and
in line with a set time frame in order to restore trust
among all parties and establish a viable country. This
will enable both States to live side by side in safety and
stability in line with international legitimacy resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also appreciate the
efforts made by various States with a View to establish
lasting peace and security in the Middle East.

