Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): As we heard this
morning, the number of women, men and children in
our world who are suffering from food insecurity is
increasing. At the same time, more and more people are
living in areas torn apart by war and conflict. This we
see every day in the Security Council. As this year's
Global Report on Food Crises sets out, those are not
separate trends. The links between conflict and hunger
are clear and undeniable. Over the past year, in the 18
countries where 74 million, or 60 per cent, of those in
acute need live, conflict and insecurity were the main
driver of food insecurity. Conflict often also prevents
humanitarian access. At the same time, food insecurity
can trigger conflict, thereby creating a Vicious cycle.
As we heard this morning from Mr. Lowcock, hunger
today is used as a weapon of war.

Let me therefore begin by thanking the Dutch
presidency, and you, Madam, for organizing today's
meeting on this important issue, which we cannot
ignore if we are to meet our responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security. Let me also thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley for their candid and forthright
briefings today. They have clearly outlined the
challenges that they and their partners face on a daily
basis as they seek to meet the needs of people who are
trapped by mutually reinforcing conflict and hunger
across the world. They also pointed out opportunities
represented by the Council effectively shouldering
its responsibilities.

Last year, the Secretary-General came to us and
warned that 20 million people were at risk of famine.
In response, the Council heeded his early warning and
took early action to avoid disaster. Working together,
the international community managed to avert
famine, and we demonstrated the important role that
the Council has to play. However, as I said yesterday
during the briefing on the Lake Chad basin (see S/PV.8212), our actions have addressed only the acute
symptoms of such crises. The situation for millions of
people around the world remains perilous. In South
Sudan, for example, the protracted conflict has led to
a shocking rise in hunger. While outright famine might
have been averted, many individuals are suffering
from famine-like conditions. Women and children are
particularly vulnerable, with women often being the
first to sacrifice their food consumption for others in
the family. Continued fighting and displacement have
disrupted planting and harvesting, which means that
next year there will be less food once again, thereby
making it still more unaffordable.

Food insecurity is being exacerbated by economic
collapse. Seven million people are now in need of
humanitarian assistance. Even when food is available
and humanitarians are ready to respond, assistance to
people in need is impeded and denied due to access
restrictions. The vicious cycle is now all too familiar
and all too common. In Somalia, violence and conflict,
combined with severe droughts, continue to cause
mass displacement. The denial of access is hindering
an effective response aimed at reaching 6.2 million
people. In Yemen, the disrupted and restricted delivery
of humanitarian assistance is affecting the 22.2 million
Yemenis desperately in need of humanitarian aid. More
decisive and long-term action is clearly needed. How
should the Council respond?

First, the role of the Council is to maintain
international peace and security, which entails
preventing conflicts, effectively working for their
cessation and contributing to sustaining peace. The
prevention of conflict requires a proactive approach
to addressing the deeper, underlying risks that prevent
sustainable development and peace. In order to
efficiently address the root causes and complex drivers
of conflict, such as those discussed today, we must
better understand the risks. Regular reporting on food
insecurity and early warning indications from agencies,
such as the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
serve to highlight the link between conflict and food
insecurity. The Council can then take greater proactive
action to prevent human suffering.

Secondly, the Council also has an important role to
play in upholding and ensuring respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law. That
includes calling on parties to armed conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians and civilian objects,
including objects necessary for food production and
distribution, and firmly condemning them when such
basic norms are not respected. Parties must refrain
from attacking or rendering useless objects such as
foodstuffs, agriculture areas, crops, livestock, drinking
water installations and supplies.

Another fundamental element of ensuring respect
for international law includes ensuring rapid, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all those in need
of such assistance. Arbitrarily denying humanitarian
access to people in need is a violation of international
humanitarian law. Starvation as a method of warfare
is outlawed and unacceptable. As we have heard today
from previous speakers, accountability for Violations
of those fundamental norms is critical. The Council
must play its full role in ensuring that its demands are
adhered to.

Adequate and flexible funding is also essential for
an effective and swift humanitarian response. Sweden
is a long-standing donor to the Central Emergency
Response Fund and all United Nations humanitarian
appeals. We call on others to contribute in order
to ensure that sufficient funding is available for
time-critical assistance and protection for civilians in
need. However, humanitarian assistance should only
be a short-term solution to the immediate crisis. To
break the vicious cycle of hunger and conflict, we must
invest in building sustainable peace, allowing farmers
to return to their lands to rebuild their livelihoods and
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive food systems to
re-emerge.

In conclusion, the duty the Secretary-General
entrusted to the Council last year is far from completed.
In the presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/l4) adopted
in August last year, facilitated by Sweden, the Council
committed to working with the Secretary-General to
pursue all possible avenues to end conflicts and to take
action to avert famine in conflict-affected countries. We
look forward to continued updates from the Secretary-
General on the matter. The Council must remain seized
of the issuse and consider further action.

