Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her comprehensive briefing. Let me reiterate our
appreciation for the tremendous work that the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has
been doing in assisting the Iraqi authorities. We
welcome the extension of the Mission's mandate. It is
vital that UNAMI continue to provide support to the
Government of Iraq as it embarks upon implementing
new programmes and strategies to overcome challenges
and pave the way for sustainable peace and development.

Iraq has emerged from a period of turmoil and
undertaken efforts to restore stability and prosperity in
the country. The current phase is crucial and requires
addressing persistent challenges by promoting electoral,
economic, social and security-sector reforms, tackling
corruption and building strong State institutions, as well
as advancing stabilization and reconstruction. We would
like to express our concern about the lack of progress
on decisions related to the vacant ministerial positions.
We therefore urge the political parties to ensure the
swift completion of the Government-formation process
and effectively address the public concerns.

We encourage the Iraqi authorities to concentrate
their efforts on the delivery of basic public services and
developing the means to meet the needs of all Iraqis,
including women, youth and members of all religious
and ethnic groups, by accelerating the implementation
of the 2018-2022 governmental programme. We also
encourage the Iraqi authorities to ensure effective and
inclusive governance and live up to their commitments
to guarantee the equal participation of women at all
levels of decision-making structures.

The issue of social protection for vulnerable
groups requires special attention. In our view, it is
vital to increase efforts to prevent violence against
women and girls and implement effective response
measures that would ensure protection for the victims
of gender-based violence, including through the full
implementation of Iraq's national action plan on women
and peace and security. We are also concerned about
the situation for children, in particular those detained
on national-security-related charges for perceived
affiliation with armed groups. Those children must be
treated primarily as victims. We urge Iraq to guarantee
UNAMI's access to detained children, develop
non-judicial measures as alternatives to prosecution
and detention and ensure the reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed groups.

The stabilization of the country will also entail
promoting national reconciliation, including by
assisting with the voluntary, dignified and safe return of
internally displaced persons, their local integration or
resettlement. It is vital that internally displaced persons
be treated in a non-discriminatory manner irrespective
of their perceived affiliation and that they be provided
with the assistance they require.

We wish to express our concerns that the ongoing
tensions in the Gulf may negatively influence the
security situation in Iraq and further destabilize the
country. At the same time, we appreciate Iraq's balanced
policy with regard to its neighbours in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
support Iraq in its efforts to restore stability after years
of conflict, in full respect for its unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. It is paramount to preserve the
security of Iraq through the de-escalation of tensions.

