Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Protocol, custom and good manners dictate that one
must thank Stephen O'Brien for his report (S/2017/144),
despite the fact that every one of his paragraphs feels
more like a direct blow to the heart than information
for our intellects. Mr. O'Brien places us squarely
in front of the frightening reality that millions of
people - hundreds of thousands of women, children
and sick people - have been facing for the past six
years in Syria. In this Chamber, we are once again
delivering speeches.

Stephen O'Brien underscored, and every time we
hear him he underscores it more, the bravery, valour and
self-sacrifice of all of those anonymous humanitarian
volunteers and workers on the ground, who while
risking their own lives on a daily basis try to relieve the
suffering of the affected people.

We are approaching the sixth anniversary of the
beginning of the Syrian conflict. As we said one year
ago, we hope that this will be the last year ofthe conflict.
We have faith in the strong commitment expressed by
the Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, who must
always be supported by Council members and by all
the parties involved in one way or another in Syria.

After more than two months, we can say that the
cessation of hostilities agreed in the waning days of
2016 has enabled a sharp drop in violence in some parts
of the Syrian territory, despite numerous violations and
fighting that still persist. It has allowed the delivery of
relief to millions of inhabitants in Syria, who in recent
years have only known war, bombing, destruction
and death. It made helped to establish a propitious
environment for the Astana meeting held in January and
the resumption of the negotiations in Geneva between
Government representatives and the opposition in
Syria, with the mediation of Special Envoy Mr. Staffan
de Mistura. We hope that the parties can now move
forward in order to overcome their mutual distrust
and make progress in the political transition process in
Syria, which after a year of delays, is more necessary
than ever.

Despite this more positive scenario at the political
level, the situation ofcivilians in Syria remains alarming.
It is very disturbing that despite the ongoing cessation
of hostilities, humanitarian access seems to be getting
worse month after month. It seems that humanitarian
access continues to be increasingly difficult with each

passing month. That is an unacceptable state of affairs
and can no longer be tolerated, as millions of people
depend on those deliveries. That is why it is necessary
to confront the obstructions to the regular provision of
humanitarian aid - primarily, the insecurity on the
ground and the lack of administrative authorization.

Similarly, the lack of consensus among the
parties regarding the ceasefire agreements in
four locations - Al-Fu'ah, Kafraya, Madaya and
Zabadani - signals a new and imminent humanitarian
catastrophe that could lead to tragic scenes like those
we witnessed one year ago when the population
was literally dying of hunger. It is appalling to once
again hear reports of medical kits being taken from
the convoys, actions that constitute crimes against
humanity, as the aid was to be delivered to the most
vulnerable populations, such as pregnant women,
children and the infirm. We note that aerial deliveries to
Deir ez-Zor, which had been suspended in mid-January,
have fortunately been resumed. We are also pleased
that the ceasefire in Wadi Barada has allowed a partial
resumption of the drinking water supply to Damascus.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Uruguay's view
on what our priorities should be if hope to significantly
improve the humanitarian situation of Syria's civilian
population: the consolidation of ceasefires throughout
most of the country; the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure by all parties to the conflict;
the protection of hospitals, medical and health
personnel, and educational establishments, as well
as their personnel and students; the urgent raising of
sieges, which have no place in the twenty-first century;
immediate, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access throughout the country, in keeping with the
monthly plans that the United Nations has submitted to
the Syrian authorities; and the ongoing and relentless
fight against terrorism in all of its forms, particularly
in Al-Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, while always keeping the
protection of civilians as the top priority; and progress
towards a political solution to the conflict, which we
hope the Special Envoy to the Secretary-General for
Syria, Staffan de Mistura, will inform us of as soon
as possible.

