Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing and
Mr. Simonovic' for introducing the third report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine. I understand that the Ukrainian authorities
have accepted the renewal of the mission's mandate for
the next three months. We welcome that. The mission is
an invaluable source of information in terms of giving
an overview of the situation in Ukraine.

The report submitted by Mr. Simonovie covers an
important event in the history of the country - the
election of Petro Poroshenko as the new President of
Ukraine. Despite the obstacles placed before the people
ofthe east in the exercise oftheir right to free expression,
voting proceeded normally in the rest of Ukraine.
As the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) has stressed, international norms
were respected. Mr. Poroshenko is therefore the new
legitimate President okaraine and has been recognized
as such. His talks in Normandy during the ceremonies
to commemorate the 6 June 1944 landing, as well as
his inaugural ceremony, are evidence of that. This is an
important stage because the election has given birth to
a process of political normalization.

Mr. Simonovie's third report sheds light on the
important steps taken by the Government of Ukraine,
particularly in the context of implementing the Geneva
statement of 17 April. Round tables were organized to
bring diverse sectors of Ukrainian society together,
and a draft law entitled "Memorandum of concord
and peace", which provides for the decentralization
of power and guarantees on the status of the Russian
language, has been adopted by the Rada.

The report also notes that investigations are under
way into the serious human rights violations committed
during the events ofMaidan Square, as well as those that
took place in 2 May in Odesa. While there has not yet
been a full clarification of those tragic events, it should
nonetheless be stressed that efforts have been made to
that end. The cooperation of Ukraine with the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission on this issue
has also been significant. Those elements show that,
despite the many difficulties that have arisen, Ukraine
is in the process of achieving its political transition.

Despite such positive developments, eastern
Ukraine, including Donetsk and Luhansk, has
experienced a general deterioration in its security,
human rights and humanitarian situation under the
sway of illegal separatist armed groups. The third
report stresses that arbitrary arrests, kidnapping,
torture and murder now affect not only journalists,
public officials and human rights activists, but the
population as a whole. Mr. Simonovie has just informed
us that the situation has grown even worse over the past
week. In that regard, I remind the Council that eight
OSCE observers have been held by separatists since
late May, which poses an unacceptable obstacle to that
Organization's mission.

The violence, as has already been confirmed,
is fueled and sustained from outside. The presence
of those foreign elements and all foreign support for
them must cease. Control of transborder movements is
critical. In such conditions, the Government okaraine
is responsible for taking appropriate and proportional
measures, with respect for international law, to combat
the armed groups, protect the populace and ensure
control of its own borders.

Those operations impact the population's access
to basic services. Some residents have been forced to
flee areas of confrontation and take refuge in other
regions of Ukraine or in the Russian Federation. No
one can deny that humanitarian needs exist. That is
why humanitarian actors on the ground are already
mobilized to respond. Coordinating all these responses
not only among the various agencies but also with
the Ukrainian authorities is essential. Indeed, the
Ukrainian Government has taken all necessary steps
to provide shelter to those who have been forced from
their homes. I note that all regions of Ukraine, east and
west alike, have responded to the call for solidarity. The
sense of unity and of sharing a common destiny clearly
exists in Ukraine.

As the mission report points out, the imposition of
Russian law in Crimea, which was illegitimately annexed
by Russia, has created a situation ofjudicial instability
that prevents the local population from exercising its
human rights and basic freedoms. Discrimination in
hiring is rampant. Leaders and human rights activists
of the Tatar community are being prosecuted. It is
increasingly difficult to keep two nationalities, and
those who refuse to inform the Russian authorities are
now subject to criminal charges. The human rights of
these people have been trampled.

Faced with the serious crisis in Ukraine, the
authorities in Kyiv have made a number of good-will
gestures. We welcome President Poroshenko's decision
to propose a lS-point peace plan and to declare a
week-long ceasefire. We note with satisfaction that his
proposed truce was accepted yesterday by the armed
groups in the context of the three-way meetings held
among Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE following the
meetings in Normandy. We encourage that dialogue to
continue and we call on the armed groups in eastern
Ukraine to lay down their arms, leave all illegally
occupied public buildings, and engage honestly and
openly in a political dialogue that will allow them to
make their claims in a legal and peaceful manner.

In such conditions, everything possible must be
done to promote a return to calm, which is a sine qua
non for the start of a political dialogue. That, I repeat,
entails control of the Russian-Ukrainian border in
order to halt the infiltration of equipment and armed
men. The international community as a whole and all
members of the Council must strive towards that end
and support Kyiv's efforts. We welcome the declaration
of the ceasefire enjoys the support of the Russian
President. That support must be reflected on the ground
at a time when there is cause for concern over word that
wide-scale new military exercises are under way. In
that light, we are heartened by the Russian President's
call on the Russian Federation Council this morning
to annul its authorization for the Russian Army to
intervene on Ukrainian territory.

Today, there is no other path for Ukraine except that
of unity and reconciliation. The European Union and
France stand ready to offer Ukraine all their support
in those efforts, as our Heads of State and Government
recalled at their summit on 27 May.

