Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): The
tragic mass shooting at Virginia Tech yesterday was
shocking news to all of us. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deepest condolences and
sympathy to the victims and their families.

Madam President, my delegation appreciates your
timely initiative in drawing our attention to the
important issue of the security aspects of climate
change. I also appreciate your delegation's concept
paper (S/2007/186, annex), which concisely shows the
potential implications of climate change for
international peace and security.

As well documented in the recent reports by Sir
Nicolas Stern and by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), it is increasingly clear that
climate catastrophes caused by global warming will
gravely affect the entirety of the world if not checked
by immediate joint action by all of us. As the globe
warms, it is more likely that extreme weather events,
including severe floods, droughts and a variety of
storms, will intensify in their impact. Floods and heavy
downpours associated with rising sea levels will
inundate cities and other habitats at or below sea level.
Moreover, the newly published report of IPCC Working
Group II depicts an acceleration of changes to the
ecosystem, in particular in its patterns and diversity.

These phenomena would not only have a
devastating impact on global economies at all levels
but would also have serious security implications, as
the concept paper poignantly recognizes. Among other
factors, competition over scarce resources, in particular
energy and water, is the most likely factor that might
induce or facilitate conflicts among nations.

Another grave security aspect of climate change
is that its impact will not be equally distributed. It has
been reasonably predicted that the effects of climate
change will be more severe in unstable States and among
poorer, more vulnerable populations. The small island
developing States might be on the front lines of these
effects, which could produce receding coastlines and
the possible future submergence of entire land masses.

Understanding this security dimension of climate
change should therefore bring us together in tackling
this global issue urgently and collectively. Climate
change certainly demands fundamental rethinking in
many policy areas, as well as in individual ways of
living. It forces us to make painful but rational
decisions within a limited amount of time. It leads us
to answer fundamental questions on how humankind
created the problem and what human factors may
produce solutions.

We may revisit a classical but still illustrative
thesis of "the tragedy of the commons." If we abuse or
misuse our public goods - in this case, our planet -
our generation as well as future generations will lose
them. With a View to escaping that trap, I strongly believe
that we should explore common solutions based on
enlightened national interests instead of being bound
by the narrow and immediate concerns of each country.
At the level of the individual living within national
borders, we have learned that enlightened self-interest,
which balances individual needs with the common
good, best serves each citizen in the long term.

In the same vein, it is time for us to learn and
accept the same logic at the level of the global Village.
As our era of globalization ushers in a new set of
transnational problems, of which climate change is a
prime case, traditional national interests may need to
expand to encompass enlightened national interest -
the interests of each nation in tune with a global
perspective. Once nations adopt enlightened national
interest, a corollary leadership by example may also be
required as another guiding principle. We must
mobilize our powers of reasoning and abstract thought,
which are unique to humankind. Those new concepts
may best ensure long-term national interests by
enabling us to better respond to global problems.

I hope that today's debate will jump-start our
search for wise solutions to this far-reaching problem,
and lead to meaningful progress towards a
breakthrough at the Bali conference in December 2007.
