Secretary-General Guterres's report card (S/2020/366) on the state of protection highlights the enormous violations and the failures to protect men, women and children around the globe. Communities caught in the crossfire of armed conflict suffer shock after shock, violation after violation, until their resilience is threadbare. I am concerned for people - for the rising number of displaced people, stuck in limbo without any prospect of a lasting solution to their plight, and for the millions of families searching endlessly for their missing loved ones. I am concerned for the urban poor, elderly, detainees, migrants and refugees, women, survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, and people with a disability. I am concerned about broken places and systems - the migration and displacement camps and the prisons where human dignity is as absent as clean water and sanitation. I am concerned about emerging threats - the rapid spread of hate speech; stigmatization of all kinds; and data being misused to suppress or control populations instead of protecting them. I am concerned about the shrinking space for neutral, impartial and independent humanitarian work. And I am concerned about the behaviour of belligerents and all those who support them - about the violations of human life and dignity caused by persistent disregard or expedient interpretation of international humanitarian law and other international legal frameworks. In particular, I raise the devastating impact on civilians when explosive weapons with a wide impact area are used in populated areas. The death and destruction left behind by heavy explosive weapons raise serious questions about international humanitarian law compliance and signal the urgent need for a change of behaviour to protect civilians, including by avoiding the use of such weapons in populated areas. A strong, unequivocal political declaration committing States to taking concrete action in that regard would be a good first step. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is working on policy and operational-level recommendations to that end. The divisions within the Security Council on critical concepts of humanitarian law and work, notably access to populations in need, are increasing suffering on the front lines. While the ICRC takes responsibility for delivering neutral and impartial humanitarian services independently and within the legal framework of the Geneva Conventions, it is the Council's responsibility to facilitate access to populations in need. Council members are obliged to proactively facilitate access and not to pile mountains of bureaucratic and political obstacles on humanitarian organizations. Council members are not asked to tell humanitarian organizations who is in need, but rather to allow neutral and impartial humanitarian organizations to do independent needs assessments in full transparency. And if there are divisions on whether people in a specific context are in need, I would expect States to allow humanitarians to do their jobs as a default precautionary measure unless imperative security reasons prohibit as much. International humanitarian laws, principles and concepts have been developed to protect people, not to make a point against political adversaries. I urge Council members to base their policies in this regard on the law, which is the only reasonable basis for consensus, and to leave political controversies outside of humanitarian concerns. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis is fast threatening to become a protection crisis. At the very time they are needed most, helpers are under attack. Health systems are being targeted and health workers abused. Since March this year, the ICRC has recorded 208 COVID-19-related attacks against health-care targets in more than 13 countries. The socioeconomic impacts will cause further waves of despair, leaving people facing hunger and poverty exposed to abuse and exploitation. States' responses to the pandemic show the risk that, without checks and balances, emergency health measures can become abusive tools to control a population's movement or withhold services. We fear that some groups - perhaps those considered to be the enemy - may be excluded from life-saving measures. For example, the distribution of any vaccine in volatile and contested places will be difficult, but it must be available to all equitably. On a more positive note, States have also stepped up in response to the pandemic, implementing more humane policies. If I have optimism during this bleak crisis, it is because I see the potential for actors to take measures during this crisis that spark a recommitment in support of humanitarian protections. For example, we have seen the safe release from detention of many people deprived of liberty, decisions to regularize non-documented migrants to ensure they can access health care, and the adoption of unilateral ceasefires. Arms bearers remain engaged with the ICRC in crises, with new opportunities for dialogue and advice arising. As police forces and military personnel are called on to maintain public order, the ICRC has maintained a dialogue with public forces to ensure that international law is upheld when conducting operations. And as part of our broader dialogue with hundreds of non-State armed groups across the world, the ICRC is engaged with Islamist and Salafi scholars in the Sahel on a fatwa on COVID-19, giving guidance on respect for the deceased and on health protocols. I am also encouraged by the potential for multi-stakeholder responses to influence behaviour. This week, 40 global leaders joined the ICRC's call for Governments to work together to stop cyberattacks on the health sector. It cannot be overstated that the extreme vulnerability of people in conflict zones to repeated shocks is, in large part, due to States and other belligerents disregarding, over many years, their legal obligations towards populations under their control. International humanitarian law protects civilian life, essential services and the environment. It prohibits torture and ill-treatment, like rape and sexual violence. It protects those not participating in hostilities and provides special protection for health services and health workers. It protects those living under occupation, those in detention, the missing, the dead and their families, and it prioritizes restoring family links. Respecting and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law in all circumstances would protect people from the impact of war and shield them against the subsequent health, economic or environmental shock waves. We call on the Council to ensure in all situations, whether while enforcing exceptional measures in response to public health emergencies or during hostilities or public unrest, that its responses are guided by the utmost respect for the protection of civilians. We also call on the Council to respect the dignity and rights of the deceased, the families of missing persons and persons deprived of liberty. We understand that consensus is difficult, but human life and dignity cannot be the price of inertia. We ask that the Council be stronger in word and deed in encouraging better behaviour on the battlefield and ensuring that human life and dignity is protected, without exception.
