Mr. Kuindwa (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank you, Madam President, for convening this debate
and to convey my delegation's appreciation to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of France, who presided
with great distinction over the Council's work for the
month of June. Your own enthusiasm in presiding over
the deliberations of the Security Council during the
month of July gives us all reason to feel much pride
and gratitude. Your personal commitment to the issue
that has brought us together today is commendable.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General for the report before the Security
Council; Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund, for her briefing;
and, in particular, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, our brother Olara Otunnu, who
comes from the East African region, for his most
thought-provoking introductory statement. The debate
that we are engaged in is of particular interest to
Africa, where there is an increase in the number of
atrocities to which children are subjected and, indeed,
in which they participate.

We all know the statistics of those involved in
armed conflicts, and the number is colossal. The
proliferation of small arms and drug trafficking in the
past decade, involving billions of dollars, has
contributed to the escalation of these conflicts. We are
living in an era of many conflicts and wars, which are
used by some to achieve their own political and
economic agendas. Sadly, it is women, children and
families as a whole that suffer. Effective intervention
that reduces and eventually eliminates the involvement
of children in all forms of conflict will make a lasting
impression. The report we are considering today
presents a number of recommendations to address this
crisis, recommendations which the Secretary-General
believes fall within the ambit of this Council. My
delegation would like to comment on just a few.

With regard to the normative foundation, my
delegation would like to state that Kenya has ratified
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
promulgated an Act of Parliament making it effective
nationally. Indeed, legislation specifically for children
was adopted in the National Assembly. It is also clear
to us that the Millennium Summit will provide a
suitable opportunity for us to sign the Optional
Protocol.

On the issue of curbing the illicit flow of arms,
Kenya believes that there is an urgency to this aspect of
the problem. This urgency is based on the recognition
that, while the world is changing rapidly, developing
countries are neither able to keep pace with the
changes, nor in a position to tackle the backlog of
economic injustice and social inequities. We must
continue to be vigilant and become even more
conscious of the danger so that children's issues are
given high priority when economic and social issues
are being determined.

I wish to refer to several declarations which have
played a big role in addressing the issue of children and
armed conflict in Africa. The Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) has repeatedly reaffirmed the
determination of the Organization to strive relentlessly
towards the promotion of the rights and welfare of the
child and to combat all forms of child exploitation and,
in particular, to end the phenomenon of child soldiers.
Heads of Government of the Commonwealth, at their
meeting in Durban in November last year, strongly
condemned the targeting, abuse, recruitment and
deployment of children in armed conflict. Indeed, the
advocacy campaign of the coalition to stop the use of
child soldiers was instrumental in building worldwide
momentum for reaching agreement on the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. My
delegation believes that all these will provide the basis
for Governments to move quickly to effective action
programmes, as called for in the Secretary-General's
report.

The Great Lakes and Horn of Africa Conference
on the Proliferation of Small Arms, held in March
2000, in which 10 countries in the region participated
at the ministerial level, adopted the Nairobi
Declaration, in which a number of regional cooperative
measures to curb illegal small arms flows were
proposed. The Declaration has been distributed as a
General Assembly and Security Council document.

In conclusion, enormous challenges face mankind
at the beginning of the twenty-first century, marked by
deepening poverty and a widening gap between rich
and poor, increasing conflict and violence, the deadly
spread of HIV/AIDS and continuing discrimination,
particularly against women and girls. Tremendous
changes are required in societies everywhere if the
vision for children, who are our future, is to be
realized. We hope that the existing laws governing the
participation of children in armed conflict will be
reviewed to provide essential protection to these
vulnerable members of society. Early-warning systems
are also needed, including better ongoing monitoring
and reporting, if the worst abuses are to be avoided.

