Mr. Spantfi (Afghanistan): Mr. President, I
would like to express to you my warmest regards and
gratitude for convening this important meeting that
demonstrates the commitment of the international
community towards a democratic, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan. I would also like to welcome
my dear friend, Minister Qureshi, with whom I had a
very productive meeting this morning.

I welcome the special report of the Secretary-
General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1806
(2008) on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (S/2008/434).

Precisely 10 minutes after the terrorist attack on
the embassy of India in Kabul on Monday, 7 July, I
witnessed the bloody scene of that attack, which
resulted in the killing of women and children, Indian
diplomats and security personnel, as well as injuries to
dozens of innocent civilians. I am still overwhelmed by
this brutal and cold-blooded act of terrorism.
Afghanistan condemns this heinous act of terrorism in
the strongest possible terms and sympathizes with
those who lost their lives. We share the grief of the
families of the victims.

This act of violence is neither the first nor the last
in a succession of increasingly brutal attacks that has
targeted the people of Afghanistan, the region and the
world. In recent months, we have witnessed a sharp
increase in terrorist acts, including the assassination
attempt on President Karzai, the Kandahar jailbreak
and a drastic increase in the number of casualties borne
by international forces. Those who are behind the
Taliban and Al-Qaida have enhanced their support to
those groups, which in turn have increased the scope
and pace of their terrorist activities. These groups have
shifted their focus towards Afghanistan as a part of
their psychological war designed to sabotage the peace
process in my country and affect the regional and
global public opinion. One of the main factors
contributing to the deterioration of the security
situation in the country is the de facto truce in the
tribal areas beyond our borders.

(spoke in Dari)

The terrorist enemy we face is sustained by a
complex set of networks and infrastructure and
therefore cannot be defeated by military operations
inside Afghanistan alone. In order to keep the terrorist
threat alive, an elaborate system of terrorist sanctuaries
and the financing, recruiting, arming and systematic
training of suicide bombers is operating outside our
borders. It is clear that we cannot defeat terrorism
unless we address its root causes. Success against
terrorism will be achieved only by a coherent and
integrated regional and global approach.

The Afghan security forces, together with their
allies from the International Security Assistance Force-
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (ISAF-NATO) and
the international coalition against terrorism, are
bearing the brunt of this effort, acting as the brave foot
soldiers of the free world on this critical battlefield.
They are fighting an enemy that is also transnational in
composition and international in focus, based
specifically outside our borders.

We welcome the results of the elections in
Pakistan and the path that the people of Pakistan have
chosen leading towards democracy and the
establishment of a civilian Government. The people of
Pakistan have said "no" to terrorism. We support the
democratic process and welcome the expansion of our
friendly relations with the civilian Government of
Pakistan. It is clear that international terrorist networks
constitute a common threat to Afghanistan and
Pakistan. It is our firm belief that a joint, coherent and
integrated approach undertaken by both Governments
is required to eliminate their bases.

Cognizant of the duty of the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure security for its citizens
throughout the country, we wish, with the support of
the international community, to take upon ourselves
more responsibilities. In this respect, President Karzai
has declared that we will assume responsibility for the
security of Kabul in August. Our aim is to take more
responsibility gradually, but that requires that the
training and equipping of our national army and
security forces be accelerated so that they can carry out
these duties.
The situation will not be improved without equal
focus being placed on such interrelated issues as
narcotics, corruption and poverty, which undermine our
goals and breed insecurity and instability. The

Government of Afghanistan is resolute in the fight
against corruption and is ready to take concrete steps to
that end. Last Sunday, our Cabinet agreed on the
mandates and responsibilities of an anti-corruption
monitoring commission. We will establish a special
police force, special courts and new attorney offices
specifically designed for the fight against corruption.

Our comprehensive counter-narcotics strategy
takes into account all security, international, social and
economic aspects of the problem. Success in this fight
mainly depends on improving good governance,
creating alternative livelihoods for farmers and the
realization of a coordinated rural development policy.
Last year, we took significant steps in the fight against
narcotics and poppy cultivation. Production was
considerably reduced in 23 out of 34 provinces, and the
number of poppy-free provinces increased to 16.

In Helmand province, where we still face severe
poppy cultivation and security challenges, the nexus
between narcotics and terrorism is evident.

The Paris Conference in Support of Afghanistan
was a landmark success for the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community as they
renew their efforts to assist the Afghan people and
Government in the peace and reconstruction process.
On behalf of the Government and people of
Afghanistan, I express my appreciation for the
international community's political and financial
commitment to the vision of a democratic, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan.

The Afghanistan National Development Strategy
and the outstanding financial commitment of
$21 billion pledged for its implementation have
provided an opportunity to endorse a common road
map aimed at achieving the objectives agreed in the
Afghanistan Compact and the Millennium
Development Goals.

We value the coordinating role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
particularly its focus on improving aid effectiveness
and adjustments to coordination mechanisms in order
to make them more efficient and delivery-oriented. I
would like to stress that Ambassador Kai Eide, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
enjoys the support and full trust of President Karzai
and of the Government and people of Afghanistan. We
support the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative to strengthen UNAMA, as
reflected in the Secretary-General's report.

I would also like to thank the United Nations and
the donor and international community for their
financial and technical support and ongoing
humanitarian assistance. The new food appeal made by
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community requires serious attention, particularly at a
time of increased food insecurity and vulnerability due
to the effects of drought this year. We thank Mr. John
Holmes for his personal involvement in that issue and
his participation in today's discussion.

For the first time in their contemporary history,
Afghan citizens have chosen their own model of
governance and social, political and economic
development. We are preparing for the presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2009 and 2010. The
participation of all Afghans in the elections is essential
to consolidating democracy and to enabling Afghans to
shape their own future. We seek the support and
cooperation of the international community in
preparing the grounds for free, fair and secure
elections.

Last but not least, the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghan people sincerely honour and remember
the dedication and sacrifice of the men and women of
the international community in the war against
terrorism. Once again, I would like to express my
sincere appreciation for being invited to participate in
this meeting.

