Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank and commend the Force Commanders
from the various peacekeeping missions who are here,
not only for their very useful briefings but also for the
work they are doing on the ground, often in difficult
circumstances.

The issue of peacekeeping operations is very
important both to Security Council members and to
the countries hosting missions. Such operations have
evolved since the first was launched in 1948, in terms
of both their composition and their mandates. The
nature and proliferation of conflicts have required
peacekeeping operations to adapt in order to become
more operational and efficient.

The briefings we have just heard basically confirm
the genuine necessity ofadapting missions to the context
on the ground and of enabling peacekeeping to evolve
into peacebuilding, using troops with proven skills.
Togo welcomes the fact that for a number of years now
analyses have been made of peacekeeping missions'
operationalization and their actual contribution to the
development of countries where they are deployed. In
view of the complex nature of such missions today,
due to the multiplicity of stakeholders and the nature
of conflicts, peacekeeping operations must seek to
combine effectiveness, independence and success.

Togo shares the views expressed by the briefers and
by a number of speakers before me on the agenda item
for this meeting. However, we would like to reiterate
that peacekeeping operations must have adequate
and predictable resources in order for missions to be
undertaken. As a contributing country, we are aware
of the difficulties that can arise as a result of delayed
reimbursements to troop- and equipment-contributing
countries. We therefore urge donor countries to continue
to support peacekeeping missions so that financing
issues do not hamper their smooth functioning.

Standardizingthetrainingofpeacekeepingpersonnel
also remains of great importance to troop-contributing
countries. Providing such standardized training should
enable all personnel to have the same level of training
and to avoid different practices in the field. Similarly,
a clearly defined mandate is needed in order to prevent
any difference in interpretation, as is sometimes the
case when peacekeepers are accused of not responding
in the face of acts of violence against civilians. We
believe that a clear mandate should make it possible to
identify stakeholders' level of responsibility.

Moreover, we welcome inter-mission cooperation,
as is currently the case between the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. We encourage such cooperation,
which can contribute to effectively combating
cross-border armed groups in particular.

Effective and successful peacekeeping operations
require ongoing constructive cooperation between
missions and host Governments. Such participation
should therefore be a significant element of the mandate
of missions, whose success is their raison d'etre.
We welcome initiatives undertaken in that regard,
particularly in areas such as police training and national
capacity-building, especially in the fields of justice,
human rights, in particular the protection of women and
children, and the establishment of the rule of law.

In conclusion, once again on behalf of the Togolese
Government, I wish to commend the commitment of
peacekeepers and civilians who work selflessly and
tirelessly in order to promote international peace and
security, in particular in Africa.

