The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chairperson of the
African Union.

We would have preferred to defer the briefing by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) until the completion of the joint missions
carried out by the Government of the Sudan and the
United Nations to assess the humanitarian situation in
Darfur, so that we might have a fuller picture of the
situation. Furthermore, if the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs were here, all delegations
would have had the opportunity to ask him questions
and receive direct responses. We also wish that those
Council members who insisted that this meeting be
held had been as enthusiastic and persistent when
aircraft were bombing civilians in Gaza, who were
deprived of food and medicine as a result of a blockade
during that aggression and for as long as two years
before it.

My country, as a neighbour of the Sudan and as
current Chair of the African Union, is closely following
developments in the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
While we regret the decision by the Government of the
Sudan to expel a number of humanitarian
organizations, we understand the circumstances in
which that decision was made. We realize the
importance of cooperation in Darfur among the United
Nations, the Government of the Sudan, the African
Union, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid

Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the League of
Arab States to facilitate the safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
We hope that the Government's decision, which has
caused a number of humanitarian organizations to
suspend their activities, will not affect the people and
that those organizations will be replaced by others -
possibly national ones - as soon as possible. We are
confident that the Government will take care of its
people in Darfur, who are Sudanese citizens, not - as
some here are attempting to imply - citizens of any
member of the Council.

Like others, we are awaiting the results of the
joint assessment missions by the United Nations and
the Government of the Sudan, and we hope that we will
receive their report as soon as possible. Regrettably,
OCHA itself, which we had hoped would be
represented at today's meeting, is also awaiting those
results. We believe that the Government's decision
concerning a number of humanitarian organizations is
one of the expected negative effects of the decision by
the International Criminal Court to issue an arrest
warrant against Sudanese President Omer Al-Bashir.
We cannot separate the two issues, and we have no
doubt that the Court's decision has created a new
reality in the Sudan. As we have stated before,
imposing the Court's procedures at the expense of the
peace process will neither do justice nor put an end to
the conflict in Darfur; however, it could threaten the
stability of the Sudan and the entire region and
undermine the whole political process, both in Darfur
and in South Sudan.

While that does not mean that we do not want
those responsible for crimes to be brought to justice,
we believe it is essential to create an atmosphere
conducive to achieving peace. Rather than taking
measures such as the Court's decision, which, under
the pretext of doing justice, could complicate peace
efforts and increase instability, we merely seek to
support the political process through other means. That
is what why the African Union, a major partner of the
United Nations, has taken a number of decisions -
including, most recently, at its summit in Addis
Ababa - highlighting the need to invoke article 16 of
the Rome Statute.

Regrettably, the Council has yet to respond to
those and other decisions taken at the regional level,
including by the League of Arab States. The Sudan
needs international efforts that are in consonance
with - and not in contradiction of - its national
efforts and the efforts of the African Union to avert the
negative effects of the lack of security and the current
instability in the country.

We do not believe that the Security Council needs
more affirmations of the possible negative
consequences for the stability of Sudan. Does it need
more evidence of the repercussions that the decision of
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International Criminal
Court has had? We have all heard the statements by
certain rebel groups in the Sudan. They in themselves
constitute a warning to us here in the Security Council.

It is indeed urgent that the Security Council
respond to the various national and regional concerns
and act to invoke article 16 of the Rome Statute in
response to the decision of the African Union that was
adopted at its most recent summit and the recent
decision of the League of Arab States.

We know that the relations of some members of
this Council with the Sudan are tense. This is quite
normal in international relations and indeed acceptable,
but what is neither natural nor normal is that the
Security Council be used as a forum to settle accounts
with the Government of the Sudan or any other
Government. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya calls on all
member States to refrain from such actions so that they
do not further damage the credibility of this Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council. The next speaker is the representative
of the Czech Republic, to whom I give the floor.

