Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this debate. We hope that these
debates can be institutionalized by the Council. I will
abbreviate what I have to say, and am circulating a
longer statement.

As we all do, Australia supports a Security
Council that better reflects the contemporary world and
is responsive. Reform of the Council's composition is
central, but so too, of course, is improving its working
methods. The working methods of an organization can
be the key to its performance. We have said here before
that the basic mindset of the Council should be one of
active accountability and deliberate transparency. The
more transparently the Council undertakes its work, the
more accountable it is; the more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
be.

There have been good developments on working
methods to welcome, but as we know there remains
much to do. I will mention three issues.

The first relates to conflict prevention. As the
security challenges facing the globe evolve, it is vital
that the Council make best use of the tools already at
its disposal to prevent conflict. To do so, it needs to be
able to act in an informed manner. In this context, we
join others in welcoming the practice of regular
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs, with a
focus on horizon-scanning and early warning. These
should be maintained. We also commend the Council's
willingness to consider complex thematic issues
relating to some of the globe's most demanding
challenges. The recent debate on climate change and
security signalled responsiveness to challenges that
affect small island States in particular.

Of course, the Council should not stray into the
prerogatives of other organs, but the Council is of
course responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. We now understand that challenges to this
can be complex and non-traditional. Having up-to-date
information and analysis on new security challenges
and discussion of their implications is essential to the
Council's preventive role.

In order to enhance the Council's capacity for
prevention, we support the suggestion of regular
briefings from the Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. We have also
encouraged the Council to issue a standing invitation to
the Executive Director of UN-Women and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
11-61406
The second issue I want to raise is improving
consultation with troop- and police-contributing
countries. These are an important mechanism to ensure
that peacekeeping mandates are informed by
knowledge of ground realities, and that expectations
are realistic and well understood. Such consultation is
also important throughout the lifecycle of a mission
and in planning transitions. Consultative meetings need
to be structured and scheduled well in advance. We
welcome the initiatives adopted in its presidential
statement of 26 August (S/PRST/2011/l7) to improve
these processes. Mission-specific groups can also be an
important conduit to the Council; the core group on
Timor-Leste, of which we are a member, is a good
example.

My third point concerns interaction between the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
While there has been good progress, there is much
more that can be done to achieve a more dynamic and
organic relationship between the two. We welcome the
participation of the PBC Chair and the chairs of the
country-specific configurations in Council meetings
and informal dialogues. We believe that the Council
could do more to draw on the expertise of the PBC,
particularly during the renewal of mission mandates.

We endorse much of what has already been said
by others, including about more open meetings; more
information on the work of sanctions committees; more
engagement with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union; more use of
Arria Formula meetings and informal dialogues;
making draft resolutions and presidential statements
available to non-members at an early stage; and
enhancing efficiency through the better harnessing of
technology.

Of course, the Council's efficiency and
effectiveness also depends in part on the performance
of us, the non-members. It is necessary for us to take
full advantage of the opportunities open to us; we
should do so actively and dynamically, but above all
we should have something to say. We would welcome
reforms to make these debates less formulaic and more
productive. They could include a better reflection, in
the outcome of meetings and the Council's annual
report, of what non-Council members say. We welcome
Portugal's initiative in the recent meeting on new
challenges to peace and security (S/PV.6668) of
allowing the briefers a chance to respond to the
comments from Council members.
To conclude, we have here a very simple linear
equation. Increased transparency and consultation
increase effectiveness and further enhance the
legitimacy of this body in the eyes of all of us Member
States. That, of course, strengthens the Council's
pre-eminent role in global peace and security.

