Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
on the consideration of the joint reports of the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council responsible
for combating terrorism and non-proliferation. We
congratulate the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for their detailed
briefings on their activities.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction are more than ever challenges to
international peace and security. The increase in, and
sophistication of, terrorist attacks is compounded by
the stated will of terrorist groups to access weapons of
mass destruction. The strengthening of collective tools
for the control of weapons of mass destruction, the fight
against terrorism and the excessive ease of mobility of
terrorists now seems to be an absolute priority that must
be placed at the heart of the international community's
security priorities.

An assessment of the threat indicates that there is a
trend in mobility and recycling of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and affiliated groups into new hotbeds of
tensions, where they continue to radicalize and adopt
new strategies for spreading terror.

In the face of that change, both in geography and
typology, and the risks associated with the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, the joint efforts of
the three subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
in the implementation of their mandates is cause for
optimism, despite the scale of the challenges. My
delegation therefore appreciates the efforts of the
various Committees and the groups of experts who
assist them in their respective missions to assess the
terrorist threat and provide Member States with the
necessary support to fulfil their obligations. C6te
d'Ivoire welcomes the dynamic cooperation among
those bodies, including their determination to adopt a
more coordinated approach in the fight against terrorism
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

In that respect, my delegation notes with
satisfaction the joint visits to Member States, the joint
meetings and the awareness-raising activities aimed at
strengthening the national mechanisms for combating
terrorism and assessing threats and needs for technical
assistance. The preparation of a compendium of good
practices for the protection of critical infrastructure
and the programme of assistance to Member States in
the implementation of advance passenger information
and passenger name record systems for the collection
of passenger information are also the result of the
excellent cooperation among United Nations entities
and should be welcomed.

Despite the considerable results achieved, many
challenges remain, as we noted earlier. Those challenges
include the return and reintegration of foreign terrorist
fighters. That exercise is difficult at best and requires
a better sharing of information between States. To that
end, we encourage the continuation of information
sessions and regional meetings, which are sources of
valuable information for Member States in their efforts
to combat terrorism and the proliferation of small arms
and weapons of mass destruction.

My delegation also welcomes the adoption, in
December 2018 and March 2019, of two instruments
that enhance the normative framework for combating
terrorism, namely, the Addendum to the Madrid
Guiding Principles on foreign terrorist fighters and
resolution 2462 (2019), on the financing of terrorism.
We consider that more sustained attention should
be paid in particular to measures to ban biological,
chemical and bacteriological weapons, financing and
proliferation networks and national export controls
and trans-shipment of such weapons. My country
therefore intends to actively contribute to the work
of the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
in the context of consolidating the international
non-proliferation architecture.

To be effective over time, our joint action
must integrate strategies to prevent radicalization
and violent extremism, through policies aimed at
eradicating poverty and unemployment among young
people, which are among the underlying causes.
Emphasis should also be placed on combating the
financing of terrorism and the illegal use of the
Internet, communication technologies and social media
for criminal purposes.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country's
unwavering support and readiness to cooperate with the
counter-terrorism bodies, the members of the Groups
of Experts and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.

