Dr. Piot: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to make a few very brief follow-up points. As
you said, I am speaking on behalf of Jim Wolfensohn,
Mark Malloch Brown, and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) partners.

I think we are faced with a great opportunity, and I
would like to assure the Council of our collective
determination to do our part. In response to your specific
requests, Mr. President, and those of Security Council
members, we will follow up on at least six specific
points.

 

First, we must deliver on our commitment, growing
out of the Secretary-General's meeting of 6 December on
the International Partnership against AIDS in Africa, to
have reached agreement by May among African
Governments, donor Governments, the United Nations
system, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector on a specific plan for a major intensification and
mobilization to address the epidemic in Africa.

Secondly, in response to your specific request, Sir, and
that of the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, we will also ensure that there is systemic
coordination between the development of this Partnership
and the Security Council.
Thirdly, we will work with the presidency of the
Security Council in follow-up to this meeting to work
through the details of how appropriate and regular follow-
up with the Security Council should be implemented.

Fourthly, in response to the request of the Permanent
Representatives of the United Kingdom and France, we will
intensify clearing-house efforts within the United Nations
and ensure the flow of current information to all of the
member States on the international response and report to
the Council within one month.

Fifthly, we will also put forward a specific plan of
partnership for addressing AIDS in emergencies and in the
uniformed services within two months.

Last, we will be very pleased to follow up in writing
individual questions raised by Security Council members,
as requested.

This is a bold step the Security Council has taken
today. Good luck to us all.

