The President (spoke in French): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Italy,
Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Rwanda and Uruguay, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
MS. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support; Mr. Alan Doss, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; Ms. Ellen Margrethe Loj,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia;
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone; Mr. Hans Peter Wittig, Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Germany; His Excellency Mr. Tete
2
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the European Union delegation
to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/67, which contains the text of a letter
dated 3 February 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


