Ms. Power (United States of America): For the
past 14 months, the United States has supported the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the region in their efforts to facilitate talks between
the warring parties in South Sudan aimed at reaching
a comprehensive and inclusive peace agreement and
establishing a transitional Government to oversee
a process of reform that addresses the root causes of
the conflict. While various papers have been signed,
partial agreements entered into, promises made and
assurances delivered, the situation has only worsened
for the people of the United Nations newest country.
The aspirations of the South Sudanese people have
time and again been thwarted. Instead of pursuing the
well-being of their people, a variety of individuals have
chosen to place their own narrow political interests
first, rather than making the compromises necessary to
get to peace.

Resolution 2206 (2015), adopted today, supports
IGAD's mediation efforts by laying the framework for
targeted sanctions. Under the terms ofthe resolution, the
parties must meet IGAD's deadlines for the resolution
of all outstanding issues of the conflict and to begin
the process of establishing a transitional Government
of national unity. The consequences for not doing so
could include the designation of senior individuals for
asset freezes and travel bans, or the imposition of an
arms embargo.

Having the resolution in place, with realistic
deadlines based on IGAD's milestones for resolving
the crisis, will, we hope, improve IGAD's chances of
success in reaching a credible and sustainable peace.
We are enhancing IGAD's leverage in the negotiations
by sending the very clear signal to those who continue
to choose war over peace that they will be held to
account now, as we urge them to compromise to reach
and agreement, and later, when they are considering
whether to follow through on its terms.

Some have asked: Why adopt this resolution
now, when IGAD is in the midst of another important
negotiating round and when an agreement may well be
around the corner? The answer is that the parties need
to know not only that they will be held to account if
they fail to compromise to reach agreement, but also
that they will be held accountable on the back end if
they do again as they have done so many times before
by failing to implement that to which they have signed.

Today, because of this conflict, 2.5 million people
urgently need help with food, more than 2 million
people have been displaced internally and as refugees
by the violence, and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, which was originally deployed to support
the world's newest State, is now itself providing safe
shelter to more than 100,000 internally displaced
persons seeking refuge from violence perpetrated by
the Government and the armed groups that oppose it.
Rape and killing have become rampant, and just a few
weeks ago we heard about the kidnapping of hundreds
of young boys in Malakal by armed groups intending to
use them as child soldiers.

Today in South Sudan, a young generation's future
is quite literally being held ransom by political actors
who, despite all costs, refuse to compromise. This
cannot continue, and those who frustrate peace must
begin to pay the price. That is why today's action by the
Council is so important.

