Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and to
commend your initiative in organizing this open debate
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, during China's presidency of

the Security Council this month. This is a clear sign of
your country's commitment to accord the subject the
importance it deserves under the current circumstances.

My country notes with deep concern the
unprecedented deterioration of the situation in
Palestine at a time when the international community
has shifted its attention to other developments. Despite
the importance of those new developments, the
question of Palestine should be the focus of attention
by the international community, not only because it is
a central issue for the Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims
all over the world, but because it is one that concerns
all peace-loving people and advocates for peace across
the globe.

The settlement of the situation in the Middle East
hinges on the solution ofthe Palestinian question, which
is the central question and the key to the resolution of
all issues in the region. Any delay in finding a just and
lasting solution for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, would complicate
the issue at the expense of Palestinian patience. For
the Palestinian people are pinning their hopes on
peace and and looking forward to the fulfilment of
their aspirations.

The Kingdom of Morocco, whose Head of State,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, chairs the Al-Quds
Committee, feels the pain of the Palestinians in general
and is pained at the situation in Jerusalem given the
continued deterioration of the state of affairs in
Palestine as a result of the Judaization, the continued
policy of building settlements, the forcible transfer
of people and repeated attacks against the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Jerusalem and the worshippers. The impasse
that international efforts reached in this area has
complicated all potential solutions.

The international community now has the duty to
use all its efforts and innovative methods in order to
bring back the Palestinians and Israelis to the negotiating
table, not for the sake of negotiations but to achieve the
two-State solution, based on the pre-l967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as the capital ofa Palestinian State. Such
negotiations should be based on good faith, according to
pre-established timelines in order to restore confidence
between the parties, according to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, in his capacity as Chair
of the Jerusalem Committee, in his address to the fifth

Extraordinary Summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, held in Jakarta last month, supports
all serious initiatives aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation and to achieve the independence of the State
of Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Morocco also supports the initiative of France to
find a solution to the Palestinian question, including
through the convening of an international conference.
During the thirteenth session of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, which was hosted by Turkey last
week, the King of Morocco said,

"We can only stress our support for the invitation of
our brother, President Mahmoud Abbas of the State
of Palestine, to convene an international peace
conference aimed at ending the Israeli occupation,
as that is a basic step towards ending the catastrophic
and volatile situation in Palestine and restoring
the hope that a peaceful, just and lasting peace on
the basis of the two-State solution can be reached.
We also support the French initiative, which aims
at bringing the Israeli and Palestinian parties to
the negotiating table and at ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory, according to a
clear timeline."

The King also called for the adoption of an approach
that would merge political actions and diplomatic
efforts, while highlighting legitimate rights and work in
the field. The Holy Jerusalem Endowment Trust Fund
would implement specific projects aimed at supporting
the inhabitants of Jerusalem and saving the city that
is at the core of the conflict. In that regard, because
Morocco remains committed to supporting work on
the ground that benefits Palestinians, we have assumed
responsibility for more than 85 per cent of the Trust
Fund's budget in order to continue the implementation
of projects on Palestinian territory.

The only sound and viable path towards the
resolution of the Palestinian question is not one of war,
bloodshed and the killing ofinnocent civilians. Rather,
the parties should return to the negotiating table in good
faith within clear-cut parameters in order to achieve the
solution of two States coexisting in peace, harmony,
security and cooperation. Morocco continues to base its
position with regard to the Palestinian conflict on the
Arab Peace Initiative and the principles of the Madrid
terms ofreference, which seek to achieve peace through
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,

with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the borders
of June 1967.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
international community is called upon more than
ever before to revive the peace process with a specific
timeline and on the basis of the norms and principles
set forth in United Nations resolutions. Morocco stands
ready to fully participate in all efforts and initiatives
aimed at advancing the peace process with a view to
reaching a settlement that consolidates peace and
stability in the region.

