Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for
introducing his latest report (S/2009/674) on the
situation in Afghanistan. We also thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Eide, for his assessments. We
commend his work as head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and wish him
success in his future endeavours.

We share the Secretary-General's view that the
complex electoral process in Afghanistan resulted in an
important outcome that satisfies the Afghan people
themselves and fully meets the requirements of Afghan
law. We trust that the formation of a new, effective
Government for the country will be completed in
accordance with constitutional procedures.

Regrettably, we must note that, in spite of the
efforts of the Afghan authorities and the international
presences, the security situation continues to
deteriorate. Violence has reached unprecedented levels
in the country, and the situation in the previously calm
northern provinces is worsening. In that connection, it
is bewildering that the report makes practically no
direct reference to the main source of the threat to the
security of Afghanistan and the entire region - the
activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida. We believe that
we must dispense with euphemisms in this regard.

We support the goal of national reconciliation in
Afghanistan, although that process should not
prejudice the achievement of long-term stability in the
country or contravene relevant decisions of the
Security Council, including with respect to the
effective implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime. The possibility of reaching
agreement with the leaders of the Taliban and other
terrorist and extremist organizations cannot be
seriously envisaged. Dialogue is possible only with
those who have laid down their weapons, recognized
the Government and Constitution of Afghanistan, and
broken their ties with Al-Qaida and other terrorist
structures.

The situation of drug production and trafficking
remains of particular concern. The global scale of the
Afghan drug threat requires more decisive action and a

new level of international cooperation. In that context,
we trust that NATO troops in Afghanistan will
cooperate more actively with the Afghan Government
and establish cooperation with the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), which has undertaken
effective anti-drug operations along the external
perimeter of Afghanistan's borders for several years.
There is also a need for more resolute action to curb
the trade in precursors, which enter Afghanistan from
Europe, inter alia, and without which it is impossible to
produce heroin.

We believe that the 28 January International
Conference on Afghanistan in London will prove to be
an important international event and that it will give
new impetus to the phased transfer to the Government
of Afghanistan of full responsibility for ensuring
security throughout the national territory, parallel with
the creation of effective Afghan armed forces and
police. Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs Sergey
Lavrov intends to participate in the Conference.

The broadest possible international cooperation,
under United Nations auspices, is needed to address all
these challenges. States of the region should also play a
positive role, as should organizations active there,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the CSTO, within the framework of which concrete
plans for counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics
activities have been drawn up and are being carried out
alongside development activities in Afghanistan.

Russia will continue to provide Afghanistan with
the necessary assistance. Resources are currently
allocated to developing the education system in
Afghanistan, including rebuilding the Polytechnical
University of Kabul. Assistance is also being extended
in other forms. Russia recently sent a large shipment of
52 Kamaz trucks to Afghanistan.

