Climate change is an urgent and growing threat to both national and international peace and security, with its effects being felt globally. As such, Sri Lanka welcomes today's high-level open debate on climate and security. As the world grapples with a sudden and raging health pandemic, it has become abundantly clear that non-traditional security threats, such as climate change, are becoming some of the greatest challenges facing humankind. In fact, we are in this predicament today because we have taken our environment for granted and have exploited it, without any thought of the consequences. Unlike our visible enemies, climate change has crept up on us, almost unseen, almost unheard, as a faceless enemy. But its impact has been devastating, shattering lives, destroying property, weakening economies and threatening the very existence of States. The socioeconomic effects of climate change include a decline in agricultural productivity, drinking and irrigation water shortages, with the related risk of thirst and famine, increased rates and geographic scope of diseases, changes and large shifts in human migration patterns, and economic and human losses due to extreme weather events and shifts in economic output and trade patterns. In fragile and conflict situations, the impact of climate change can become a magnifier of existing tensions and make conflicts more likely, intense and longer-lasting. Its effects can create fertile ground for the activities of extremist groups. Natural disasters due to climate change are also major security threats, as people affected by them are susceptible to becoming refugees or internally displaced persons, who are vulnerable not only to the physical and socioeconomic effects of disease, but also to malnutrition and loss of income, which could spur them to crime and violence. In fact, climate change gives rise to climate refugees, which can change the demographics of countries and regions. That, in turn, can create a multitude of security issues that could threaten peaceful societies, ranging from petty crimes to conflict between countries, and can bring pressure to bear on humanitarian assistance. Women, children and other vulnerable groups are the most affected, and their livelihoods and security is at heightened risk. Sri Lanka is deeply concerned about the negative impact climate change has on the security, economy and social progress of countries, as well as the devastating consequences it has on the environment, particularly on island countries. Climate change continues to hamper national and global efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and threatens to reverse the progress achieved thus far. As such, building the resilience of vulnerable communities and ecosystems to withstand the effects of climate change, in line with our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is a priority for Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka believes that a fair and ambitious agreement is needed for countries to reach the long-term temperature targets and Sustainable Development Goals, and is pleased to be associated with efforts to tackle current and projected climate change challenges through its nationally determined contribution. While it is clear how climate change interacts with the drivers of conflict, we must better understand climate-related security risks and develop improved tools and reporting on the issue. To that end, we need a holistic approach that includes political, humanitarian and security responses, coupled with longer-term economic development and governance solutions. We must urgently acknowledge that addressing climate change is important to sustaining peace. We cannot afford to be complacent. Appropriate measures need to be taken to mitigate and adapt to climate change and build resilience. Otherwise, destabilization and the possibility of increased conflict in many parts of the world is extremely real. Sri Lanka has a long history and heritage of conserving the environment and utilizing precious natural resources in a sustainable manner. It has also supported and committed to global efforts to address issues related to climate change. As a country that is no stranger to the adverse impact of climate change, Sri Lanka continues to advocate for the provision of assistance to developing countries to combat these challenges, including with regard to finance, technology-transfer and capacity- building. Climate-related agreements need to be respected and upheld. That includes the implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and adherence to the principles of common but differentiated responsibility and respective capabilities. That must be pursued if the world is to move forward on ensuring comprehensive security and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Sri Lanka firmly believes that the fight against climate change and consolidating security cannot be won by Governments alone. Partnerships are vital in our efforts to mitigate and adapt to that threat. The private sector, civil society, academia and key stakeholders, such as youth, women and indigenous communities, remain critical to our efforts to combat this concealed foe and overcome the threat that it poses to national and international security. We must all come together in a timely fashion to jointly address this issue.
