We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Lieutenant General Gyllensporre and Lieutenant General Tinaikar, the Force Commanders of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as well as Brigadier General O'Brien, Acting Force Commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), for their briefings and the information they provided on the current situation in the respective peacekeeping missions under their command. It is always useful to learn first-hand how the mandates authorized by the Security Council are implemented on the ground and what specific challenges arise in that regard. We join our colleagues in expressing our condolences with regard to the recent death of two peacekeepers in the line of duty. United Nations peacekeeping operations are usually deployed in complex and dangerous environments, complicated by difficult humanitarian and socioeconomic situations and sometimes by asymmetrical threats. Needless to say, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak became an additional factor, adversely affecting the performance of peacekeeping operations and the ability of the Blue Helmets to effectively fulfil their tasks. Under such unprecedented circumstances, it is of the utmost importance to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers and to take appropriate measures to continue the effective implementation of the mandates, while reducing the risk of virus outbreaks within missions and through contact with civilian population. We appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat in that connection and wish to emphasize the importance of close collaboration with troop- and police-contributing countries on any steps in that regard, particularly on the issue of temporary restrictions for the rotation of contingents. Peacekeeping operations, as we all know, are not meant to be a substitute for the authority of the host State, but rather a supplement to help them enhance their own national capacities. The vital precondition for the success of any peacekeeping operation is constructive and effective cooperation with the host State. The necessity for confidence-building measures and information exchange is especially important nowadays, when measures implemented by national authorities to combat the spread of the pandemic could lead to limitations on the movement of United Nations personnel. Such situations must be solved through dialogue. Supporting host countries in their response to COVID-19 can be provided, where possible, within the respective mandates and upon the request of national Governments. The primacy of diplomacy and dialogue stands at the core of peacekeeping mandates and remains an imperative in the resolution of any crisis where peacekeeping missions are deployed. It is therefore vital not to lose the gains made in the implementation of peace agreements and to continue to encourage parties to reach political solutions and move forward towards national reconciliation despite temporary pandemic difficulties. The call by the Secretary-General for a ceasefire provides a very good basis for such efforts. In that regard, we note the signs of normalization of the situation in South Sudan, primarily owing to the accords reached by the parties on the implementation of the Revitalized Peace Agreement of 2018. The formation of transitional Government bodies, including the Government of National Unity, has begun. Significant decreases in the level of violence and cases of human rights violations in the country are already being reported. Increasing numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons returning to their places of permanent residence are also being reported. However, the security situation is still fragile. The efforts by UNMISS peacekeepers are therefore indispensable. We would like to highlight the role MINUSMA has played in addressing the security situation and facilitating the progress in the political settlement in Mali. We are convinced that the Mission needs comprehensive support, as outlined in the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/476) and in his letter on MINUSMA's performance (S/2020/481). Certain steps carried out in accordance with the Mission's mandate are already bringing about some positive results in the most affected areas, such as the country's central regions. In the light of the interactive format of our meeting today, I would like to ask Force Commanders of MINUSMA and UNMISS a specific question: are there any signs of attempts to use COVID-19 as a pretext to hinder positive developments on the ground, or even political processes? We also wish to stress the stabilizing role of UNDOF in the Syrian Golan in reducing tensions and in preventing incidents and escalations between the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974. We will continue to assist in ensuring the conditions necessary for the full return of UNDOF to the Bravo side. In conclusion, let me once again express our appreciation to the Force Commanders for their leadership, which is in special demand in this time of pandemic, and for their continued efforts aimed at delivering on the tasks before them with dedication. I also wish to commend the thousands of Blue Helmets of the United Nations peacekeeping missions and pay tribute to the peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice for the re-establishment of international peace and security.
