Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is
rather nice to be able to say "Madam President". It is
not often that one can say that in the Council.

I am grateful to the Special Representative,
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his briefing, and I listened
very carefully to the intervention of Mr. Covie. I think
our special thanks are due to the Special
Representative for so obviously getting a grip on the
job in such a short time.

The United Kingdom associates itself fully with
the statement which will soon be delivered by the
Ambassador of the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

The United Kingdom shares the Secretary-
General's assessment that progress has been made
since the violence last March, but that much remains to
be done before the comprehensive review in mid-2005.
The elections last month, which were free and fair; the
progress on post-March reconstruction; and the
establishment of a framework for decentralization,
local crime prevention councils and a United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)-
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government working
group on the economy all are positive developments.
The focus now must be on taking those achievements
forward and making concrete progress on the ground.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's helpful recommendations paper on the way
forward based on the excellent Eide report and on his
consultations in New York in September. We look
forward to discussing it further.

The United Kingdom continues to hold resolution
1244 (1999) as the basic framework for taking forward
the political process in Kosovo. We recall the public
statement that followed the meeting of the contact
group political directors in New York during the
ministerial week, and that informs the United
Kingdom's position. So this process of open
consultation today on the way forward is indeed very
welcome.

I should like to make four points on Kosovo's
priorities in the coming months.

The first point concerns the formation of a new
government - a government which can commit to
making immediate progress on implementing the key
standards. We share the Special Representative's
priorities. A government which is as representative as
possible of all the people of Kosovo is clearly in
Kosovo's best interests. Kosovo Albanian leaders have
a responsibility to support the rule of law, including
cooperation, as appropriate, with the International
Criminal Tribunal, and a responsibility to speak out
against inter-ethnic violence and incitement to racial
hatred.

The international community will hold the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to account
for their actions in the coming months. Indicators of
responsible government will have an impact on the
mid-2005 review.

Secondly, immediate and visible progress on the
ground is essential, especially with regard to
minority rights and security, for which more effective
local government is a vital contribution. Progress on
decentralization is needed urgently, and the
identification and launch of pilot projects present an
early opportunity to move forward.

Thirdly, Kosovo's economy is in urgent need of
an injection of momentum, and by that I mean the
legitimate, non-black economy.

The United Kingdom welcomes the call of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative for
the European Union quickly to devise and implement
an economic development plan in cooperation with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. We
therefore welcome the work of the Joint UNMIK-
Provisional Institutions Economic Strategy and Project
Identification Group on Kosovo's economic
development.

Lastly, there must be dialogue with Belgrade. But
Belgrade cannot expect to exercise oversight or veto.
Belgrade's active discouragement of Kosovo Serb
participation in Kosovo elections and in the
decentralization process does not give the impression
of a Government committed to improving the everyday
lives of Kosovo Serbs. If Belgrade continues to block
progress in certain areas, this will not be held against
the Provisional Institutions. There will be a price to
pay for obstructive behaviour, whether on the part of
authorities in Belgrade or in Pristina; it will be a price
to pay in future participation in determining Kosovo's
future.

I listened attentively to Mr. Covie and to the
questions he posed. Do we want to solve the problem
for good? Yes. Are Serbs in the Assembly as a token of
multi-ethnicity? No. Do we favour an open-ended
presence in the province? No.

I have some questions of my own for Mr. Covic',
if I may. Will the future of Kosovo be improved by a
partition which will ignore the interests of two thirds of
those Kosovo Serbs scattered south of the Iba river.
Would the future of the Serbs not be enhanced by a real
effort to work through Kosovo institutions and with the
international presence? Is not cooperation by Belgrade
more likely to promote the sort of outcome we all
want? And is not the way forward cooperation within
Kosovo and with Belgrade, to reduce dependence on
the international community?

The truth is that the solutions rest in the region.
The rest of us can do what we can to facilitate positive
outcomes, but it is those in the region who in the end
have to make this work.

The Special Representative, looking to the future,
said that the people of Kosovo understood that the
implementation of priority standards is a necessary step
before final status negotiations. I hope he is right that
they know that. I am all the more encouraged that his
positive approach will deliver those standards, which
would put us then in a position to move forward on
resolution 1244 (1999).

