Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Thank you, Mr. President, for giving us a second
opportunity to address the Council.

A few moments ago, the representative of Israel
gave a lengthy and rather strange intervention,
discussing, in the first place, essential matters
unrelated to the issue at hand. Secondly, he gave false
legal arguments, false interpretations of the provisions
of the United Nations Charter and of Security Council
resolutions. Thirdly, he attempted to falsify Israel's
record in non-compliance with the Council's
resolutions, accusing many speakers and launching
unjustified accusations. This is why we find ourselves
obliged to reply to his intervention.

The representative of Israel tried to say that there
is a difference in the nature of the resolutions pursuant
to Chapter VII and those pursuant to Chapter VI of the
Charter. He went so far as to say that the resolutions
adopted pursuant to Chapter VI are mere
recommendations. Of course, we do admit that there is
a difference in the fact that there is an enforcement
mechanism pursuant to Chapter VII. But to attempt to
give the impression that some resolutions are binding
and others are not is legally false and should be
condemned, because this is an attempt to falsify one of
the Charter's principles. Article 25 is extremely clear,
and all Security Council resolutions are binding.

Israel is the only State in the United Nations that
has been recognized by the Security Council as an
occupation Power. It is the only State within the United
Nations that continues an active colonialist process in
the twenty-first century, now that the entire world has
practically eliminated colonialism - or most of it.

The record is quite clear. Since the beginning of
Israeli occupation in 1967, the Council has adopted 37
resolutions related to Israeli practices in the occupied
territories. Thirty-seven resolutions, Mr. President, that
deal only with Israeli practices in the occupied
territories. They do not include resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), or Israeli practices in southern Lebanon;
nor do they include the peacekeeping operations. These
37 resolutions deal only with Israeli practices in the
occupied territories.

Among the resolutions in question, there are 27
that reaffirm the Fourth Geneva Convention and call on
occupation forces to respect the Convention. What has
happened? Israel continues to violate the terms of the
Geneva Convention, one serious violation after the
other, including collective punishment and, recently,
war crimes.

Among the resolutions in question, some relate to
the displaced Palestinian people, not the refugees, but
the displaced people of the 1967 war. What was the
result? Israel refused to implement the resolutions, and
there are now 700,000 displaced Palestinians. Israel
has not allowed a single one back.
Among the resolutions in question are those
concerning the illegal Israeli practices and the attempt
to change the legal and demographic nature of Al-
Quds, resolutions which considered the law concerning
Al-Quds null and void and asked Israel to put a stop to
such practices. What was the result? Israel continued
violating the resolutions and pursued the Judaization of
the city, insisting on referring to it as the capital of
Israel.

Among the resolutions in questions are those
concerning the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories that called upon Israel to put a stop
to these settlements, and even to dismantle them. What
was the result? Israel pursued its settlers' colonialism
and over the years transferred 400,000 Israelis into the
occupied territories. The settlements now dominate and
occupy 40 per cent of our occupied territories.

Among the resolutions in question are those
concerning the extradition of certain Palestinians,
asking Israel to put a stop to this practice, but Israel
has continued this practice until very recently. There
are resolutions calling for the protection of Palestinian
civilians and resolutions calling for investigations by
the Council itself. The Council set up a committee for
this purpose, but Israel refused to receive it.

The latest Security Council resolution, 1405
(2002), was to develop accurate information regarding
recent events perpetrated by Israel in the Jenin refugee
camp through a fact-finding team. What was the result?
Again, the answer is very clear.

So, as we can see, it is a matter not only of what
took place in recent months, but also of systematic
policies that Israel has carried out for the past 35 years,
in blatant violation of 37 Security Council resolutions,
not to mention international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Thus, the entire life of the Palestinian
people has been destroyed: their land has been stolen
and their houses have been demolished; they have been
deprived of their fundamental rights, of their State and
of the right to return to their land.

There is no other example of this kind in the
world today. It is unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations, and yet the Israeli representative says
that there are no double standards. Why did the
Security Council not try to enforce compliance with its
resolutions? Why did the Council accept Israel's
blatant defiance of the Council and even its disrespect
for that body? Why were no measures undertaken,
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, to enforce
compliance with and respect for Council resolutions?
We know the reason, and I shall not dwell on it now.
But it undoubtedly constitutes a double standard. I do
not believe that there is anyone in the Arab region, or
perhaps in the entire world, who does not know that.

I shall reiterate what I said this morning. What we

need today from the Security Council is a more serious
attitude, in conformity with the Charter, that will
convey the right message: that there is only one
standard, based on international law and the provisions
of the Charter. Then, and only then, will the entire
Arab region be prepared to fully heed the Security
Council and to implement its resolutions in all areas.

