The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to briefthe Council on the
situation in the Middle East.

(Spoke in English)

Sadly, 2016 has begun much like 2015
ended - with unacceptable levels of violence and
a polarized public discourse across the spectrum in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. Stabbings,
vehicle attacks and shootings by Palestinians targeting
Israeli civilians - all of which I condemn - and
clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces
have continued to claim lives. But security measures
alone will not stop the violence. They cannot address
the profound sense of alienation and despair driving
some Palestinians, especially young people. The full
force of the law must be brought to bear on all those
committing crimes, with a system of justice applied
equally to Israelis and Palestinians alike.

Palestinian frustration is growing under the weight
of a half century of occupation and the paralysis of the
peace process. Some have taken me to task for pointing
out this indisputable truth. Yet, as oppressed peoples
have demonstrated throughout the ages, it is human
nature to react to occupation, which often serves as a
potent incubator of hatred and extremism. So-called
facts on the ground in the occupied West Bank are
steadily chipping away the viability of a Palestinian
State and the ability of Palestinian people to live in
dignity.

In an effort to overcome the political impasse,
Quartet Envoys met with Israeli and Palestinian
officials on 17 December 2015. They reiterated the
urgent need for significant steps, in line with previous
agreements, to strengthen Palestinian institutions and
security and economic prospects, while addressing
Israel's security concerns. Changing Israeli policies is
central to advancing this goal, particularly in Israeli-
controlled Area C, which comprises 61 per cent of
West Bank territory and is home to some 300,000
Palestinians. Approvals of master plans for Palestinian
sectors of Area C would allow for much-needed growth
in these areas and prevent demolitions.

Progress towards peace requires a freeze of
Israel's settlement enterprise. Continued settlement
activities are an affront to the Palestinian people and
to the international community. They rightly raise
fundamental questions about Israel's commitment to a
two-State solution. I am deeply troubled by reports today
that the Israeli Government has approved plans for over
150 new homes in illegal settlements in the occupied
West Bank. This is combined with its announcement
last week declaring 370 acres in the West Bank, south of
Jericho, as so-called State land. These provocative acts
are bound to increase the growth of settler populations,
further heighten tensions and undermine any prospects
for a political road ahead. I urge the Israeli Government
not to use a recent decision of the Israeli High Court
affirming a large tract of land south of Bethlehem as
State land to advance settlement activities.

The demolitions of Palestinian homes in Area C of
the occupied West Bank continue, as do the decades-
long difficulties of Palestinians to obtain building
permits. The Bedouin community in particular is
paying a heavy price. I reiterate the United Nations
call for an immediate end to Israeli plans to forcibly
transfer Bedouin communities currently living within
the occupied Palestinian territory in the Jerusalem area.

At the same time, the humanitarian situation in
Gaza remains perilous. Eighteen months after the
end of hostilities, conditions have not significantly
improved. I condemn the continuing rocket fire into
Israel from militant groups in Gaza. Chronic security
and governance challenges and funding shortages
have slowed the pace of reconstruction. Much work
remains to be done. Meanwhile, the people of Gaza
face dire unemployment and water and electricity
needs. Meeting these concerns must be a top priority.
However, none of this can be accomplished without the
critical support of donors, the fulfilment of pledges
from the Cairo Conference and the full return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. I continue to strongly
believe that conditions in Gaza pose a severe threat to
long-term peace and security in the region.

Palestinians must also demonstrate commitment to
addressing the divisions among Palestinians themselves.
I strongly urge the Palestinian factions to advance
genuine Palestinian unity on the basis of democracy
and the Palestine Liberation Organization principles.
Reconciliation is critical in order to reunite the West
Bank and Gaza under a single legitimate Palestinian
authority. Healing Palestinian divisions is also critical
so that Palestinians can instead focus their energies
on establishing a stable State as part of a negotiated
two-State solution. Genuine unity will also improve
the Palestinian Government's ability to meet pressing
economic problems that are adding to the frustration
and anger driving Palestinian violence.

The international community also has a
responsibility, not least by responding generously to
the recent emergency appeal by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East for over $400 million to support vulnerable
Palestinians. And as we continue to uphold the right
of Palestinians to self-determination, let us be equally
firm that incitement has no place, and that questioning
the right of Israel to exist cannot be tolerated.

In an already tense regional environment, it
is imperative to promote and consolidate stability
wherever possible. In Lebanon, I urge all political
leaders to work with Prime Minister Tammam Salam
and to intensify efforts to resolve the presidential crisis.
The Syria donors conference on 4 February in London
will be an important opportunity to mobilize support.
This must include meeting the huge humanitarian,
infrastructure and stabilization needs of neighbouring
countries in light of the refugee crisis. We are all aware
of the strains on Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.

I welcome the resumption of calm along the Blue
Line and in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
area of operations following the serious incidents
of 20 December and 4 January. All parties have a
responsibility to uphold the cessation of hostilities and
to ensure full respect for resolution 1701 (2006).

On the Golan, it remains critical that parties to
the Disengagement Agreement maintain liaison with
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
They must refrain from actions that could escalate the
situation across the ceasefire line.

Some may say that the current volatility across
the region makes it too risky to seek peace. I say that
the greater peril lies in not seeking a solution to the
Palestinian question. Some say that the two sides are
entrenched in their respective positions. I say that
we must not succumb to passivity, resignation or
hopelessness that a comprehensive resolution of the
conflict is not achievable. A lasting agreement will
require difficult compromises by both the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders - yes - but what are the
alternatives? The continuing deadly wave of terror
attacks and killings? The possible financial collapse
of the Palestinian Government? Ever-greater isolation
of the Israeli Government? A further deterioration of
humanitarian conditions in Gaza and the agonizing
build-up to another terrible war? A hollowing of the
moral foundation of both Israeli and Palestinian
societies alike? A creeping moral blindness that
ignores the suffering - indeed the humanity - of
one's neighbour? More unilateral acts by each side,
intentionally designed to pre-empt negotiations and
provoke the other side?

The parties must act - and act now - to prevent
the two-State solution from slipping away forever.
Upholding and implementing that vision - two States
living side-by-side in peace and security - offers the
only means by which Israel can retain both its Jewish
majority and its democratic status.

As the wider Middle East continues to be gripped
by a relentless wave of extremist terror, Israelis and
Palestinians have an opportunity to restore hope to
a region torn apart by intolerance and cruelty. I urge
them to accept this historic challenge in the mutual
interest of peace.

The support of regional partners in that pursuit is
essential. The Arab Peace Initiative provides a valuable
basis for broader support.

Finally, the whole international community must be
ever-more committed to actively helping Palestinians
and Israelis to rebuild trust and achieve an enduring
peace before it is too late.

