Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Heidi Grau and Ambassador Halit Cevik for their valuable briefings. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Sergiy Kyslytsya, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. We hope that this meeting, which coincides with the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Minsk agreements, will contribute to more efforts to advance a peaceful settlement in eastern Ukraine and to end the crisis through negotiations. In his briefing to the Security Council two weeks ago (see S/PV.8714), the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) addressed the crisis in eastern Ukraine. At that meeting, Tunisia expressed its commitment to all efforts aimed at strengthening international peace and security. Given our adherence to the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, Tunisia today stresses once again our steadfast position based on respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs. Those are fundamental elements of peaceful relations among States. In that context, my delegation asserts its support for the efforts of all parties concerned to reach a comprehensive solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine through dialogue and negotiations, in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter and the Minsk agreements, particularly within the Normandy Four and the Trilateral Contact Group, and based on resolution 2202 (2015). My country's delegation wishes to commend the positive developments registered throughout 2019, including the meeting of the Normandy Four in Paris in December, the prisoner exchange process in September, progress made in the negotiations, the establishment of new disengagement areas and the opening of new crossing points along the line of contact. Those positive steps contribute to paving the way towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis and to alleviating the suffering of the population concerned. We call for those positive developments to be built upon in order to ensure that conditions do not regress into a cycle of violence, especially given the concerns expressed in the briefings about violence and the number of casualties. My country's delegation reiterates the important role of the OSCE in advancing efforts to resolve the crisis. We express our appreciation and support for the efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, within the framework of its mandate, to monitor and report on the security situation, facilitate dialogue to reduce tension and enhance confidence-building measures. My delegation also appreciates the continued work of the Trilateral Contact Group and its various working teams, and reiterates its call for a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire while fully implementing the Minsk agreements, as well as respect of all parties for their commitments under those agreements. Amid the continued momentum in the ongoing peace efforts, my delegation hopes to see improvement in the humanitarian situation through the concerted efforts of all parties to provide assistance and protection to the population in the areas concerned, including such basic needs as health care and services, food security and education in the areas close to the line of contact and elsewhere, based on the report issued by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, especially in light of the shortage of financing for the humanitarian response plan. In conclusion, in the context of the growing challenges to international peace and security, I emphasize once again my delegation's hope to see acceleration in the implementation of all concluded agreements and the outcomes of follow-up meetings with a view to reach a comprehensive peace settlement to the crisis in eastern Ukraine. That will contribute to restoring stability and strengthening the elements of regional security and prosperity for the peoples of the region.
