Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the President of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Tomislav Nikolie, and share the serious concerns
he expressed about the situation in Kosovo. We thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General, and his team for their briefing on
the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), highlighting that serious
problems persist in the region. Many of those problems,
however, have been urgently awaiting solutions for
years. We categorically refuse to accept the practice
of directing unilateral and offensive insults at Serbia
and its people. One should first cast out the beam from
one's own eye.

The report of the Secretary-General on the Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/95/Rev.1) is generally objective
and deserves to be commended. It and Mr. Tanin's
briefing this morning reflect the growing level of
tension between the parties and the presence in the
region of outstanding issues, most of them in key areas,
particularly those relating to the protection of the
political, economic, social and religious rights of the
Serb community. It is becoming clear why the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, which has already been
in a prolonged deadlock, is in danger ofbreaking down.
That is primarily the result of the biased attitude of the
European Union, which, as intermediary, has not exerted
the proper degree of influence on the Kosovo-Albanian
side regarding implementation of the agreements.
Above all, what is at issue is the fundamental question
of the establishment of an association/community of
Serb-maj ority municipalities of Kosovo, which, we must
not forget, is a key point of the agreement of 19 April
2013 on the principles of the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. There has been plenty
of discussion and many pronouncements about national
reconciliation and the creation of a multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo, but no sign whatever of practical steps to
achieve those things.
We also categorically refuse to accept the attempt
to distance Belgrade from the process of resolving some
of the most important issues surrounding the protection
of the lives of the Kosovo's Serbian community. No
one - neither Serbia nor Serbs living in Kosovo - will
ever accept that. Many members of the international
community will not accept it. We are disturbed at the
lack of an appropriate reaction among the international
community to Pristina's ongoing attempts to wrest
away economic assets that belong to Serbs, including
the Trepca industrial complex and major electric power
facilities. During the recent exacerbation of tensions,
not even feeble attempts were made to urge Kosovars to
comply with the sensitive agreements. On the contrary,
it is always the Serbs who are leaned on from the other
side, time after time.

We note Belgrade's constructive attitude. On
5 February, the Serbs began to dismantle the walls
around a pedestrian zone in North Mitrovica, something
that, let us not forget, the Pristina authorities had
insisted on. Serbia fulfilled its obligations regarding
the International Telecommunication Union's
establishment of a separate telephone code for Kosovo.
Thanks to Belgrade's restrained position, an escalation
of conflict was avoided when, on 14 January, heavily
armed units of Kosovo-Albanian police invaded
Serb-populated areas of Kosovo in order to prevent
the resumption of train service between Belgrade
and North Mitrovica; this unprovoked measure was a
gross violation of the current agreement on freedom
of movement across the administrative boundary line.
Pristina should have no security forces in northern
Kosovo, where the Serbian population lives. That is a
key element of the agreements.

The dialogue's effectiveness is undermined by the
fact that some countries that pay lip service to the idea
of dialogue are playing a double game. They encourage
the unilateral attitude in Kosovo to applications
for membership in international bodies, prompting
other States to recognize Kosovan sovereignty. The
renewed declarations by Pristina of its intention to seek
membership in the Council of Europe, INTERPOL
and UNESCO are nothing but open provocations.
Incidents, including some involving physical violence
towards non-Albanian nationalists, continue to
occur. Stone-throwing at buses carrying Serbian
schoolchildren and Orthodox Christian pilgrims is
commonplace. Kosovo's law enforcement bodies react
extremely sluggishly, and in most cases the perpetrators
are never found. All of this creates obstacles to the
already almost paralysed process for returning refugees
to the region.

On 4 January, we noted the arrest in France, at the
request of Serbia, ofRamush Haradinaj, the leader ofthe
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and former Kosovo
Liberation Army insurgent. We await the completion
of all the formalities necessary to enable the launching
of a special investigation into the Kosovo Liberation
Army's crimes as soon as possible. If the perpetrators
are not brought tojustice, regardless ofthe positions they
may currently occupy, it will be impossible to achieve
national reconciliation or a comprehensive settlement.

We consider enabling the creation of a Kosovo-
Albanian armed force on territory under a United
Nations mandate unacceptable. Such an act contravenes
resolution 1244 (1999), which supports the presence
on Kosovo's territory of a multinational force under
international control, exclusively. When dealing with
any issues related to Kosovo security forces, the views
of Serbia and Kosovo Serbs must be taken into account.
As long as we are talking about national reconciliation
and a multi-ethnic society, those views must be taken
into consideration. One indisputable priority should be
ensuring the security of the Kosovo Serb community,
for which the Kosovo-Albanian authorities and
international organizations in the region are responsible,
particularly the Kosovo Force, whose mandate includes
relevant provisions in that regard.

Serious issues regarding the protection of Serbian
religious and cultural heritage continue. The Serbian
Orthodox Church is encountering obstacles in gaining
access to religious sites, which they need to be able to do,
among other things, in order to put them back in order in
the wake of acts of vandalism. The Kosovo authorities
have long prevented the completion of the construction
of the church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina, and now
they have also blocked the reconstruction of the church
of Saint Nicholas in the Holy Archangels Monastery in
Prizren by refusing building permission to the Serbian
Orthodox Church. This very typical act does not jibe
with Kosovo's professed desire to become a member
of UNESCO.

The task of countering the spread of Islamic
radicalism and terrorism in Kosovo has lost none of its
urgency. It is a worrying fact that the region is used
for recruiting insurgents to fight with extremists in the
Middle East and to prepare acts of terrorism in other
countries. Incidentally, major Western publications
often feature reporting on the subject of the fact that
when these insurgents get done fighting and return
home they create the problem of what to do with them.

Given the current situation, we see no grounds
for reviewing the Security Council's quarterly
consideration of the question of Kosovo. On the
contrary, the regional dynamics require us to intensify
our attention to the situation in Kosovo, and any talk
of reducing the level of the United Nations presence in
the region provided by UNMIK, under the leadership
of Ambassador Tanin, is inappropriate. There can be
no doubt that he is playing a key role in the situation in
Kosovo, or that UNMIK remains the central instrument
for international monitoring and contributes to
normalizing the situation, in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999) - which remains in force in its entirety.
The resolution cannot be changed unilaterally. That is
an absolute political taboo.

