Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council in the very first month of Viet Nam/'s current term as a member. I also thank you for convening this debate at the start of the year in which we observe seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations. The values of the Charter have served us well. The purposes and principles of the Charter have become the foundation of international law. They have played their part in the journey of many Member States towards peace, security and international cooperation. Reiterating support for those values is therefore timely However, in a world constantly in flux, the reality is that the challenges to international peace and security are a step ahead of the systems designed to tackle them. It is now evident that there are fires all across the horizon. To undertake a fair evaluation of the available mechanisms without belittling their importance, we need to ask ourselves whether they are still fit for the purpose of implementing the fundamental principles of the Charter. The central premise of the Charter in terms of peace and security is ensuring world peace subject to law, for which collective security was the formula proposed. Alas, that goal has been elusive. Hence the instruments for implementing the primary objective have, over time, been engaged in other pursuits. As the quest for international cooperation in matters of peace and security has grown, improvisations have come to the fore. Many have been listed before. The genius of the Charter was to recognize that, instead of constraining the abilities of sovereign States, Charter institutions magnified them. Hence there is a case to be made for innovations that enlarge the vision of global rule of law. It is possible that, just as generals often re-fight the last war, the drafters of the Charter responded to the factors and forces that led to the Second World War, without anticipating what we are now faced with. Notwithstanding all its imperfections, the United Nations Charter is still the main incarnation of the global spirit. Constancy to its principles promotes the common good. Moving away from a formal system that is well understood to one that is based on untested interpretations might have unexpected consequences. Justice dispensed on the fly might come to be resented. It is increasingly acknowledged that the Council faces crises of identity and legitimacy, as well as relevance and performance. The globalization of terror networks, the weaponization of new technologies and the inability to counter those resorting to subversive statecraft are showing up the shortcomings of the Council. One delegation that epitomizes the dark arts yet again displayed its wares by peddling falsehoods earlier today, which we dismiss with disdain. My simple response to that delegation - the delegation of Pakistan - is: even though it is late, neighbour, heal thyself of your malaise - there are no takers here for your malware. We need the Council, as part of the political tool kit, to address ongoing and future threats to global peace and security. The answer to the crises the Council faces lies in invoking and working through the Charter provisions that provide for reform and change. We need a Council that is representative of current realities, credible and legitimate, rather than one that rests merely on the claim that it existed at the inception. The Council needs to be fit for purpose for the twenty- first century. As Mahatma Gandhi once said, "one must care about the world one will not see". Resilient organizations are those that are not resistant to change - or else current emergencies can turn into catastrophes, even while we continue our endless prevarication. It is said that humankind progresses when it collectively rises to its responsibility to the future. The time to act is now.
