The President: At the outset, I should like, on
behalf of the Council, to express our heartfelt
sympathy and condolences to the people and the
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the
passing of their King, Fahd Bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud,
who wholeheartedly devoted himself to both the
service of his country and the promotion of peace and
understanding in his region and internationally.

I should like to request the representative of
Saudi Arabia to convey the sentiments of the Security
Council to the royal family, as well as to the
Government and people of Saudi Arabia.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Adamantios Vassilakis,
Permanent Representative of Greece to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of July 2005. I am sure that I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Vassilakis for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on Sudan


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Erwa
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its
profound regret over the death of First Vice
President of Sudan Dr. John Garang de Mabior in
a helicopter crash on 30 July 2005. The Security
Council offers its deepest sympathy and
condolences to the family of Dr. Garang and to
the people and Government of the Republic of
Sudan.

"This is a time for the world community to
come together to support Dr. Garang's vision of a
united and peaceful Sudan. The Security Council
commends the perseverance and commitment
which the parties in Sudan demonstrated in
achieving the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the promise of a new future. Over the last
few years, Dr. Garang's courageous efforts were
instrumental in ending the over 21-year civil war
that cost the lives of millions of Sudanese. His
leadership offered hope of democracy and peace
for all people of Sudan.

"The Security Council calls on all Sudanese
to honour his memory by restoring peace and
calm throughout Sudan. The Security Council
trusts that, despite the sudden death of Dr.
Garang, the people of Sudan remain united and
continue to work for the consolidation of peace in
the country by implementing the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, for which Dr. Garang worked
unstintingly.

"The Security Council stresses that the
death of Dr. Garang should not deter the struggle
of the Sudanese people for justice and dignity,
and encourages the people of Sudan to refrain
from violence and maintain peace in the midst of
mourning.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to assist the Sudanese people in
their efforts to promote national reconciliation,

resolve the conflicts in Darfur and restore peace This statement will he issued as a document of
and stability throughout the country and to build the Security Council under the symbol
a prosperous and united Sudan. S/PRST/2005/38.

"The Security Council looks to the The Security Council has thus concluded the
international community to continue its support present stage of its consideration of the item on its
for the people of Sudan to implement the agenda.
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. to resolve the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur and to proceed with
the reconstruction and rehabilitation process."

The meeting rose at 12 noon.

