Mr. Weixiong Chen (spoke in Chinese): Today,
the Security Council discusses the issue on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons with a view to
adopting a draft resolution on that topic, which is both
significant and necessary.

(spoke in English)

In many of its resolutions, the Council has stressed
the importance of preventing terrorists" access to
weapons. The current draft resolution, once adopted,
will add further tasks to the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in this area. Under the policy guidance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, CTED is required to monitor,
facilitate and promote the implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions by Member States and
to support the policy development of the Committee
and the Council and their efforts in defining the
international counter-terrorism agenda.

We are proud to support the policy responses of
the Committee and the Council on the broad range
of counter-terrorism issues through our assessment
visits, our analyses and our identification of trends
and challenges, gaps and good practices. Our analysis
has reviewed a wide range of concerns with respect to
terrorist access to weapons, including poor stockpiling
management and shortcomings in monitoring the
protection, control, sale, brokerage, export and imports
of small arms and light weapons; looting of military
arsenals; transnational organized crime; weak border
controls; activated and deactivated weapons; and the
international arms trade and trafficking via the Internet,
in particular via the Dark Web markets.

Even though Member States have achieved
significant progress in addressing these issues, further
efforts are needed, including in the following areas.

First, reviewing and strengthening national
legislation on countering the supply and trafficking of
weapons to terrorists; second, strengthening national
control regimes for the possession, use and transfer of
weapons; third, ensuring that weapons held by defence
and security forces are properly stored and controlled;
fourth, preventing the flow of weapons to conflict-
affected regions and conflict zones; fifth, strengthening
professional and expert training, including through
the provision of modern technology and equipment;
sixth, effectively implementing arms embargoes,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions; and seventh, strengthening and expanding
cooperation and partnership with United Nations
entities, international and regional organizations and
civil society.

The country visit remains a critical tool for
CTED. It enables us to assess Member States' overall
national counter-terrorism efforts and their specific
achievements, strengths, weaknesses and technical
assistance needs and to identify and promote good
practices. We will continue to make optimum use ofthis
vital tool, including within the framework of post-visit
information-sharing and in facilitating the delivery of
technical assistance with our implementing agencies.

Cooperation with other United Nations entities and

international and regional organizations is essential to
CTED's work. In that regard, I would note that CTED
is Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force Working Group on Border Management and Law
Enforcement Relating to Counter-Terrorism, and works
closely with the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolution 1526 (2014)
and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (Da'esh); the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs; the United Nations Mine Action
Service; the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
INTERPOL; the World Customs Organization and
many other international and regional organizations.
CTED has also contributed to a number of
initiatives, including the development of International
Small Arms Control Standards, the INTERPOL Illicit
Arms Records and Tracing Management System.
Moreover, the CTED and INTERPOL recently signed
a formal cooperation agreement that will enable us to
deepen our cooperation in denying terrorists' access to
weapons. It is also essential to raise Member States'
awareness of this topic and promote related international
good practices. In this regard, the Committee, with
the support of CTED, has arranged a series of related
thematic and regional briefings. CTED will continue
to pay increased attention to new and emerging threats
and trends, and strengthen its efforts to assist Member
States to address new risks deriving from international
arms trafficking via the Internet and across borders.

Just last week, Mr. President, under your leadership
and stewardship as Chair of the Committee, CTED
finalized the updated version of the Technical Guide
to the Implementation of Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) , 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014) and other relevant
Council resolutions and decisions. The Technical Guide
serves as a comprehensive and unique reference tool,
both for CTED and for Member States, in our joint
efforts to counter a broad range of terrorist threats,
including access to weapons.

Preventing and eliminating the supply of weapons
to terrorists is a complex task, but rest assured that
CTED will continue to strengthen its engagement
with the United Nations entities and international and
regional organizations, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, to assist Member States
in denying terrorists access to weapons.

