Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to extend warm congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative of Togo
to the United Nations, on his presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February, and to welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbe,
President of Togo.
Japan commends Togo's initiative to continue the
discussion on West Africa and the Sahel region,
following up last month's initiative by South Africa. I

would also like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his decision to send assessment
missions to examine the two emerging threats in the
region, namely, piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea and the effect of the Libyan crisis on the
countries in the Sahel region.

Countries in West Africa and the Sahel region
have suffered greatly over the years from the threat of
transnational organized crime, which includes
terrorism, small-arms proliferation and illicit drug
trafficking, but they have made strenuous efforts to
overcome these difficulties. Some notable engagements
in that area include efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
control small-arms proliferation and illicit drug
trafficking. The four West African countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) have
also strived to cope with those problems through
security-sector reform and strengthening of the rule of
law. Those efforts should be recognized.

However, recent discussions have highlighted the
emerging challenges facing those regions. One is the
issue of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea, and the other is the fallout from the Libyan
crisis. The Libyan crisis has generated approximately
420,000 returnees to neighbouring Niger, Mali, Chad
and Mauritania, adding to the number of people
already facing food shortages, and promoting the
proliferation of weapons. Furthermore, the activities of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb pose a significant
threat to security in the region. In addition, Japan is
seriously concerned about the recent clashes between
the Government and the Tuareg rebels in Mali, as well
as the repeated attacks by the Nigerian terrorist group
Boko Haram. Effective action must be taken in order to
prevent the region from retreating from the progress
made thus far.

The transnational nature of these problems
requires us to take a multifaceted approach that
supplements existing national efforts while allowing
ownership to remain in the hands of the countries
affected. With that in mind, Japan has supported efforts
to address the threats in the region through national,
regional and multilateral frameworks.

At the national level, Japan has worked in
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme to manage the proliferation of small arms
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire, and
provided the vehicles necessary for controlling
organized crime in Mali bilaterally.

At the regional level, we have been continuously
providing assistance to ECOWAS since 2000. For
example, Japan recently participated in efforts relating
to capacity-building for counter-narcotics efforts in
Guinea.

Multilaterally, Japan, through the PBC and the
Commission's working group on lessons learned, has
contributed to resource mobilization and expressed
political support for security-sector reform and the
strengthening of the rule of law in the countries on its
agenda. We encourage the Security Council to utilize
the outcomes of Peacebuilding Commission
discussions as one of the tools for formulating its
policies in this area.

We, the international community, must give
serious consideration to what is being discussed here
today. Transnational organized crime not only spans
various countries; issues such as trafficking, terrorism
and piracy are also closely interlinked. In order to fully
utilize our existing resources, we must strengthen our
efforts and ensure better coordination among the
relevant regional and international actors. Japan
remains committed, in cooperation with the United
Nations, regional organizations and the countries in the
region, to work to bring about peace and stability in
these two critical regions.

