Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I have the honour
of addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
Secretary-General to outline the stages that will enable
the strengthening of the capacities of the African Union
(AU) to maintain peace and security and enhance
relations between the United Nations and the African
Union. The presence of Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-
Secretary-General for Field Support, underscores the
importance that the Secretariat gives to this issue and
our will to work together on it.

The report presented today (S/2009/470) sets out
the assessment made by the Secretary-General of the
recommendations included in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel established under Security
Council resolution 1809 (2008) to consider the
09-57623
modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary-General's report builds on
the recommendations made by the panel, under its
Chairman Mr. Prodi, and underscores some points on
which the Secretariat should take immediate steps to
strengthen its cooperation with the African Union
Commission. This will require, on the one hand,
restructuring our presence in Addis Ababa and, on the
other, of course, strengthening the institutional
capacities of the African Union in the areas identified
by the panel.

The report also considers the financing
mechanisms of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council and emphasizes the
importance of sustainable, flexible and predictable
funding. I believe that those three adjectives -
sustainable, flexible and predictable - are very
important with regard to the financing mechanisms.

Last year's debate on regional organizations
enabled the Security Council to reaffirm the
importance of the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. We share the belief that security is
prerequisite to sustainable development. That is
particularly true in Africa, where instability and
conflicts continue to undermine the aspirations of
peoples in many countries. The international
community must work together in order to build the
capacity of vulnerable nations to prevent and resolve
conflicts through political solutions.

When a peacekeeping operation is necessary, we
must ensure ongoing support to those who are carrying
it out - usually the Blue Helmets - once their
deployment is authorized. The emergence of new
threats to peace and security makes the environment in
which peacekeeping operations are deployed
increasingly complex. That further underpins the need
to deploy robust and credible peacekeeping missions.

In that context, the enhanced role of African
Union peacekeeping operations and of African regional
economic communities is a major and welcome
development. Their troops have been able to deploy
quickly with limited resources and when the situation
on the ground has needed a robust intervention. The
African Union has assumed its responsibilities in
complex political environments, with the authorization
of the Security Council, when it has had a comparative
advantage over a United Nations peacekeeping
09-57623
operation or when more time was needed to establish a
consensus within the international community on the
preferred course of action.

The African Union has developed its
peacekeeping capacity based on the commendable
principle that the continent should have its own means
to act to prevent conflicts and the resulting suffering. If
the international community really wishes to help it to
achieve that objective, it must more actively support
the strengthening of African peacekeeping capacity.
That entails in particular helping to train each African
troop contributor, contributing financially to
peacekeeping operations and demonstrating the
political will necessary to resolve conflicts. We must
set ourselves realistic goals and priorities and make
every effort necessary to ensure that the men and
women deployed in conflict areas are equipped with
the means required to achieve those goals.

Over the past five years, considerable progress
has been achieved. The United Nations has broadened
and deepened its strategic and operational partnership
with the African Union. The 10-year capacity building
programme, which is designed to provide support to
the African Union Peace and Security Architecture, has
laid the groundwork for this partnership, especially in
the areas of conflict prevention and post-conflict
recovery. At the same time, our joint efforts in
peacekeeping and mediation in Darfur and our support
for the African Union's peacekeeping operation in
Somalia are further reminders of the scope and shape
of the various types of partnership that can be achieved
in an effort to address the peace and security
challenges on the African continent. Serious capacity
and resource constraints have, however, hampered the
partnership's ability to fully realize its potential.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations has worked closely with the
African Union and its partners to determine the best
way to ensure that capacity-building is targeted and
effective. There is a broad consensus that, as a first
priority in the effort to build conflict prevention and
peacekeeping capacity, the African Union should
finalize and recruit the core staff required for the
Commission to support the African Peace and Security
Architecture. At the same time, it is critical that the
African Union define its own priority requirements and
develop a comprehensive road map for long-term
capacity-building that will build on its strategic
3
framework and provide the framework for donor
support. This will help to ensure that capacity-building
is demand driven and not imposed externally. This is
extremely important to ensure African Union
leadership and ownership of the process.

Limited capacity is not our only challenge. As has
been noted by this Council and the General Assembly,
there is a need to provide resources for peacekeeping in
a sustainable and predictable manner without
undermining the flexibility required to respond to a
crisis quickly. Currently, African Union peacekeeping
is entirely dependent on the same small pool of donors.
There is little flexibility, sustainability or predictability
in its stream of resources. The lack of certainty as to
when donations will be made impacts the AU's ability
to plan missions and pay troop-contributing countries.
Reliance on unpredictable sources of funding means
that there is no guarantee that essential capabilities will
be available, which in turn may invalidate planning
assumptions and put a mission at the risk of failure. If
the international community requests the AU to bear
the brunt of its initial response to a crisis, it has an
obligation to support the AU in ensuring that that
response is credible.

In this regard, the report of the Secretary-General
examines the various financing mechanisms which
have been used in the past to ensure effective financing
of AU peacekeeping. It also proposes ways in which
each mechanism could be improved in order to allow
for resources to be more predictable, sustainable and
flexible. Building on the experience of the United
Nations support packages to the African Union
missions in the Sudan and Somalia, which were
financed by assessed contributions and the European
Union Africa Peace Facility, the international
community must work together to find creative
solutions and ensure that the most effective mechanism
is made available to the African Union when the
Security Council authorizes it to undertake a
peacekeeping operation.

Ultimately and as emphasized in the Secretary-
General's report, it is the African Union's member
States' responsibility to identify sustainable resources
for the long term. To this end, we are very encouraged
by the African Union Assembly's decision to increase
the portion of funds - from 6 to 12 per cent -
contributed to peace support operations from its regular
budget.
At the same time, it is important to recall that
peacekeeping is no replacement for a political solution
and that peacekeeping operations are most effective
when deployed in support of a peace agreement.
Efforts continue, in parallel, to enhance and support
preventive diplomacy, early warning and conflict
resolution and mediation. Experience teaches us that
peacekeeping operations should be embarked upon
only after careful consideration of all available
response options, and must be accompanied by a viable
political strategy and a set of clear objectives.

In looking forward, the United Nations system is
committed to working with the AU in implementing
the proposals in this report, especially concerning ways
in which to enhance the strategic relationship between
the United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
and to provide additional support to the AU in the area
of peacekeeping.

We welcome the AU Peace and Security
Council's 15 October statement on the Secretary-
General's report and fully support the emphasis on the
need for effective follow-up to implement the
proposals made in the report. Of course, this is going to
be a long-term process that will require continuous
international engagement that is coordinated to ensure
that support is prioritized appropriately. Building a
resilient and responsive African Union is vital to the
establishment of an effective and complementary
system for global peacekeeping. I am confident that the
Council's meeting today will contribute to that goal.

In closing, we would like once again to thank
former Prime Minister of Italy Romano Prodi, who is
with us here today, for his leadership of the AU-United
Nations panel. Its efforts have been a significant step
forward in a process which will advance our collective
peace and security objectives. We would also like to
thank the African Union Commission, including
Chairperson Jean Ping and our dear friend
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, for their continued
commitment and contribution to enhancing peace and
security in Africa.

