Mr. Seger (spoke in French): A Burundian proverb
says, "Even if there is no rooster to crow at dawn, the
day will dawn." Undoubtedly, the day will dawn, but
will people also wake up on time?

Peacebuilding in Burundi has made significant and
impressive progress, but a critical point has also been
reached that requires a higher level of commitment
from both sides, the Government and the international
community, to take the final steps. The rooster would
therefore do well to continue crowing for some time
more.

My briefing will focus on the following three
points. First, I will summarize the results of my most
recent visit to Burundi, from 24 to 28 June, which
aimed to take stock of the situation in the country;
discuss the follow-up to the Geneva Conference of
Development Partners; and, address the issue of the
next steps to be taken by the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As I sent
member States of the Council my full report by letter
last week, I will simply give a brief summary of the
peacebuilding situation. Following the excellent
briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, I will be able to make my statement even more
concise. Secondly, I will share the main messages and
conclusions from my visit. And, lastly, I will make a
pitch for extending the presence of the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB) beyond its current mandate,
ideally until the 2015 elections.

Before I begin, let me first take this opportunity to
offer my sincere thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his team at the United Nations Office in Burundi
for their exemplary work and excellent cooperation with
the Burundi configuration of the PBC. I would also like
to thank the Government of Burundi for welcoming
me warmly once again and for the spirit of trust and
cooperation it has always displayed.

Last month I visited Bujumbura, where as usual,
in close cooperation with BNUB, I met with senior
representatives of the Government, including the
President of the Republic, the principal political
parties, and interlocutors from civil society and the
international community, including the international
financial institutions. The main topics discussed were
the political situation, particularly in the context of the
2015 elections, the socioeconomic situation, human
rights, the issue of how to deal with the past, and the
land issue. My impression confirms that of the Special
Representative, which is that although the country has
made significant progress, several challenges remain.
I saw a real risk of a gap between the expectations
of the Government on the one hand and those of the
international community on the other. Moreover, the
fragility of the Burundian economy requires urgent
action.

As the Special Representative said, we are seeing
positive developments but also problems at the political
level. On the positive side, it should be noted that the
two most recent workshops on elections promoted a
democratic, transparent and open dialogue between
the Government and the opposition, and prompted the
return of several politicians from exile. By contrast, the
recent enactment of a new press law, along with other
bills currently being drafted - particularly those on
non-profit associations and public demonstrations -has
drawn a lot of criticism. Some rather vague provisions
in these pieces of legislation are thought to be
potentially harmful to peacebuilding. The same applies
to the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the governing
party, the Conseil national pour la defense de la
de'mocratie-Forces pour la defense de la democratie.
The Special Representative also mentioned this point,
which was indicated to me across the board as an issue
in need of greater attention. It seems that these young
party members sometimes take over the role of State
security institutions and resort to intimidation methods
and threats against the population and members of
other political parties. And various people I spoke to
mentioned the risk that the other political parties might
also mobilize their own youth members. That is why
programmes targeting young people, particularly job-
creation programmes, should be given more weight.

The political situation is thus a difficult one, and the
same goes for the financial situation, which continues
to deteriorate. As the Special Representative said,
the results of the Geneva Conference of Development
Partners must be implemented, particularly since the
time is ripe to take bold, major measures. In order to do
that, new energy is needed on the part ofthe Government,
particularly in the area of good governance. It is also
important that the Geneva spirit of mutual commitment
be maintained by both the Government and the
international community. I am, incidentally, looking
forward to participating at the end of October in the
second sectoral conference, which will deal with the
challenges of peacebuilding in Burundi, among other
issues.

The Special Representative mentioned the process
of dealing with the past, and I will simply refer the
Council to his discussion ofthe issue. He also discussed
the handling of the land question by the Commission
nationale des terres et autres biens (CNTB), which
has recently shaken up public life in Burundi. As
the Council is aware, most of those cases date from
the tragic events of 1972, when a large part of the
population, mostly Hutus, were forcibly evicted from
their land. I have learned that the various stakeholders
have differing opinions on how the President of the
CNTB has dealt with this complex and politically
sensitive question. The controversy has chiefly to
do with the notion of purchasing in good faith. The
President of the Commission, minimizing the number
of cases of landowners who acquired their land unaware
of its illegal origins, favours reconciliation through
restitution. Given the importance of landownership
in Burundi and its potential ethnic repercussions, this
issue is very relevant to peacebuilding and deserves our
attention. I have specifically informed the authorities
that the Burundi configuration of the PBC is ready to
facilitate the establishment of a compensation fund,
should the Government so desire.

I left Bujumbura with mixed feelings. The country
has made impressive progress, but what is needed is
to maintain the momentum that has prevailed since the
Geneva Conference. I realize that the peacebuilding
process is arduous and requires perseverance. Every
marathon runner knows that the last 10 kilometres are
always the hardest. Like the Special Representative, I
therefore encourage the Government to stay the course,
given that the country has made so much progress
towards stabilization in recent years.

My message to the Burundian Government is that
it should display political leadership and redouble
its efforts to tackle major reforms in the areas of
good political and economic governance and the rule
of law. In particular, I encourage the authorities to
translate the consensus of the two political workshops
into improving the electoral code, to employ a liberal

interpretation of the new press law while respecting
freedom of expression, to ensure that other legislation
complies with international standards, to implement
the poverty reduction strategy paper in accordance with
the commitments made in Geneva and to implement the
recommendations of the International Monetary Fund
for improving the country's fiscal situation.

At the same time, my message to the international
community is to step up its commitment to Burundi
and to maintain constructive, open and forthright
communication with the Government. We should closely
monitor the implementation of the press law and the
drafting of other bills; continue to support Burundi in
the spirit of our mutual commitments and in compliance
with the pledges made in Geneva; follow developments
relating to the land issue and support the Government's
efforts to establish a framework for dealing with the
past, based on the will of the Burundian people. In any
event, the PBC will remain engaged in all these areas.

My role as an advocate for Burundi depends largely
on the presence of BNUB and especially on the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga. Their untiring work,
day after day, for the good of Burundi is essential. I
am aware that BNUB's mandate will not be under
discussion for another six months, when we will also
have the results of the strategic assessment mission,
but I know already that I would strongly recommend
BNUB's continued presence at least until the 2015
elections. 1 have also said as much to the authorities
in Bujumbura. That personal conviction, which I
expressed the last time I spoke here (see S/PV.6909),
was further strengthened by the impressions produced
on my last visit to Burundi. We have not yet reached a
point when we can disengage.

In three days, the Security Council will discuss
the situation in the Great Lakes. It goes without saying
that the security situation in the region influences
the situation in Burundi and vice versa. The regional
dimension is one more reason why the international
community and the United Nations in particular should
continue its engagement in Burundi. With a peaceful,
secure and prosperous Burundi, the Council will not
have to worry about yet another situation in that volatile
region.

I will conclude my remarks by calling on the
representatives of the members of the Security Council
to keep Burundi in mind during their discussions next

Thursday. Burundians very much deserve a prosperous
future.

