Mr. Bailly-Niagri (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The Permanent Representative of C6te
d'Ivoire, who could not be here today, has instructed
me to read out the following statement to the Security
Council.

"My delegation commends and thanks you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on the
report (S/2007/421) of the Security Council's
mission to Africa. Allow me also to express my
deep gratitude to the other members of the
Security Council.

"For my delegation, the Council's mission
to Africa to assess the situation on the ground
was both a source of great satisfaction and a
guarantee of success in the implementation of
Security Council resolutions. Such missions will
contribute to a realistic assessment by the
Security Council of the problems in Africa, and
as such should help the Council to develop
consistent and progressive solutions tailored to
resolving crises on the continent.

"In that regard, the Security Council's
mission to Cote d'Ivoire, which took place on
19 and 20 June 2007, was very much appreciated
by Ivorian authorities, headed by President
Laurent Gbagbo and Prime Minister Guillaume
Soro. This is therefore an opportunity for my
delegation to encourage the Secretary-General to
continue his efforts in this positive vein and to
assure him that my country highly appreciates the
fact that he is heading the United Nations. This is
also an opportunity to pay tribute to the United
Nations for its efforts in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as
to South Africa, for its previous mediation, and to
Burkina Faso, for its current role in the peace
process.
"The situation in Cote d'Ivoire has evolved
markedly since the signing of the Ouagadougou
agreement, on 4 March 2004, which was the
result of direct negotiations with the Forces
nouvelles, initiated by President Gbagbo. My
delegation is pleased to note that, as regards Cote
d'Ivoire, the excellent report before the Council
today provides a review of concrete
developments in the peace process and contains
recommendations for the proper implementation
of the Ouagadougou agreement. That serves as
further motivation for former warring parties,
who have freely committed themselves to address
the underlying causes of the conflict in Cote
d'Ivoire. These include, inter alia, the issue of
identifying the population, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, the dismantling of armed militias,
dismantling the zone of confidence and the
restoration of State authority and the deployment
throughout the country of State administration
with a view to organizing and holding national
elections.

"I should also like to state before the
Security Council that the Government of Cote
d'Ivoire is seeking to carry out the peace process
successfully. In that connection, the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire has noted with interest the
various views and suggestions made by the
Security Council mission to Cote d'Ivoire.

"With respect to the mission's concerns in
the humanitarian, socio-economic and human
rights areas and with regard to the political and
security situation - especially the problem of the
ranks of the ex-combatants and their quotas -
the group of negotiators, of which I have the
honour to be part, is working with very good
intelligence, with the assistance of the Burkinabe
facilitator, in order to make specific proposals to
the principal signatories of the Agreement. That
means that despite the delays in certain areas of
the Agreement and the incident of 29 June at
Bouake, the various parties have clearly
demonstrated, in their declaration and in the
council of ministers of 15 July 2007, their
commitment to continue the peace process.

"The facts on the ground express that
commitment with respect to the disarmament of
the self-defence forces, disarmament,
10

demobilization and reintegration, restoring State
authority throughout the country, holding mobile
court hearings and voter identification. For
example, we note, inter alia, that in Bouake
judges were set up within hours of the attack on
the Prime Minister's airplane, and police chiefs
were installed. In general, the peace process is
moving forward normally, in accordance with all
the points of the Ouagadougou Agreement.

"In terms of the social and political issues,
President Gbagbo, believing that the Ivorian
crisis stemmed essentially from an economic
crisis marked by high rates of unemployment
among youth, has established a civic service.
Under that programme, the ex-combatants and
militia members benefit from training. In other
words, as the President of the Republic has said
himself, the war is truly over. No one wants to
make war any more. Throughout Cote d'Ivoire
demonstrations in favour of peace are increasing
among Ivorian on all sides. The considerable
international community in Cote d'Ivoire is
participating in all reconciliation efforts.

"In short, peace is made not only by the
major players, but also by the great majority of
the people living in the country. That explains the
calm climate that we see at present. To maintain
the peaceful sociopolitical climate now prevailing
in Cote d'Ivoire and to more effectively combat
insecurity, the Government has sought an
exemption from the arms embargo in order to
equip the national police.

"The Security Council mission met with the
highest Ivorian authorities and with the Foreign
Minister of Burkina Faso, Mr. Djibril Bassole, in
his capacity as representative of the President of
Burkina Faso, Blaise Compaore, current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States and facilitator for the political
dialogue between Ivorian parties. The mission
also met with the major leaders of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and
the French commander of the force that supports
the United Nations operation. Thus the Council
mission was able to get an overview of the
situation in cote d'Ivoire.

"Therefore my delegation expresses its full
support for the mission's recommendations. They
07-425 33
include the Council's support for full
implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
and for the efforts of the facilitator. The Council
should take into account the recent
recommendations of the Secretary-General with
respect to the mandate of UNOCI, United Nations
support for the process undertaken under the
Ouagadougou Agreement, the appointment of a
new special representative and head of UNOCI,
and careful examination of the request for a
partial lifting of the arms embargo regime in
order to contribute to the peace process, taking
into account the peaceful implementation of the
Ouagadougou Agreement."

