Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Allow me to begin by
congratulating the Permanent Mission of Cote d'Ivoire
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December and for holding this important
debate. I would also like to thank President Ouattara for
his inspiring speech yesterday (see S/PV.8413), as well
as Secretary-General Guterres and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, for their insightful remarks.

Our world today continues to face unprecedented
serious challenges to peace and security. Those include
persistent traditional challenges, such as internal crises,
wars and regional tensions. We are also seeing the
emergence of new threats - terrorist acts, cybersecurity
threats and the adverse impact of climate change, to
name a few. The United Nations must now, more than
ever, confront security crises of an overwhelming
magnitude - both in number and scope. That gloomy
reality amplifies the importance of collective action for
conflict resolution. It also highlights the need for long-
term prevention as a paramount tool for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.

The Secretary-General has put prevention at the
heart of his vision for the reform of the United Nations
peace and security architecture. He has also attached the
highest priority to forging robust partnerships among
all relevant stakeholders in addressing threats to peace
and security. That includes strengthening cooperation
among States, the United Nations and regional and
subregional groupings.

President Ouattara said yesterday that C6te d'Ivoire
should be a source of inspiration for other post-conflict
reconstruction. That is true. Lebanon too can serve as a
source of inspiration for post-conflict rebirth. Lebanon
is a concrete example of how multi-levelled cooperation
can play a decisive role in conflict resolution, post-
conflict economic reconstruction and peacebuilding.
After a devastating 15 years of civil war, which started
in 1975, Lebanon witnessed a full-fledged Israeli
invasion and a subsequent Israeli occupation of an Arab
capital and a large area of our territory. Thanks to the
Arab world and the international community, Lebanon
was able to stand again on its feet. The international
community worked feverishly to restore peace in
Lebanon and to bring an end to the occupation. The
United Nations played a central role in those efforts.
Various Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 425 (1978), were critical.
However, regional initiatives were equally
important. The League of Arab States kept the
situation in Lebanon under its close attention, initiating
political talks, dispatching envoys and, at one point,
even deploying joint forces to stabilize the conflict.
The adoption of the Taif Accords, in 1989, brought
our devastating civil war to an end. The Accords
were the culmination of a national political process
facilitated by a regional initiative and supported by the
United Nations and the international community. The
Lebanese people will remain immensely grateful to the
host, Saudi Arabia, for its efforts, and to the enabling
umbrella of the League of Arab States for achieving
peace. Lebanon has enjoyed two decades of internal
peace thanks to that collective Arab effort. That is the
best example of how regional cooperation and solidarity
can bring about peace.

However, and as the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission said yesterday in the Chamber (see S/PV.8413), silencing the guns is only the first step.
The real work of making peace starts afterwards. An
enormous amount of work needs to be done after the
end of civil turmoil to preserve peace, achieve national
reconciliation, rebuild the country and society and
solidify the foundations of a revitalized democracy.
Such ongoing collaborative efforts on the national,
regional and international levels also supported
Lebanon's efforts towards post-conflict recovery.
Once again, Arab assistance and international support
provided an indispensable boost for my country with
regard to its post-war reconstruction and institutional
and economic revival. We could not have done it alone.

Leadership is also just as important, if not more
important, to achieving that end. Late Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri led an enormous reconstruction effort
that revived the country and its economy. We are still
enjoying the fruits of that effort.

The United Nations remains a major contributor
to peace and security in Lebanon today. Thanks to
its peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, the situation in southern Lebanon
remains generally calm, contributing positively to
the overall stability in the country and beyond. The
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon and various United Nations agencies continue
to support the Lebanese Government's tireless work
towards sustaining peace and economic well-being in
the face of colossal challenges, especially the burdens
that arise from the Syrian refugee situation.

The Rome II, CEDRE, and Brussels Conferences
of 2018 are the latest demonstrations of the generous
international and regional commitment to the stability
and welfare of my country. They are also good examples
of how post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding efforts
in one country can be a long-term investment in peace
and security regionally and internationally. While
international organizations are guardians of the pillars
of international law, it is regional and subregional
organizations that provide a contextual angle, enabling
a clearer and closer understanding of and responsiveness
to local and regional security issues. It is evident that
the complementarity of both international and regional
structures is something we should build on in our
collective goal towards achieving global peace and
security. As Secretary-General Guterres said yesterday,
a holistic approach to peace is the right way to achieve
long-term peace and security.

