Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to express our sincere gratitude for the determined
commitment demonstrated by the Governments of Iraq
and the United Kingdom, which resulted in today's
unanimous adoption of the landmark resolution 2379
(2017). The resolution also indicates our wholehearted
endorsement of international efforts to combat the
common evil of terrorism that is confronting the entire
international community. The liberation of Mosul, the
last stronghold of Da'esh in Iraq, by Iraqi and coalition
forces was received in Kazakhstan and its entire region
with great satisfaction, as well as with deep sorrow
given the high price paid for the victory by the long-
suffering Iraqi people.

The adoption of today's resolution supporting the
launch of an investigative team to hold the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) accountable is an
important milestone in bringing the terrorist group to
justice for all of the atrocities committed in the territory
of Iraq and beyond. The collection analysis tools used
and the preservation of credible evidence will serve
to implement the principle of the inevitability of the
prosecution and punishment of members of Da'esh,
wherever they may be, for committing atrocious crimes
against humanity, war crimes, terrorism and crimes
against children, women and civilians. We also hold the
perpetrators responsible for the destruction of cultural
heritage sites. My delegation has high expectations of
the investigative team to be established pursuant to the
resolution. We join other Security Council members
in calling on all interested States to cooperate with
the team.

The adopted resolution contains the key elements
to effectively hold Da'esh to account and prosecute
the transnational terrorist group. The courage and
consolidation of Iraqi society required for the liberation
of Mosul commands our respect and confidence that
the Iraqi people will also be united in establishing
the rule of law in the country and in restoring all that
has been destroyed. The unfailing national solidarity
and sacrifice made for their country will also, over
time, return refugees to their homes, normalizing
life, rehabilitating victims of ISIL - among whom,
sadly, there are many families from our part of the
world - and promoting sustainable development. It
is obvious that only the elimination of socioeconomic
factors that give rise to terrorism will prevent the
return of chaos, suffering and irreparable loss among
the civilian population and give them new hope for a
better future.

Kazakhstan is firmly convinced that a holistic and
systematic approach by the international community,
represented by the States Members of the United
Nations and international organizations could be a
solution to the complex phenomenon of international
terrorism. Over the course of its implementation, such a
strategy would ensure responsibility and accountability
for the entire chain of terrorist groups, including
organizers, ideologues, militants, their financiers and
other accomplices. It is very important for my country
and for all of Central Asia that we start work today in
order to prevent a spillover of terrorist activity to the
currently stable parts of our community. Kazakhstan,
which deeply believes in human dignity, justice and
freedom,joins other Member States in striving to uphold
and fully implement today's resolution, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

