Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I would like to express the
strongest appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his passionate briefing, which provided a
comprehensive picture of the progress made and of our
continuing concerns about the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, which is one of our top priorities, as
Under-Secretary-General Holmes rightly emphasized.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make only
a few additional remarks.

Resolution 1674 (2006) marked a milestone in
the work of the Security Council, affirming the
responsibility of States to protect civilians in armed
conflict, in line with the principles of international
humanitarian law. We welcome the progress and
positive achievements made in this field, which is at
the core of United Nations activity in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and rapid response in times
of crisis. We now have to focus on how to ensure the
steady implementation of resolution 1674 (2006) - to
move from words to deeds, as our colleague from the
United States has just said. In this respect, Italy would
like to stress three simple operational ideas. The first is
to systematically address the issue of protection of
civilians on the ground upon revision of the mandates
of United Nations missions and operations. The second
is to use a framework based on that of the Working
Group on children in armed conflict and its reporting
mechanism also for protection of civilians in armed
conflict so as to provide, as so rightly highlighted by
Under-Secretary-General Holmes, a better system of
proactive - I stress the word "proactive" -
monitoring and prevention, advocacy, awareness-
raising and capacity-building. The third idea is to
encourage further cooperation among the relevant
actors to follow up on the decisions of the Security
Council in this regard, taking into due account the
crucial role of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Under-Secretary-General Holmes's briefing was
troubling in many ways. It addressed key protection
issues, such as a rise in the deliberate targeting of
civilians in conflict, the indiscriminate use of force,
forced displacement and the issue of safety and access
of humanitarian personnel. Let me briefly touch on a
few aspects, before concluding my statement.

The protection of civilians is not an abstract
political or legal concept. It is, of course,
understood- as recalled by Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and by many other previous speakers - that
what is at stake here is the seriousness and credibility
of our commitment to the responsibility to protect.
Civilian suffering and casualties are very concrete, and
particularly and increasingly troubling, realities in the
very many crisis areas and the numerous aspects that
were recalled by Under-Secretary-General Holmes. In
this respect, we are particularly concerned about the
protection of the most fragile groups, those who are the
most exposed to the consequences of conflict. I am,
obviously, referring to women and children.

Secondly, the consistent reports regarding the
increase in the number of journalists being killed in
conflict situations are alarming. Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006) addresses the safety and
security of journalists. Accordingly, Italy promoted the
inclusion of a reference to it in resolution 1746 (2007),
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, and finally, in situations where any
civilian population is the target of attacks, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court provides the
legal basis for holding accountable those responsible
for the attacks if a State is unwilling or unable to do so.
In this regard, we must reiterate our commitment to
end impunity.

I would like to close with the words of Under-
Secretary-General Holmes, who rightly emphasized
that "if there is one thing we need to do above all, it is
to end the culture of impunity which underlies so many
abuses" (supra).

