Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the
clarity of his briefing on the situation in that country.
We also welcome Ambassador Tanin's participation
and the perspective he has presented to us.

Madam President, Nigeria offers its deep
condolences on the demise of Ambassador Holbrooke,
whose pioneering work in Afghanistan cannot be
forgotten. Our greatest regret is that he did not live to
see the success of the work that he started in
Afghanistan. What we owe Ambassador Holbrooke is
to continue, so that the Afghans may realize his dreams
for the development and security of the country.

Nigeria welcomes the successful conclusion on
18 September of elections to the Lower House of the
parliament, the Wolesi Jirga, despite the huge
challenges endured, including the intimidation of
voters by insurgents, and reported cases of electoral
fraud. The certification of the final results has
enhanced the credibility of the country's electoral
process and should serve as the foundation for further
progress in electoral reform. We commend the Afghan-
led Independent Electoral Commission for its efforts
and contributions, and UNAMA for providing the
requisite technical support for the elections.

The parties that have filed complaints with the
Electoral Complaints Commission should now allow
the legal process to take its course. The Complaints
Commission's obligation to expeditiously and
transparently deal with all pending complaints cannot
be overstated. Both the Independent Electoral
Commission and the Complaints Commission should
take advantage of the ongoing discussions with the
United Nations to further strengthen their capacities.

We welcome the formal inauguration of the High
Peace Council by President Hamid Karzai. The
responsibility placed on its members is crucial to
national peace and unity. They should therefore create
a platform for reconciliation, as envisaged, and
promote peace and unity through confidence-building
measures. That is particularly relevant to the attempts
to reintegrate some armed groups that have expressed
their commitment to disarming, renouncing violence
and supporting the Government's development efforts.

The volatile security situation in Afghanistan
continues to hinder the country's political and

economic development. The persistent attacks by
insurgents and terrorists on innocent civilians and on
the personnel of non-governmental organizations and
the United Nations deserve our strong condemnation,
particularly the one on the United Nations multi-
agency compound on 23 October. Our focus and
priority should be on continuing to strengthen
Afghanistan's security capacity and on implementing
the Government's security framework. These
conditions are unquestionably vital to reinforcing the
Government's preparedness to assume full
responsibility for law enforcement by 2014. UNAMA's
technical and military training and capacity-building
support remain important and will make the difference.
By fulfilling its pledges, the international community
will also be helping the process.

The international community must continue to
support Afghanistan's fledgling democratic structures
and show solidarity with the Government. Threats and
attacks must not be allowed to hinder efforts to foster
peace within the country and the entire region. We
welcome Afghanistan's regional policy, emphasizing
political dialogue with neighbouring countries. The
policy's benefits are already evident in Afghanistan's
improved and enhanced relationships with its
neighbours.

Nigeria welcomes UNAMA's role in generating a
coherent approach to donor assistance in support of the
Afghan Government's anti-corruption agenda. We
support the strengthening and expanding UNAMA's
field offices and the efforts for greater coordination
among United Nations partners through the
development of the Integrated Strategic Framework,
which is currently under way, as key steps towards
UNAMA's effective delivery on its development
coordination mandate.

Nigeria notes with concern the limited access for
humanitarian activities, despite the increasing demand
for such assistance. More concerted efforts are needed
to address the situation. However, we appreciate the
tremendous work of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in facilitating the return a
number of Afghan refugees.

Nigeria welcomes the announcement that the new
parliament will be inaugurated in early January 2011. It
is our expectation that the Afghan people and
Government will seize this opportunity to deepen
confidence- and nation-building efforts in order to
address in a concrete manner the issues of security and
governance in the country. We also thank those who
continue to provide training, mentoring and support to
the Afghan military and police, as well as those who
made financial commitments during the donor
conference.

In conclusion, Nigeria expresses its appreciation
to the staff and personnel of UNAMA for their
dedication, and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his continuing commitment to
peace efforts in Afghanistan.

