Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I welcome you to
New York, Mr. President; it is good to see you here.
You know, Sir, we in the Non-Aligned Movement used
to be very envious of Colombia for its wonderful city
of Cartagena, but now we are truly, truly envious of
your having won the Copa America; we congratulate
you and the people of Colombia.

South Africa is pleased that the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects successfully adopted a
realistic and implementable Programme of Action. In
that regard, I wish to recall the statement made by the
head of the South African delegation during the general
debate at the Conference, when he said that

"the Conference provides the international
community with a unique opportunity to
collectively express itself on the dangers posed
by these weapons and to adopt a realistic and
implementable programme of action. Such a
collective effort would initiate a long-term
process to prevent, combat and eradicate this
threat to peace, stability and sustainable
development".

In that regard, South Africa is satisfied that the
Conference achieved its goals. While it must be
recognized that the Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference strikes a delicate balance of differing
views, the Programme provides for the first time an
internationally agreed framework for preventing,
combating and eradicating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects on the
national, subregional, regional and global levels in a
realistic, sustained and comprehensive manner.

The successful conclusion of the Conference, Mr.
President, was possible thanks to the important role
played by your Government, and in particular by
Ambassador Camilo Reyes in his capacity as President
of the Conference. His leadership and contribution, as
well as that of Ambassador Carlos dos Santos of
Mozambique, the Chairman of the Preparatory
Committee, inspired the Conference to seek
compromises and to adopt a realistic and achievable
Programme of Action. Their dedication to the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is symbolic of the plight of
the peoples of States most affected by the scourge of
those weapons.

South Africa is particularly pleased that the
Programme of Action is based on the approach adopted
by States most affected by the threat of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons. Africa collectively
responded to that threat through the adoption of the
Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position
on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking
of Small Arms and Light Weapons, thereby providing a
framework for an African solution to a problem that
transcends national and regional boundaries. In terms
of that framework, the small arms problem is addressed
from an inclusive perspective of arms control and
disarmament, post-conflict peace-building, conflict
prevention and socio-economic development. In
addition, the Declaration concerning Firearms,
Ammunition and Other Related Materials in the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the adoption of a SADC draft protocol in August
this year will facilitate subregional cooperation to
combat illicit small arms proliferation; this is of
particular relevance to the Programme of Action.

South Africa also welcomes the agreement that
the General Assembly should convene a follow-up
conference by no later than 2006 to review progress
made in the implementation of the Programme of
Action. That conference and its preparatory phase,
including meetings of States on a biennial basis, would
consider national, regional and global implementation
of the Programme of Action. It would also ensure that
the process started by the United Nations Conference is
sustainable and that it remains relevant. It would
further ensure that the United Nations continues to play
a central role in addressing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects. In that regard,
South Africa welcomes the various references in the
Programme of Action to the role of the United Nations,
other international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society in assisting States to
promote and implement the Programme of Action.

Although the important role of the Security
Council in implementing the Programme of Action is
recognized and welcomed, the nature and origin of the
Programme of Action as an initiative of the General
Assembly should be respected when the Council
considers initiatives related to small arms. Given the
nature of the problems associated with the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons and the fact that the
Programme of Action was developed and adopted
through a process initiated by the General Assembly,
this issue should continue to be dealt with in the ambit
of the General Assembly. The Security Council's
involvement in this issue should be confined to specific
areas related to the Council's agenda.

In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
commitment made by States in the Programme of
Action to encourage, particularly in post-conflict
situations, the disarmament and demobilization of ex-
combatants and their subsequent reintegration into
civilian life, and to provide support for the effective
disposition of collected small arms and light weapons.
Of related importance is that one of the measures is to
encourage the Council to consider, on a case-by-case
basis, the inclusion of relevant provisions for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the
mandates and budgets of peacekeeping operations.
South Africa furthermore welcomes the undertaking by
States to take appropriate measures, including all legal
or administrative means, against any activity that
violates a Security Council arms embargo in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and to
cooperate with the United Nations system to ensure the
effective implementation of Security Council
embargoes.

South Africa recognizes the important
interrelationship between the role of the Council in the
implementation of Programme of Action and its
responsibilities with regard to international peace and
security issues. It is, however, regrettable that the
Programme of Action, owing to the concerns of one
State, does not include a commitment by all States not
to provide arms to so-called non-State actors or rebel
groups. The continued supply of arms, in particular
small arms and light weapons, to rebel groups and
other non-State actors clearly runs counter to efforts by
the Council to promote peace and stability in specific
areas of conflict. A commitment by all States to
provide arms only to Governments would, in our view,
have strengthened the Council's efforts to prevent the
supply of arms to rebel groups that continue to
destabilize peace and security in many countries in
Africa. In that regard, we remain concerned that rebel
groups and other non-State actors continue to receive
arms despite various initiatives by the Security
Council. As that issue drives to the core of the problem
associated with the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in Africa, South Africa trusts that both the
General Assembly and the Security Council will
remain seized of this matter.

