Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): We are once again gathered in an open
meeting - just a few days after the Quartet's 26
September meeting and the Security Council's own
meeting of 5 October - to address the subject of the
Middle East. The General Assembly also discussed this
question in depth during the course of its general
debate. On all those occasions the people of the United
Nations and people of good will have called upon the
parties to the conflict and the mediators to resume the
road map initiative and to define together future stages
for its implementation. Everyone has reaffirmed strong
support for that initiative, whose goal is to find a
lasting settlement to the conflict between now and
2005.

Is it necessary to recall that the road map is
based, first of all, on the idea of two States - Israel
and Palestine - living side by side in peace and within
secure and recognized borders? Similarly, need one
recall that the parties to the conflict each entered into
commitments contained in the road map to reach that
goal? For its part, Cameroon has repeatedly called
upon the parties to refrain from any actions that could
compromise peace. Bearing all that in mind, we
wonder whether the attacks, targeted raids, destruction
of houses and goods, continued construction of the wall
in the West Bank and the ongoing building of new
settlements do not indeed impede the peace process we
have sought, and which we continue to seek.

A few days ago, on 2 October, the Secretary-
General expressed his own deep concern about the
Israeli Government's decision to continue to build that
wall deep in the territory of the West Bank. According
to a statement by the Quartet on 26 September, the
Secretary-General considered the separation wall and
the settlements on Palestinian territory to pose a
serious obstacle to reaching a two-State solution. Other
members of the Quartet also share that vision, and have
so indicated on several occasions. We have always
condemned violence whatever its source. We have
always recognized and defended Israel's right to ensure
its security within the context of norms that are in
keeping with international law, in general, and within
the context of its respect for its own commitments
under the road map, in particular.

It goes without saying that Israelis and
Palestinians will be unable to achieve peace in an
atmosphere of mutual defiance. In order to remove that
mutual defiance, the parties must promote true
disarmament: disarmament in terms of weapons policy,
but also, and above all, psychological and cultural
disarmament. They must do so by casting war
psychosis and fear of the other from their hearts. There
is no doubt that such disarmament will take time. If the
protagonists themselves make good use of time - the
present and the future - to shape future generations
into a culture of peace, then we can hope for better
prospects for the Holy Land, a land of peace, and for
the Middle East as a whole.

It is true, nevertheless, that the long history of
conflict has demonstrated that without the international
community's involvement, the disarmament I
mentioned will continue to be a very distant prospect.
We therefore once again call upon the international
community, and in particular upon the Quartet, to take
bold and simultaneous steps, as opposed to incremental
ones, in order to create the conditions necessary to
ensure that peace prevails in the region.

