Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
situation in the Darfur region of the Sudan is entering
an important phase of transition from armed conflict,
disorder and human catastrophe to an emerging
glimpse of hope that the conflict is coming to an end,
and that incremental steps are being taken to restore
calm and stability and to achieve national
reconciliation. Undoubtedly, the current phase of the
Darfur problem presents a significant challenge for the
Sudanese, the African continent and the international
community. Such challenge is manifested in whether
we can fully benefit from the experience we gained
over the past two years in addressing the situation in
Darfur, where the international community lacked the
ability to comprehend the particular character and the
historical, geographic and demographic circumstances
in the region. Therefore, the manner in which the
international community sought to address the conflict
in that region was both unconvincing and inefficient.

In this context, we believe that the current phase
will require an agreement among us all on a number of
priorities that would provide for a new framework for
addressing the problem, guarantee the best possible
utilization of the momentum resulting from the signing
of the Darfur peace agreement and create a space of
trust between the Sudanese parties and the international
community in their quest for stabilizing the region.
This should include the settlement of all outstanding
issues between the Sudan and its neighbours,
particularly Chad.
To this end, I wish to present the views of Egypt
on those priorities, which we believe should be
addressed and supported by the United Nations in a
parallel and integrated manner.

First, the point of departure must be the
assistance we should provide to the Government of
National Unity in the Sudan to reinforce its ability to
address the situation in Darfur. That should involve a
clear approach that does not undermine the country's
sovereignty or territorial integrity. The approach should
not exacerbate the situation on the ground but should
be based on an all-inclusive peace agreement.

Secondly, we need to improve the difficult
humanitarian situation in Darfur. That should take
place within a framework of enhanced understanding
and constructive cooperation with the Sudanese parties
aimed at increasing the level of humanitarian
assistance and facilitating the access to and the
delivery of such assistance to the needy in a manner
commensurate with the dire humanitarian situation in
the region, and in a manner that would lead to the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes.

Thirdly, we need to introduce a clear approach
and to take significant steps towards the launching of
the Darfur-Darfur dialogue, which should bring
together all parties and tribes which were not party to
the crisis and which did not carry arms. Such an
inclusive approach will guarantee the launching of an
integrated national reconciliation process, ensure
justice and widen the base of consensus on the
requirements for peace and stability within the unity
and sovereignty of the Sudan. We believe that the
relationship between the United Nations and the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan, and with
the people of the Sudan in general, must be based on a
comprehensive partnership that can instil mutual trust
and cooperation that would complement the efforts
under way to convince the non-signatories of the
agreement to join it and to refrain from obstructing its
implementation.

Fourthly, we must embark on a process of
formulating a comprehensive plan for reconstruction in
Darfur within a more comprehensive framework of
development in all the regions of the Sudan. Such an
endeavour is essential for the elimination of potential
conflict over resources, which might provide the
grounds for renewed armed violence in the region.
Egypt prepared an integrated programme with a view
to contributing to reconstruction and development

efforts in southern Sudan and began to implement it in
cooperation with the Government of National Unity
shortly after the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The programme consists of a package of
projects in the areas of health, education and
infrastructure development. Egypt is currently
preparing a similar programme for the reconstruction
and development of Darfur, to be implemented as soon
as the Darfur Peace Agreement becomes all-inclusive.

Fifthly, we must initiate, without delay, the
process of strengthening the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) so that it can carry out its vital role
in monitoring the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement during the transition period, in accordance
with the enhanced concept of operations under
consideration by the African Union Peace and Security
Council. Our preliminary reading of the enhanced
concept of operations suggests that that it would lead
to the major transformation of the AMIS mandate - if
AMIS were to become a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation. We therefore stress the need for the parties
to the Darfur Peace Agreement to agree to the proposed
new mandate of AMIS.

In the meantime, we look forward to the
international community's providing political and
financial support to AMIS. We hope that the
forthcoming donor conference, scheduled to take place
in Brussels on 17 July, will produce tangible results in
translating such support into practical commitments.

Sixthly, we need to consider the Darfur Peace
Agreement in an integrated and comprehensive
context, taking account of other existing political and
operational arrangements in all parts of the Sudan,
particularly the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
the positive developments in the talks taking place in
eastern Sudan. In that way we would prevent too close
a focus on one issue, to the detriment of other efforts to
ensure lasting peace and stability in the Sudan.

The leadership of the African Union during the
various stages of addressing the situation in Darfur has
produced commendable results that reflect the solid
will of Africa to take ownership of the means to
resolve its own problems. Our continent expects from
the Security Council, and from the United Nations as a
whole, full and sustained support, as well as
confidence in the ability of the organs and structures of
the African Union to address the most difficult tasks
before it. Our most recent experience during the

critical phases preceding the signing of the Darfur
Peace Agreement proves that the international
community's support for the African Union leads to
positive results. Thus, we look forward to enhancing
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the next critical phase in the
implementation of all aspects of the Darfur Peace
Agreement.

In this context, Egypt is closely following the
ongoing consultations between the United Nations and
the Government of National Unity, including through
the contacts made by the most recent Security Council
mission to the Sudan - about which we have just been
hearing - in relation to, inter alia, the possible
transition of peacekeeping tasks from the African
Union to the United Nations. We hope that those
consultations will be conducted in the most transparent
manner and that the concerns of all parties will be
addressed with due seriousness. We also hope that the
Security Council will address all such concerns during
the next phase with an open mind.

In this context, we welcome the conclusions
made by the joint United Nations-African Union
assessment mission during its most recent visit to the
Sudan concerning the need for the consent of the
Government of National Unity regarding the
deployment of any peacekeeping operation in Darfur
and its emphasis that the principal guarantee for the
success of any such mission will depend on the
Government's full cooperation.

The situation in Darfur and the human
catastrophe caused by the armed conflict in the region
have touched the heart of the international community.
However, we believe that the international community
has a joint responsibility in this respect, particularly
given the lack of a comprehensive and integrated
vision and of a deep sense of understanding of the
causes and the dimensions of that conflict.

However, the national, regional and international
resolve shown in recent days gives us reason to hope
for a settlement of the problem in Darfur. We would
therefore like to emphasize here that all of our
pronouncements and actions must be characterized by
caution and determination. We must avoid
oversimplification and a narrow focus in terms of the
reality on the ground. In our view, that is the only
means of reaching our common objective of alleviating
the suffering of civilians and achieving the desired
security, justice and development for all, as well as the
maintenance of international peace and security within
a framework that fully respects the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Sudan.

