Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Madam, and the Argentine
delegation on your successful presidency for the month
ofOctober. The work ofthe Council has been excellently
conducted thanks to your able, warm-hearted and
passionate leadership and the diligent work of your
team. We would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the five newly elected Security Council
members - Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela.

The Council's work this month focused, among
others, on situations in Africa and the Middle East.
With regard to Africa, we had valuable opportunities
to review the situations in Somalia and Eritrea, as well
as the work of the Somalia Sanctions Committee, on
which I reported to the Council as Committee Chair. We
believe that those discussions serve as a useful reminder
that the sustained engagement of the international
community remains critical to those countries'
paths towards stability. In particular, the adoption of
resolution 2182 (2014), including the authorization of
maritime interdiction, demonstrated the Council's
commitment to peace and stability in Somalia.

The Council also remained vigilant on the situation
in the Middle East. The last open debate on the Middle
East (see S/PV.7281) allowed us to address that issue in
a comprehensive manner, especially in the wake of the
Secretary-General's visit to the region, which reflected
his unswerving efforts to bring peace to the Middle
East. Yesterday's briefing (see S/PV.7291) was very
timely as well, given the series of actions undertaken
by the Israeli Government in East Jerusalem.

With regard to the situation in Syria, given its
gravity, this morning's briefing (see S/PV.7293), the
first by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, provided us
with a new perspective on the situation in that country
and the neighbouring area. For more than three years,
the situation in Syria has been deteriorating, and today
it is having a spillover effect on all its neighbours,
including Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. The
Council's consultations on resolution 1559 (2004) and
on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force,
as well as this morning's briefing by the Special Envoy,
all pointed to a political solution to the Syrian conflict
as the only viable way forward in the region.

Turning to thematic issues, the open debate on
women and peace and security (see S/PV.7289) was
both timely and pertinent in the run-up to the 2015
high-level review to assess progress in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that meeting offered
momentum to mobilize international attention and
commitments with a view to the protection of displaced
women and girls facing dire situations around the
world.

Another open debate this month, on the working
methods of the Security Council (see S/PV.7285), also
served as a valuable opportunity to consider ways to
improve due process in sanctions regimes, as well as
how to ensure follow-up of the Council's referrals to
the International Criminal Court. At the same time,
the progress achieved and limitations with regard
to the working methods overall were also addressed.
In the light of that, it is necessary to consider how to
follow up on some of the commonly raised points at
the meeting through the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

This month we also heard an assessment of the Ebola
epidemic by the Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
and we heard about its continued political and security
impact in West Africa (see S/PV.7279). As a follow-up
to resolution 2177 (2014), the meeting demonstrated
the Council's attention to the Ebola crisis, specifically
through the issuance of a press statement (SC/11602).
Finally, we would like to congratulate Ambassador
Gary Quinlan and Australia's team as they prepares to
assume the Council's presidency in November, even
though it is still 31 hours away. We assure them of the
Republic of Korea's full cooperation.

