Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for organizing
today's debate. We also thank the Special Representative
of Secretary-General, Mr. Yamamoto, and the other
briefers for their briefings, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for sharing his
perspectives on the recent developments in his country.

While the situation in Afghanistan continues
to cause concern, there have also been several
positive developments of significance. Millions of
Afghans - women and men - who turned out to
vote in the recently held elections, despite the Taliban
threat, demonstrated their courage and strong desire to
work for a better future by exercising their democratic
right. It was a bold refusal to be cowed by the terrorist
groups. We commend the National Unity Government,
the Independent Election Commission and the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, which
made sure that the elections went ahead despite the
serious challenges and threats. Democracy is clearly
taking firmer root in Afghanistan. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General stated earlier,
those elections were the first to be completely run
by Afghan authorities since 2001. They indeed mark
an important milestone in Afghanistan's transition to
self-reliance.

Many Member States attended the recently
concluded Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan last month, thereby reaffirming the
commitment of the international community and the
United Nations to Afghanistan. Ten days ago, the
General Assembly also reiterated its support to the
cause of Afghanistan through its adoption of resolution
73/88. However, that is clearly not enough.

Even as the reports of the Secretary-General have
continued to stress that the violence and terror in
Afghanistan show no signs of abating, terrorists are
now attacking places never imagined before, including
hospitals, schools, mosques and even mourners
at funerals. Sadly, one-quarter of all terrorism-
related deaths in the world were caused by attacks
in Afghanistan last year. Despite all the signs of the
deterioration in the security situation, the international
community and the Council, with all its tools, have
simply been unable or unwilling to deal effectively with
the source of the problem.

The Council's actions against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant can serve as a template for action
against terrorists and their supporters in Afghanistan.
The illicit narcotics, illegal mining and other criminal
industries controlled by those terror groups are stealing
the resources of the Afghan people and funding
ever more violence. The sanctuaries and safe havens
provided to those terror networks for years are well
known. The activities of the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network, Da'esh and Al-Qaida and its proscribed
affiliates, such as the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaysh
Muhammad, must be stopped. The Security Council
sanctions committee, which refuses to designate the
new leaders of the Taliban or to freeze the assets of its
slain leader, is falling short of what is expected of it by
the Afghans and the international community. Based
on lessons of the past, we in New York are aware that
peace in Afghanistan is tied to peace and security in the
entire world.

Even as the challenges of security, peace and
development continue to mount, there has also been
considerable progress over the past 17 years, especially
in the areas of promoting education and health care;
protecting the rights of women, children and the
marginalized; improving governance and reforms;
generating livelihoods and moving Afghanistan
towards self-reliance.

India has age-old historical, cultural, civilizational
and economic ties with Afghanistan. We are working
closely with our Afghan partners in implementing
development projects and will continue to do so in this
transformation decade. Building reliable connectivity
for landlocked Afghanistan is a key component of our
regional partnership. We are mindful to ensure that all
such projects respect State sovereignty and territorial
integrity and are based on universally recognized
international norms, transparency and principles of
financial responsibility, ecological and environmental
protection and preservation standards. It is in that spirit
that we are engaged in various connectivity projects
in the region, including the Chabahar Port project
and the direct India-Afghanistan air freight corridor,
which have been successfully operationalized. We will
continue to build on the gains made and to work with
all those who share the spirit of helping Afghanistan
without conditions.

We support an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled inclusive peace and reconciliation
process that promotes and protects unity, sovereignty,
democracy, inclusiveness and prosperity of Afghanistan.
Any meaningful progress towards sustainable peace
requires the cessation of terrorist violence, renunciation
of links with international terrorism, respect for the
rights of common Afghan people, especially those
of women, children and minorities. We hope that the
courage, resilience and determination of the Afghan
people can be matched by those of the international
community in doing what needs to be done on its part
to bring peace to that war-torn country.

