Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting and commend your presence here as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France, as
well as that of the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Mali, His Excellency Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga,
and all the other members of the Governments present
here today. I would also like to express my gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his detailed and very
informative briefing.

As has been comprehensively outlined, the security
situation in the north and centre of Mali faces various
challenges. The situation has made those two areas
even more vulnerable and exposed to threats such as
violent extremism and organized crime, including
trafficking in persons as well as trafficking in drugs
and weapons. Against that background, there are also
ecological and climate challenges. Given the explosive
situation that is endangering the very existence of
the State, it is important to continue promoting broad
consultations and exchanges between national and
international stakeholders and partners in order to
provide the tools to combat and prevent terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, both at the national level
and throughout the Sahelo-Saharan region.

Despite the unwavering international mobilization
and support for the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the situation in Mali remains of great concern. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea once again wishes
to firmly condemn the continued attacks being
perpetrated against Blue Helmets, United Nations
personnel, the Malian armed forces and, above all,
against the population. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea wishes to express its appreciation of, and pay
tribute to, all national and international defence forces
involved in the brave efforts to combat violence and
transboundary organized crime in Mali and throughout
the Sahel region. Those despicable attacks must
serve to strengthen the determination of the Malian
authorities, in collaboration with the African Union and
the international community as a whole, to continue
to support, to the extent possible, efforts aimed at
combating terrorism and violent extremism as well as
to promote sustainable peace, security and stability in
the country.

As we emphasized yesterday at the ministerial
meeting on the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, and having taken into account recent
events, it is essential to ensure greater international
mobilization in support of the work of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the Government
of Mali throughout the country and the wider region.
The central role played by all international actors must
also promote a new geostrategic approach based on
multi-stakeholder cooperation among the countries of
the Sahel, the Maghreb countries, the European Union
and the African Union, through their competent regional
mechanisms, in order to contribute significantly to the
improvement of the security and stability situation in
Mali and the wider Sahel.

We will never tire of reiterating that, in view of
that disheartening backdrop, it is imperative that the
Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
expedite the full implementation of the key provisions
of the Malian peace agreement, as also highlighted in
resolution 2423 (2018). In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made by President Keita and his Government in
promoting the review of the Constitution. We support
the words of the Secretary-General in emphasizing
that the constitutional review is an indispensable step
towards adopting critical political and institutional
reforms envisaged in the agreement, given that such
reforms will lay the groundwork for a unified nation
and a more peaceful and stable Mali. In the framework
of those consultations, we stress the importance of the
inclusive nature of reform and permanent dialogue with
all political actors and civil society for the successful
completion of the process.

My country's Government also believes that, in
order to bring the security situation under control in
Mali, the national authorities must do everything in
their power to put an end to massacres of all kinds,
such as that of 23 March in the village of Ogossagou.
Political actors must consistently ensure not to create a
gateway to civil war. In the same vein, it is necessary to
urgently implement the disarmament and dismantling of
all militia groups committing murders and massacres,
in order to protect the civilian population. The national
authorities must therefore deploy the security forces to
the areas most affected by such attacks. We believe that
that also constitutes a solution to the current crisis.

The long-term solution to put an end to the violence
and any conflict is inexorably through solutions of a
political nature. In that regard, we urge all parties to be
fully committed to prioritizing, supporting and actively
participating in all initiatives aimed at ensuring the end
of the conflict, such as the promotion of justice and
reconciliation among the sons and daughters of Mali.

