The President: The Security Council Will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
827 (1993) of 25 May 1993, which established
the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and its resolution 955 (1994)
of 8 November 1994 which established the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) - the Tribunals - and further recalls
that resolution 1503 (2003) of 28 August 2003
called upon the Tribunals to take all possible
measures to complete all trial activities at first
instance by the end of 2008 and to complete all
work in 2010 - the completion strategies - and
that resolution 1534 (2004) of 26 March 2004
emphasized the importance of fully implementing
the completion strategies.

"The Security Council recalls that the
Tribunals were established in particular
circumstances of the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda as an ad hoc measure contributing to the
restoration and maintenance of peace.

"The Security Council takes note of the
presentations made on 12 December 2008 by the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals to the
2
Security Council on the implementation of the
completion strategies.

"Noting with concern that the deadline for
completion of trial activities at first instance has
not been met and that the Tribunals have
indicated that their work is not likely to end in
2010, the Security Council emphasizes that trials
must be conducted by the Tribunals as quickly
and efficiently as possible and expresses its
determination to support their efforts toward the
completion of their work at the earliest date.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
necessity of persons indicted by the ICTY and
ICTR being brought to justice.

"The Security Council calls on all States,
especially States where fugitives are suspected to
be at large, to further intensify cooperation with
and render all necessary assistance to the ICTY
and ICTR, as appropriate, in particular to achieve
the arrest and surrender of all remaining fugitive
indictees.

"The Council also reaffirms in this context
that the referral of cases to competent national
jurisdictions is an essential part of the completion
strategies and in this regard underlines again the
need for the Tribunals to concentrate their work
on the prosecution and trial of the most senior
leaders suspected of being most responsible for
crimes within their jurisdiction, and urges the
Tribunals to work with relevant national
authorities to secure the transfer of cases which
do not involve this level of responsibility for
prosecution by competent national jurisdictions.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
need to establish an ad hoc mechanism to carry
out a number of essential functions of the
Tribunals, including the trial of high-level
fugitives, after the closure of the Tribunals. In
view of the substantially reduced nature of these
residual functions, this mechanism should be a
small, temporary, and efficient structure. Its
functions and size will diminish over time. Its
expenses will be expenses of the Organization in
accordance with Article 17 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

"The Security Council emphasizes that any
such mechanism will derive its authority from a
08-66218
Security Council resolution and from statutes and
rules of procedure and evidence based on those
existing for the ICTY and the ICTR, modified as
appropriate, and that accommodations may be
needed to address the differing needs and
circumstances of the ICTY and the ICTR.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to its Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals for its work to date on the
establishment of this mechanism, including
through a thorough examination of which
functions of the Tribunals are necessary for the
administration of justice after their closure. The
Security Council requests the Informal Working
Group on international tribunals to continue its
efforts in that regard and to concentrate on the
main outstanding issues with a View to drafting as
soon as possible appropriate instruments
necessary for the performance of residual
functions of the Tribunals.

"In order to facilitate the further work of the
Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, the Security Council requests the
08-66218

the

Secretary-General to present a report within 90
days on the administrative and budgetary aspects
of the options for possible locations for the
Tribunals' archives and the seat of the residual
mechanism, including the availability of suitable
premises for the conduct of judicial proceedings
by the residual mechanism, with particular
emphasis on locations where the United Nations
has an existing presence.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretariat to provide the Informal Working
Group with all necessary assistance, including
interpretation in the six working languages of the
Council."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
