Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the United States for having organized and
convened this debate. At the same time, I should also
like to express appreciation for the dedicated work and
leadership of Ambassador Lucas in her time at the helm
of the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We should also especially like to thank
Ms. Zerrougui, Mr. Whitaker and Ms. Uwiringiyimana
for their briefings.

In August 15 years had passed since the adoption
of resolution 1261 (1999). It was the first resolution
addressing children in armed conflict, and, as with
resolution 1612 (2005) and the recently adopted
resolution 2143 (2014), Argentina supported these
efforts in each ofthe three occasions as a member of the
Council. My country firmly supports the work of the
Security Council with the goal halting serious human
rights violations of children in armed conflict. We
demonstrated that commitment when we became one
of the first States to ratify the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

Like the rest of the international community,
Argentina is very aware of the devastating effects that
armed conflicts have on children through indiscriminate
attacks in civilian areas and direct attacks on civilians
themselves - whether with explosive devices, aerial
bombardments or the tactics of terror - which produce
intolerable numbers of victims among children. We
are all aware of the serious effects of the use of long-
range explosive weapons in densely populated areas,
of which the recent escalation of the violence between
Israel and Palestine is a clear and tragic example.
Schools, hospitals, mosques and protected civilian

sites, including United Nations facilities, have been
damaged or completely destroyed. Entire families and
hundreds and hundreds of children have been crushed
beneath the rubble of buildings demolished by bombing
of residential areas. Whether intended or not, collateral
damage or not, such distinctions blur when bombs
are capable of destroying whole buildings in densely
populated areas, with results that can only mean the
deaths of human beings. Argentina urges that the use
of such weapons in such areas be banned and to ensure
that their use is considered a war crime or a crime
against humanity, and that those responsible be brought
to justice.

The escalation of the crisis in Syria, with an
intensification of hostilities that during the reporting
period ledto serious violations ofchildren's human rights
and a worsening humanitarian crisis, is another grave
situation that requires the international community's
urgent attention. We regret that the Security Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
still been unable to act on the report's conclusions on
Syria (S/20l4/339), and we call for increased efforts
here in the Security Council to reach the consensus
needed to achieve that. We urge just as strongly that
the Council listen to what Argentina has been saying
since it became a member - as has the Secretary-
General - which is that supplying arms to every party
to the conflict must stop.

That is why it is not enough for us to be aware of
what is happening; we must act ifwe are to bring about
change. We want to change the disgusting behaviour
of inflicting violence on children, whether in times of
peace or war and armed conflict. We must fight to end
impunity for those who commit serious crimes against
children, particularly sexual crimes. The Secretary-
General's report covers much of this and indicates
that such crimes must be brought to justice. As we
know, children in armed conflict are victims of sexual
violence, in different ways. Sexual violence is used
to torture, wound, extract information, humiliate and
intimidate and as punishment for acts, real or imagined,
by children or their families, in order to destroy the
dignity of individuals, families, and communities. The
rape of girls is used to inflict dishonour. Today, girls in
some armed conflicts are raped on the basis of terrible
beliefs. There are people who believe that raping a
young girl can give protection from or provide a cure
for HIV infection. We have seen how the loss of family
members can result in an increase in early or forced or
early marriage, at the same time reinforcing the idea
that this protects girls. Children are recruited by armed
groups and by particular States' forces for particular
purposes, whether military, for support or for sexual
slavery.

We say, enough of this. We in the Security Council
must fight impunity. We in the Council acknowledge the
important efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui,
ofUNICEF and ofthe Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
in working to end the recruitment of children by
security forces and Governments in situations of armed
conflict, which must happen before the end of 2016.
We welcome the eight Governments in the Secretary-
General's report that have joined the campaign in order
to declare that, ethically and politically, we must have
children, not soldiers.

Lastly, we agree with the report's conclusion
that we must pay attention to non-State actors and
incorporate them into the plan for children and armed
conflict. We must find new ways to hold a dialogue
with armed groups. We welcome such efforts, as
well as the growing number of statements by such
groups on preventing the recruitment of children.
We condemn the attacks on schools and hospitals. As
everyone has done, we condemn the use of schools for
military purposes. It is a violation of international law
when educational institutions become targets, since it
endangers children, teachers and staff and jeopardizes
the future of all humankind. Argentina is committed
to upholding the principles designed to protect schools
and universities from being used for military purposes
in armed conflicts.

Madam President, you know how much I respect
you for your defence of human rights. For that reason, I
call on you to help us in the Security Council. We need
children, not soldiers. When the Council says, again and
again, that we must address the underlying causes of
conflicts, when it says over and over again that military
solutions are not solutions, that the only true solutions
are non-military, we cannot just say those words. We
must believe them, live them and act on them. We must
say no to weapons and violence.

I would also like to say to Sandra that we have
previously heard the Pakistani girl Malala speak here.
She told the Council that more violence and more
weapons were not the answer. That was what she said.
A child, a teacher, a book, a pencil - that can change
the world. That is the peace that Argentina believes in.

