Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): We appreciate the
convening of this open meeting on the situation in
Bougainville. I join the previous speakers in extending
our gratitude to Ambassador Sinclair for his
informative briefing. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea for his
presentation.

Bulgaria welcomes the progress made since the
last discussion concerning Bougainville in the Council,
and we pay warm tribute to the work of Ambassador
Sinclair and his team in Bougainville.

We highly appreciate the conclusion of stage II of
the agreed-upon weapons disposal plan contained in
the Bougainville Peace Agreement, verified and
certified by the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB). The official presentation of
the verification report by Ambassador Sinclair creates
the conditions for the constitutional laws implementing
the Bougainville Peace Agreement to become fully
operational. It will open new opportunities for the
people of Bougainville to exercise their right to self-
government and self-determination, including through
the election of an autonomous Government and the
holding of the Bougainville referendum. In this context
we welcome the efforts of the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission.

The Peace Monitoring Group (PMG), in close
collaboration with UNPOB, provided active and
efficient support for the Bougainville peace process.
The decision of the PMG to curtail its activities is a
positive sign of confidence in the sustainability of the
peace process. We highly appreciate the readiness of
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu to continue
their assistance to the peace process on the ground
through the Bougainville Transition Team (BTT). We
note that the civilian team of the BTT will cooperate
with the United Nations observers in respect of the
objectives of the Lincoln Agreement, subject to such
terms and conditions as may be mutually determined in
consultation between the United Nations and the
Parties to the Protocol setting up the BTT.

We share the View that the neutral verification of
the conclusion of stage II of the weapons disposal plan
does not mark the end of the challenges to the peace
process in Bougainville. We support the efforts of all
parties to convince Francis Ona and his Me'ekamui
Defence Force to join the peace process. We emphasize
the importance of promoting dialogue and confidence,
and we think that the progress towards stage III of the
weapons disposal programme should not be hindered.
Finally, Bulgaria welcomes the contributions of
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children's Fund and other United
Nations organizations to the peace process in
Bougainville. We would appreciate more information
with regard to post-conflict peace-building and
sustainability and the contributions of those agencies
during this phase of the peace process. We are
specifically interested in their contributions to the
process of reintegration and rehabilitation of former
combatants.

