Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The paradox that attracted my attention during
this meeting on the humanitarian situation in my
country, Syria - throughout Syria, not only in part of
it - is that some colleagues who spoke, in particular
the Permanent Representatives of Sweden, Kuwait,
the United States of America, Britain and France, had
an extraordinarily narrow-minded view of resolution
2449 (2018) on renewing the so-called mechanism for
the delivery of cross-border aid. It was repeated at the
beginning of all their statements. They wanted the
extension of the mechanism only to transcend Syrian
sovereignty by continuing the cross-border aid. That is
the crux of the issue. They disregarded the fact that such
operations 7 the so-called cross-border humanitarian
aid 7 covers only 5 per cent of the assistance delivered
to Syrians. Ninety-five per cent of humanitarian
assistance is therefore delivered within the Syrian
territory, not across the borders.

That is of course apart from the fact that the border
crossings with Turkey are used to smuggle weapons and
terrorists, not to provide humanitarian aid. It is a long
story that we have repeatedly mentioned. There are
dozens of Turkish officers andjudges in Turkish prisons
because they revealed that the cross-border convoys
were delivering weapons, not humanitarian assistance.
Despite that fact, some are still doubtful after eight
years of the terrorist war being waged against my

country by a devilish global coalition, some members
of which are present in the Council's Chamber.

Today, we are considering the fifty-eighth report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in my country, Syria (S/2018/1104). As representatives
know, the Security Council has adopted many
resolutions and held hundreds of formal and informal
meetings in that regard. I believe that, after all those
resolutions and meetings, it is high time for the Council
to ask the following question: is the purpose of those
reports, meetings and resolutions really to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria or for some to put
political pressure on the Syrian Government and to use
the suffering and pain of Syrians for cheap political
purposes? I would say that if the objective, as some
allege, is to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria,
what we need today is not to adopt new resolutions or
to hold spectacular meetings, but to do the following.

First, it is necessary to help the Syrian Government
to combat the remnants of the armed terrorist groups,
which were the main cause of the humanitarian crisis
and its escalation, including the displaced persons and
refugee crises. Anyone following the crisis and truly
wanting the well-being of Syrians would see that the
humanitarian crisis is only in areas infiltrated by those
armed terrorist groups, which harbour illegal foreign
troops.

Damascus has 8 million inhabitants. We do not
face any humanitarian problems there. There is no
humanitarian crisis in Damascus, Aleppo, Horns or
Hamah. They are all under the control of the State.
The humanitarian crisis is prevalent only in areas
under the control of armed terrorist groups and foreign
occupation. Members have talked about Al-Tanf and
Rukban. Who protects the terrorists from Da'esh in
those areas? Is it not the United States forces?

Secondly, the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility by taking serious and immediate steps
to stop the aggression, massacres and systematic
destruction of infrastructure in Syria carried out by the
illegal coalition led by the United States of America.
The Council must compel the countries of that illegal
coalition to abide by the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the Council resolutions, which
all underline the condemnation of such crimes of
aggression and interference in the internal affairs of
States, while undermining the territorial integrity of
Member States. It is as if all that was not set out in the
Council's resolutions but was written by Shakespeare
400 years ago.

Thirdly, there must be an immediate lifting of
the unilateral coercive measures imposed against the
Syrian people by certain States, some of which are
members of the Council and present in the Chamber.
Those measures have greatly harmed the livelihood of
Syrians. My colleagues the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation and the Ambassador of Bolivia have
thankfully mentioned that. Those ongoing measures,
which are described by some as sanctions, are not
sanctions because they were not imposed by the Security
Council. They are unilateral coercive measures that are
condemned by the so-called international community.
We have adopted many resolutions in the General
Assembly in that regard. The continuation of those
measures is the main obstacle to ensuring a response to
the basic needs of Syrians, supporting their livelihood
and providing the basic requirements for the return
of displaced Syrians and refugees to their homes and
normal lives.

Fourthly, international humanitarian assistance
must be stepped up to respond to the needs of the
Syrians, especially given the current status of financing
humanitarian assistance, which has yet to meet
expectations, as Mr. Lowcock stated earlier. Donors
continue to hold their theatrical conferences and link
their financing to political conditions that run counter
to the principles of humanitarian work. They have
refused to support the reconstruction of Syrian facilities
that provide basic services in order to strengthen the
steadfastness of the Syrians and the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes in
dignity and safety. We listened today to our colleagues'
statements on behalf of the United States, Britain and
France in which they clearly spoke about their political
preconditions for reconstruction, the return of refugees
and ending their support for terrorism.

Fifthly, the politicization of the humanitarian
aspect in Syria must be brought to an end, including by
stopping the spread offalsified information and statistics
and ceasing to ignore facts, changes and developments
on the ground. Of course, when we discuss that issue,
we have facts, statistics and evidence at our disposal to
substantiate what we say. Others make false statements
by saying that only four or five humanitarian convoys
have reached their destination during a particular
month. That is untrue. I was in Damascus a few days
ago, and I visited the President of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent. I asked him how many convoys had been sent
since the beginning of this year to date. I point this out
for Mr. Lowcock's benefit. He provided me with the
table I have before me, showing a total of 182 convoys,
all solely carried out exclusively by the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent. Some brief the Council with falsified
information to say that only four or 12 convoys were
sent. When they send a convoy to Rukban or Al-Tanf
with our consent, they deliver it to the terrorists. It is
not delivered to the 50,000 civilians who are in dire
need of assistance. For Mr. Lowcock's information, the
convoy that went to Al-Tanf ended up in the hands of
the terrorists, as he is well aware.

Extending the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014)
does not correspond to the recent developments on
the ground since its adoption on 14 July 2014. There
is no longer any need for cross-border humanitarian
assistance as we have regained control of all areas
that were categorized as besieged or hard-to-reach. In
that regard, I would like to stress once again that the
Government of Syria is the most eager of all to provide
every form of humanitarian assistance to its people
wherever they are throughout Syria. That is our duty
and we are duly discharging it in cooperation with the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. The Government of Syria
will remain committed to fulfilling that obligation.
I also emphasize that my country stands ready to
cooperate and coordinate with the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners under the guidelines governing
the coordination and enhancement of humanitarian
work, which stress the need to respect the sovereignty
and independence of host countries and the role of the
countries concerned in overseeing the distribution of
humanitarian assistance within their territories, as well
as respect for the principles of impartiality, integrity
and non-politicization.

There is a State in Syria. It is a State that deserves
the respect of all and the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the provisions of the
Charter and international law. That is the main issue.
However, when certain representatives refer in their
statements to a "regime" or use other, similar terms
indiscriminately, such speech is not fitting of the
Council or those addressing it.

Some Council members insist on extending the
provisions of resolution 2165 (2014), while deliberately
turning a blind eye to my country's objective criticism of
the resolution and its extension. That in no way negates
its defects or implementation since the very first day of
its adoption. I would like to briefly cite those defects in
the hope that they will not be committed later.

First, the hub for humanitarian assistance for
the Syrian crisis is in Damascus - the capital of
Syria - and not, as the resolution attempts to convey,
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in Gaziantep, Turkey, or any other place.

Secondly, receiving the consent of the Government
of Syria before humanitarian assistance crosses its
country's borders is a guiding principle in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 46/182. We should
not simply be informed, as stated in the Security
Council resolution, because such a move is similar to
the consultation process conducted by the co-sponsors
of resolution 2449 (2018), adopted today. They said that
they had consulted us, which is correct. They did not,
however, consider any of our observations. Is that what
consultations mean?

Thirdly, the United Nations monitoring mechanism
remains incapable to this very day of verifying the
delivery of cross-border assistance and whether it
reaches those for whom it is intended. The majority of
those operations take place across the Turkish-Syrian
border and are directed towards areas under the control
of the armed terrorist groups that confiscate such aid
and distribute it to their own members and families, as
happened in Al-Tanf. The mechanism has stood idly by
over the past four years rather than prevent the misuse
of those borders by neighbouring countries that have
taken advantage of the situation, provided support to
armed terrorist groups and smuggled whatever those
groups looted from factories, as well as antiquities and
petroleum products, back into their own territories.

Fourthly, the effectiveness of cross-border
assistance was and remains limited when compared to
the assistance distributed from within the Syrian Arab
Republic, as I previously mentioned.

Fifthly, senior OCHA staff members have not
upheld the principles of transparency or provided the
necessary guarantees to convince the international
community that the cross-border assistance would reach
those for whom it is intended and not the armed groups.
To this very day, those senior OCHA staff members
have not been able to provide an adequate explanation
regarding the so-called partners or independent

companies - third parties - that were contracted to
verify the delivery of assistance to warehouses and
beneficiaries despite our repeated requests.

Sixthly, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has been
listed as a terrorist group by the Security Council,
levies taxes on assistance delivered from across the
borders, especially the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing
between Turkey and Syria. That is considered to be
direct financing of terrorism, in violation ofthe relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
2178 (2014), 2253 (2015) and 2396 (2017). That is exactly
what Qatar did when it disbursed millions of dollars to
Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front in the occupied Golan
Heights under the pretext of paying ransom to free the
hostages taken by those terrorist groups, which is once
again a clear violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2368 (2017).

In conclusion, the Government, the people and the
army of my country know very well who is our enemy
and who is our friend. We know very well that our fight
against terrorism is a war imposed on us by the sponsors
of terrorism to drain our energies in order to advance
their unjust plans in the region, foremost among which
is eliminating the Palestinian question and drowning
the people of the region in bloody obscurantism, fuelled
by extremist Wahhabi ideology, ignorance and agendas
of destruction.

My Government is more determined today than ever
to fight the remaining armed terrorist groups in Idlib
and elsewhere. We are firm in exercising our legal right
for self-defence and expelling all foreign occupying
forces that have entered our territories illegally. My
colleague the representative of the United States of
America brazenly stated today that his country has
spent $8 billion towards financing terrorism in Syria,
which he labelled as humanitarian assistance. Those
$8 billion were in fact for financing terrorism.

We will continue to reconstruct the areas destroyed
by terrorists in order to restore normality to everyday
life and allow our people to enjoy the lives that they
had built before the war was imposed on them by the
terrorists. That will enable Syrian citizens to return to
their homeland after they left it because of terrorism
and the unilateral coercive economic measures that
targeted their livelihoods.

The success of the sponsors of terrorism,
destruction and the assassins of international law in
certain places does not in any way mean that their
plan will succeed in our country. We vow to foil their
schemes and conspiracies.

The meeting rose at 6pm.
