Mr. Solana: It is for me a pleasure to have been
invited to participate in this important meeting about
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As has been said already, the request of the
United Nations almost a year ago for military support
3
came at a crucial point in time. The transition period in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo had entered its
final phase, and it was essential to create the necessary
conditions and security environment to ensure a
successful outcome. The European Union had worked
very hard for a number of years to facilitate the
democratic transition in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Elections were the final success. We could
not fail, and we responded positively to the United
Nations request to put soldiers on the ground.

We deployed a military force with operational
headquarters provided by Germany, a European Union
presence in Kinshasa, and a force element in Gabon,
ready to be deployed as necessary. I would like to draw
attention to that structure. By keeping an over-the-
horizon force in Gabon, we ensured simultaneously a
deterrent capacity and avoided an unnecessary heavy
military presence in Kinshasa. In fact, the deterrence
effect of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) was a significant factor in limiting the
number of incidents. Reinforcement by additional force
elements from the over-the-horizon component in
Gabon was undertaken on a number of occasions. In
addition, a number of deployment operations to the
geographically agreed points of application were
undertaken. That served also to increase the geographic
spread of the force's deterrent effect.

The incident with the greatest destabilizing
potential occurred on 21 August 2006 with an attack on
Vice-President Bemba's residence. EUFOR intervention,
in close cooperation with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), was decisive in containing the
potential spread of violence at a particularly sensitive
moment in the election process. In addition to that,
EUFOR confirmed its position of neutrality in the eyes of
the Congolese population and reinforced its credibility.

We can state today that the mission has been a
success, both in the way it has been conducted and in
its contribution to the overall positive conclusion of the
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Although a lessons-learned review is under way, some
key elements for its success can already be identified:
the definition of a clear mandate, both in scope and in
time frame; highly professional troops, to whom I wish
to pay tribute; a very high degree of interaction with
MONUC, which I believe to have been fundamental;
and an active communication policy, both towards the
Congolese population and to key actors in the electoral
process. In a wider context, transparency and
information-sharing with African partners, the African
Union and other African regional organizations invited
to deploy liaison officers also facilitated the process.

(spoke in French)

Military intervention makes real sense only if it is
part of a comprehensive commitment. That is
particularly true for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the European Union deployed the full
range of its political, civilian, military, financial and
development resources in a consistent approach and in
close cooperation with all regional and international
stakeholders. In that regard, the relationship that has
been built with the United Nations reflects the joint
statement issued by the two organizations on 24
September 2003. I can today confirm that it is along
those lines that the European Union is determined to
continue to work with the United Nations.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo can now
look forward to its future with greater confidence.
Credit for that goes to the international community, but
especially to the Congolese themselves, who have
chosen the path of reconciliation. In that connection, I
should like to pay tribute to the Congolese people,
those they have elected, the Independent Electoral
Commission and national and international observers.
Working together, they have made it possible to
properly carry out the first democratic elections in the
country in more than 40 years.

However, we must still face significant
challenges. The inaugural address made by President
Kabila included the key principles on the basis of
which the European Union is prepared to continue its
commitment. Those include good governance,
democracy, the rule of law, an opening to the
opposition and, in particular, priority to security and
security sector reform. With regard to security, the
European Union has already launched military and
police missions. We are currently considering ways to
strengthen those missions.

Allow me, in closing, to say that we believe that
MONUC and Special Representative Bill Swing have
made decisive efforts on the ground in recent years and
months. Those efforts will continue to be equally
decisive in the future, both in assisting the new
institutions and in further strengthening stability in the
east of the country. Like the United Nations, the
European Union will remain committed to that goal.
07-20483
