Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month, and to assure you of my delegation's
full cooperation. I would also like to express sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Rosenthal and the
delegation of Guatemala for their excellent leadership
of the Council last month.

I would also like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her
briefing and to welcome her today as she provides
her first report to the Council as Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The United States
looks forward to continuing our active engagement with
the Office ofthe Prosecutor and the ICC, consistent with
our law and policy, in order to advance accountability
for the most serious crimes of international concern.

The United States congratulates the Government
and people of Libya on the positive steps they have taken
to put in place a democratically elected leadership,
including the recent formation of a new Cabinet. This
is the first time an elected body in Libya has formed
a Government, and we continue to support the Libyan
people as they work diligently to build a country that is
representative of all its citizens and fully respects the
rule of law. We look forward to working closely with
the new Government, including Minister of Justice
Margani.

As Libyans chart the country's future, justice and
accountability issues will remain central to the success
of Libya's transition and essential to securing lasting
peace. In this context, we continue to urge Libya to
adhere to its international obligations, including under
resolution 1970 (2011), and to continue its cooperation
with the ICC.

The cases involving Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi will unfold against the backdrop
of Libya's transition to democracy. This is an important
moment for both Libya and the ICC as they work
together within their respective roles towards fostering
and ensuring accountability during this historic
transition.

We recall our comments last month at the Council
debate on peace andjustice and the role ofthe ICC (see S/PV.6849) that the Council's referral of situations to
the ICC and subsequent developments highlight why
we should consider ways to improve cooperation and
communication between the Security Council and the
Court. For example, the Council should continue to
monitor the developments and situations it refers to
the Court and the challenges that may be faced by ICC
personnel in conducting their work. States should look
for appropriate ways to ensure that Court staff are able
to undertake their work safely and effectively.

Furthermore, we note the Prosecutor's statement
that many requests for assistance to a variety of parties
have yet to be fully executed. In resolution 1970
(2011), the Council decided that Libyan authorities
shall cooperate fully with and provide the necessary
assistance to the Court and Prosecutor, and also
urged all other States and concerned organizations to
cooperate fully. The United States has endeavoured to
respond positively to informal requests for assistance in
the Libya situation, consistent with our law and policy.
We also remain deeply concerned by allegations of rape
and sexual violence documented by the United Nations
commission of inquiry and look forward to further
reports by the Office of the Prosecutor about its efforts
in this regard.

Regardless of the outcome of the admissibility
proceedings before the ICC, Libya will need to bolster
domestic accountability structures and processes to
create a robust and fair system of justice at home. After
40 years of dictatorship, no one has a better appreciation
for the importance of due process and the rule of law in
Libya than Libyans themselves. The new Government
must work to combat impunity for perpetrators of serious
crimes regardless, of their affiliation or the nature of
their crimes; to ensure a comprehensive programme of
transitional justice consistent with Libya's international
human rights obligations; and to commit to measures
aimed at assisting victims.

The United States stands ready to assist Libya as
it works to reform its justice sector, strengthen the rule
of law and advance human rights and international
law. We look forward to working with the international
community to ensure adequate support to Libya as it
undertakes these critical tasks.

