Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking the Special Coordinator for his
detailed and characteristically well-judged briefing to
the Council. As this is his last appearance before us, I
would like to express the United Kingdom's
appreciation for all he has done for the United Nations
over the last few years, both in his present appointment
and in previous ones. His work on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), and on the Middle East
peace process generally, speaks for itself. We will all
miss you in New York, Michael, and we offer our best
wishes to you in your next role.

As this is my first Security Council debate on the
situation in the Middle East, I should like to take the
opportunity to reiterate the basic elements that
underpin my Government's approach to the peace
process. These are: first, support for the two-State
solution; second, working with all those in the region
committed to peace; and, third, improving the lives of
Palestinians in the West Bank and in Gaza.

It is clear from the interventions of colleagues
that there is much common ground. There are reasons
for cautious optimism. There is the continued dialogue
between Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas,
which we hope will include meaningful discussion of
permanent status issues. There is a new focus, in the
appointment of Tony Blair, for the Quartet's and the
wider international community's efforts to reinvigorate
the peace process, in particular by building the
institutions of a future Palestinian state, and by
developing the Palestinian economy. There are
intensifying international efforts, proposals for a donor
conference and, in particular, the international meeting
on the Middle East convened by the United States
president. There are discussions on the Arab Peace
Initiative, which we hope will build on the historic
visit to Israel by Arab League representatives last
month.

These developments provide us with a clear
agenda for progress, which we should not allow to be
derailed by events. Of course, we must not
underestimate the huge challenges we face. One of the
most urgent priorities for the international community
is to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We
all need to continue to show strong political and
practical support for President Abbas and Prime
Minister Fayyad's Government. We welcome the
transfer by Israel this month of $160 million of
Palestinian clearance revenues. It is important that
these transfers continue. And we look to the
Government of Israel to take further steps to improve
the daily lives of the Palestinian people.

I would like to say a few words about Lebanon.
The parliamentary elections to select a new president
next month will be an important milestone on the path
to restoring stability in Lebanon. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of international partners, in
particular, France and the Arab League, to secure a way
through the current political impasse.

We also welcome this Council's decision to

renew the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force

in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for another year. UNIFIL has

made a vital contribution to maintaining stability and

security in southern Lebanon since the conflict last
yean

There is a wider need for concerted action to
implement fully resolution 1701 (2006). Action to put
an end to arms smuggling across the Syria/Lebanon
border will be particularly important. That will require
robust follow-up to the mission of the Lebanon
Independent Border Assessment Team to ensure that its
recommendations are taken forward.

The United Kingdom believes this work should
take place in tandem with efforts to reduce Israeli
overflights and to work towards a resolution of the
Sheba'a farms dispute.

Finally, the United Kingdom looks forward to the
Secretary-General's 90-day progress report on the
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We
remain determined to support the Lebanese people and
Government in their efforts to bring to justice those
responsible for the murder of Rafik Hariri and that of
others.

I also associate myself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of
Portugal on behalf of the European Union.

