Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I too would first like to thank Mr. Alvaro
de Soto, United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. I would
also like to say that my delegation aligns itself with the
statement to be made shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Germany on behalf of the European
Union.

I should like to refer first to the situation in
Lebanon, a friendly country with which France has
special historical ties. The successful international
conference in support of Lebanon that took place in
Paris on 21 January was an opportunity to make direct
gestures of support - in the form of pledges totalling
$7.5 billion - for Lebanon, its people and its
legitimate Government. Unfortunately, tragedy has
now once again struck Lebanon. The two bomb attacks
on buses near Bikfaya, north of Beirut, which caused a
number of victims, is a reminder of the cost the
Lebanese people continue to pay as they assert their
sovereignty. France condemned that heinous and
cowardly attack in the strongest terms, which occurred
on the eve of the commemoration of the assassination
of former Prime Minister Hariri, almost two years to
the day since that event. Those responsible for that new
attack, as well as for the attacks that have taken place
in the course of more than two years, must be held
accountable for their crimes.

Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank
you for organizing consultations after this debate; we
believe that the Security Council must respond to this
horrendous crime with a statement. In the face of this
new attempt to destabilize Lebanon, it is more essential
than ever that the Lebanese should come together, so as
to avoid falling into the traps that have been set for
them, and that they should return to dialogue. We call
on all parties to work together to preserve the stability
of the country and to ensure an effective follow-up on
the Paris conference and the complete implementation
of Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).

With regard to southern Lebanon, France recalls
the importance of full respect for the Blue Line in all
circumstances and the need to make rapid progress
toward reaching a lasting ceasefire and a long-term
solution in line with resolution 1701 (2006).

Turning to the issue of Israel and Palestine, a
number of recent events have been cause for renewed
hope. France truly hopes that after months of political
stagnation, violence and suffering, the peace process
between Israel and Palestine can at last be brought
back on track. We would first of all like to pay homage
to the intra-Palestinian agreement reached in Mecca on
8 February under the auspices of King Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia. This agreement on the formation of a
government of national unity, which we had been
earnestly calling for several months, provides an
opportunity for Palestinians to overcome their
divisions.

France considers that that agreement, which
provides for full respect by the future government of
international legality and the agreements that have
been reached between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization, represents a step in the right
direction, towards full accession to the principles that
have been guiding the peace process since Madrid and
Oslo. The rapid creation of such a Government should
now be encouraged by the international community in
order to open the way to renewed cooperation and the
reopening of talks in order to create a Palestinian State
that is independent, viable, democratic and sovereign,
existing in peace and security, side by side with Israel.

France also welcomes the recent resumption of
dialogue between the parties with the support of the
international community. The Israeli-Palestinian
summit of 23 December, the Israeli-Egyptian summit
of 4 January and the visits to the region made by
Ms. Rice and Mr. Solana, have relaunched a political
momentum that had been paralyzed for too long.
At its meeting in Washington on 2 February, the
Quartet decided to support in an active and determined
way the relaunching of the peace process. We hope that
the upcoming summit meeting between President
Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert, under the auspices
of the United States Secretary of State, planned for
19 February, and the meeting of the Quartet in Berlin
on 21 February, will accelerate that momentum.

We continue to believe that an international
conference that is properly prepared would be useful to
support the peace process and give the parties the
security and other guarantees that they need.

We know how numerous and difficult the
obstacles are that remain to be overcome. We count
upon the political will of the various players, Israel and
Palestinian Authority above all, to meet those
challenges. The priority, of course, is the
implementation by the parties themselves, under the
supervision of the Quartet, of the commitments that
have been made, particularly the Sharm el-Sheikh
agreements and the obligations under the road map, the
Agreement on Movement and Access, and the
arrangements of 23 December.

In order to re-establish confidence, it is necessary
that the violence stop. The Palestinian Authority must
tirelessly counteract terrorism. Israel must respect
humanitarian international law. Corporal Gilad Shalit
must be released without delay, as must be the
Palestinian elected leaders who are held in Israel.
Unilateral actions must be halted, particularly
settlement activities and the construction of the wall in
the West Bank, which threatened the viability of a
future Palestinian State.

Finally, with regard to the very delicate situation
in East Jerusalem, France recalls the fact that the status
quo must not be changed, in order not to prejudge the
outcome of final status negotiations.

