Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor. We associate ourselves with the statement made
by Germany on behalf of the European Union, but we

have requested to add a few remarks in view of our
own very concrete commitment to peace, security and
sustainable development in Afghanistan. We are both a
substantial contributor both in terms of personnel,
2,000 on the ground through the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), and also in terms of our
financial contribution of more than €70 million
annually to development cooperation, mainly through
United Nations and World Bank channels.

The year 2007 should be the year of improved
governance in Afghanistan. It is encouraging to see that
the Afghan Government is indeed determined to fight
corruption and create a better functioning justice
system. Governance is the key to improving the
Government's credibility.

Reconciliation and transitional justice are
essential for sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
Preventing impunity and bringing justice is needed to
overcome the legacy of conflict. In that regard,
amnesty for war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other gross human rights violations would, in our view,
not be in conformity with Afghanistan's obligations
under international law. The adequate implementation
of the Transitional Justice Action Plan launched by
President Karzai in early December 2006 is key.

ISAF is a United Nations-mandated mission, with
full international legitimacy and the support of the
Afghan Government and the Afghan people. While it
might sound like a truism in this Council, I wish to
underscore that ISAF is inclusive. NATO and
non-NATO countries alike participate. ISAF is active
in many areas of Afghanistan. Thirty-one thousand
men and women from 37 countries, are working on a
daily basis in 26 Provincial Reconstruction Teams
(PRT) to bring back security and economic
perspectives to the Afghan people. We clearly would
welcome more countries joining this common
endeavour, with military and non-military means.

This is not NATO acting on its own. On the
contrary, ISAF is an assistance force that is providing
stability and security so that international organizations
and other civilian development actors can succeed.

Together with non-NATO partner Australia, the
Netherlands is deployed in the southern province of
Uruzgan. That region has seen good results in the last
seven months. In Uruzgan, there is stability and
security within the Afghan Development Zones. These
zones are growing steadily. The Netherlands-Australian
PRT is covering about 60 per cent of the population of
the province. Diplomacy is being conducted by
involving key tribal leaders, defence is being bolstered
and visible development projects are directly reaching
40,000 Uruzgani. Through these joint efforts, we are
indeed reaching results.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to open up permanent United Nations offices
in more southern provinces, including, we are sure,
Uruzgan. A United Nations presence is a prerequisite
for the implementation of national development
programmes in the southern provinces and for more
activities by non-governmental organizations. We
would therefore encourage the United Nations to gear
its programmes more towards strengthening provincial
government in the south.

The United Nations, ISAF and the European
Union are united on the aims of their respective
missions: to help the Afghan people to build a
prosperous democracy. There can be no development
without security, and vice versa. International civil and
military stabilization missions will succeed only if
there is better cooperation and mutual understanding
among development, political and military actors.

Finally, I would like to say a word on counter-
narcotics. The Afghan Government is determined to
make its policies work. We applaud that. But
eradication without mitigating measures for poor
farmers is counterproductive and will hamper our
stabilization and reconstruction effort. Eradication will
be effective only if it is part of a wider strategy. We
should limit the impact on small and disenfranchised
farmers. Therefore we will deploy extra projects in
Uruzgan to minimize the destabilizing effects of
eradication. We will also support farmers in developing
alternatives. Finally, we encourage the Afghan
Government to disrupt the drug trade and to go after
the drug lords.

