Mr. Barros Melet (Chile): We thank the United
States presidency for having convened this meeting. We
also thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein and their teams for their briefings today.

It is difficult for us to remain indifferent in the face
of human rights situations that demand coordinated
and specific actions on the part of the United Nations
system. We therefore appreciate the fact that the Council
is responding today to the call of the Third Committee
made through its draft resolution on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of

Korea to consider the conclusions and recommendations
of the commission of inquiry and to take the appropriate
measures to ensure accountability. The possibility of
referring the ongoing situation in that country to the
International Criminal Court should be considered. It
is important to note that there are issues, such as the
protection and promotion of human rights, which are
broadly cross-cutting in nature. Notwithstanding the
specific competencies of various organs, we cannot
avoid moving towards constructive and complementary
cooperation among the different bodies of the United
Nations system. That is what makes the United Nations
more effective and credible.

There has been some progress since the meeting
held by the Council on 22 December 2014 (see S/PV.7353), such as the establishment in Seoul of an
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the meeting that took place last
October of separated families living on both sides of
the border. Nevertheless, we remain concerned by
the serious human rights violations and the climate
of impunity described in the reports of the Secretary-
General and of the Special Rapporteur, both of whom
have pointed out that, regrettably, the human rights
situation has not improved and crimes against humanity,
as documented by the commission of inquiry, continue
to be perpetrated. It is urgent to put an end to summary
and extrajudicial executions, torture and arbitrary
detention. We must resolve the issues of abductions
and enforced disappearances of foreign nationals and
resume the dialogue on technical matters between
Pyongyang and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

It is imperative to protect the affected population
and to ensure their human rights through greater
involvement and dialogue with the authorities of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as well as
by promoting accountability and putting an end to
impunity. We urge the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to welcome the various recommendations,
especiall those made by the commission ofinquiry and
the Special Rapporteur. They include: moving forward
on the dialogue with the entire United Nations system,
especially with regard to the technical talks with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its Office in Seoul; facilitating
access to the Special Rapporteur to the country, in
accordance with the terms of reference of the United
Nations on special procedures; and cooperating
with Member States that are affected by the issue of
international abductions and enforced disappearances.

The continued refusal of the leadership of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to cooperate
constructively with the United Nations system does
not help to rectify the critical human rights and
humanitarian situation, which cannot be disentwined
from the nuclear programme. It is therefore imperative
that its authorities respond positively to calls on
behalf of the international community to cooperate
with the United Nations system. The agenda item on
nonproliferation and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea proved to be insufficient in addressing this
very complex situation, and that is why we hope that
this initiative will be repeated if the situation, which is
having such an impact on the civilian population, does
not improve.

I thank you again, Madam President, for having
facilitated this meeting.

