Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Madam, and the delegation of Tanzania for
your timely initiative of convening this debate and
especially appreciates the fact that you are presiding
over it. We recall the significant achievements to date,
including the Dar es-Salaam Declaration adopted at the
first summit of the Great Lakes Conference in 2004, in
which Japan participated. We are pleased that, through
the processes following the Conference, a framework
has been established and gradually strengthened to
effectively address the key challenges facing the
countries of the Great Lakes region. Today's meeting is
particularly timely in order to accelerate the
momentum towards further concrete outcomes.

In its resolutions 1625 (2205) and 1631 (2005),
the Security Council has provided guidance regarding
conflict prevention in Africa and cooperation with
regional organizations in dealing with conflicts.
Today's meeting provides an important opportunity to
discuss the implementation of those resolutions in the
specific context of a region rife with conflicts, but also
holding the promise of the resolution of conflict and
peacebuilding.

In this debate, I would like to focus on the issues
of armed groups, the framework for regional
cooperation and Japan's efforts for the region.

We commend the encouraging progress made in
the peace processes in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would like to convey our
sincere appreciation to Foreign Minister Batumubwira
of Burundi and Foreign Minister Ramazani Baya of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who spoke earlier,
for the efforts of their respective Governments. At the
same time, we commend the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the United Nations
Operation in Burundi for their valuable support to the
two countries.

However, armed groups continue to pose a
serious threat to security and the nascent democratic
processes in the form of the continuing resistance of
the Forces nationales de liberation in Burundi and
foreign armed groups and local militias in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The recent tragic
incident in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which involved the killing of MONUC peacekeepers
by suspected Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) soldiers,
and the attacks launched by rebels in the North Kivu
region show yet again how dangerously fragile the
situation remains.

The threat posed by armed groups is not confined
within the borders of one country, but is already
regional in dimension and as such is fast becoming
more potent. That makes it imperative that, if it is to be
effective in dealing with those armed groups, greater
cooperation among the countries in the region be put in
place. For example, while MONUC is providing
assistance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
implementing the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of armed combatants, the
cooperation of neighbouring Rwanda and Burundi in
tackling that issue is also critically important. To deal
effectively with the menace posed by the LRA, there
should be closer cooperation among the countries in
which that group is operating actively.

In addition, in the context of the LRA issue, we
hope that the Government of Uganda will further
strengthen its efforts to improve the security and
humanitarian situation in the northern part of the
country.

While the issue of armed groups is serious and
requires urgent measures, there are other equally
pressing problems for which cooperation among the
countries in the Great Lakes region must also be
strengthened. Thus, the countries of the region are
expected to intensify their own efforts to build mutual
confidence, which will enable them to address issues of
common interest by expanding the framework of
cooperation in the humanitarian areas, such as the
return of refugees and in the management and control
of natural resources.

Japan's approach to cooperation with African
States in matters of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding, as well as in development cooperation,
is to respect and encourage ownership of the process
and the outcomes by the African countries themselves.
Where there is a lack of such ownership, there is little
chance of a reliable and sustainable outcome.

It is our belief that this principle of ownership
should apply not only to the efforts of individual States
but also to cooperative regional efforts. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
a forum that should foster this sense of both individual
and regional ownership in resolving problems and
promoting mutual confidence and regional resiliency.
We expect that the members of the core group of the
Conference will work for peace, the consolidation of
peace, peacebuilding and development in the region, in
cooperation with, and with the support of, the Group of
Friends, which includes international partners, United
Nations agencies and the African Union.

Japan's key framework of cooperation with
Africa is the well established Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (T ICAD), which
we have been conducting for more than a decade. A
fourth full-fledged TICAD conference is to be held in
2008. Through this process we have identified three
pillars for development cooperation with Africa: first,
human-centred development: secondly, poverty
reduction through economic growth; and thirdly,
consolidation of peace efforts. Within that framework,
my Government has implemented assistance for the
Great Lakes region in the areas of elections, food,
refugees, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) and community development, and
it intends to continue its assistance efforts. In addition,
within the TICAD framework, my Government will
shortly be hosting a conference in Addis Ababa, on
16 and 17 February, on the topic of consolidation of
peace in Africa, focusing on issues such as DDR, small
arms, security-sector reform, governance and recovery.
At that conference we will share experiences gained on
these issues elsewhere and examine ways of assisting
African countries in addressing these questions. It is
our hope that many leaders and interested individuals
and organizations from Africa and outside Africa will
participate and that the exercise will serve also as a
useful contribution to building momentum towards the
next International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our hope
for the early convening of the second International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We also look
forward to the efforts of the countries of the region to
move the process forward through the exercise of their
ownership, with the support and assistance of the
United Nations and the international donor community.
Japan will be pleased to continue to be associated with
this important conference process.

Finally, I thank the delegation of Tanzania for its
work in finalizing a draft resolution on this matter
(5/2006/51), which we fully support.

