The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. I shall now make a statement in my national capacity, as co-penholder on the Syrian chemical dossier. This will take some time. Unfortunately, what has happened today is more sad evidence of how Western delegations are scared to listen to an inconvenient truth. They want to ignore the objective facts that might destroy the picture of the evil Syrian regime that they have drawn and the infallibility of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. However, it is already clear to everybody that this view is far removed from reality. I wonder whether those delegations understand how unfavourably this reflects upon them in the eyes of the international community. What happened today is a shame and a disgrace. Today they have gone down in the history of the Security Council, and they have dragged the Council down with them. The Security Council has never voted on the presence or absence of a briefer invited by the presidency. I remind Mr. Heusgen that when we last spoke about this we were dealing only with an agenda item. I challenge anyone to find a historical precedent for what has happened today. Given that the statement by Mr. Bustani was blocked, I will read out his statement as part of my national statement. (spoke in English) "My name is Jose Bustani. I am honoured to have been invited to present a statement for this meeting of the Security Council to discuss the Syrian chemical dossier and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). As the OPCW's first Director General, a position I held from 1997 to 2002, I naturally retain a keen interest in the evolution and fortunes of the organization. I have been particularly interested in recent developments regarding the organization's work in Syria. "For those who are not aware, I was removed from office, following a United States-orchestrated campaign in 2002, for - ironically - trying to uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). My removal was subsequently ruled to be illegal by the Administrative Tribunal of the International Labour Organization (ILO), but despite that unpleasant experience, the OPCW remains close to my heart. It is a special organization with an important mandate. "T accepted the position of Director General precisely because the Chemical Weapons Convention was non-discriminatory. I took immense pride in the independence, impartiality and professionalism of its inspectors and wider staff in implementing the Chemical Weapons Convention. No State party was to be considered above the rest, and the hallmark of the organization's work was the even-handedness with which all member States were treated, regardless of size, political might or economic clout. "Although no longer at the helm then, I felt great joy when the OPCW was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2013 for its extensive efforts to eliminate chemical weapons. It was a mandate towards which I and countless other former staff members had worked tirelessly. In the nascent years of the OPCW, we faced a number of challenges, but we overcame them to earn the organization a well-deserved reputation for effectiveness and efficiency, not to mention autonomy, impartiality and a refusal to be politicized. The ILO's decision on my removal was an official and public reassertion of the importance of those principles. "More recently, the OPCW's investigations of alleged uses of chemical weapons have no doubt created even greater challenges for the organization. It is precisely for that kind of eventuality that we had developed operating procedures, analytical methods and extensive training programmes, in strict accordance with the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Allegations of the use of chemical weapons were a prospect for which we hoped our preparations would never be required. Unfortunately, they were, and today allegations of chemical-weapon use are a sad reality. "Tt is against that backdrop that serious questions are now being raised about whether the independence, impartiality and professionalism of some of the organization's work is being severely compromised, possibly under pressure from some member States. Of particular concern are the circumstances surrounding the OPCW's investigation of the alleged chemical attack in Douma, Syria, on 7 April 2018. Those concerns are emanating from the heart of the OPCW, from the very scientists and engineers involved in the Douma investigation. "In October 2019, I was invited by the Courage Foundation, an international organization that supports those who risk life or liberty to make significant contributions to the historical record, to participate in a panel, along with a number of eminent international figures from the fields of international law, disarmament, military operations, medicine and intelligence. The panel was convened to hear the concerns of an OPCW official over the conduct of the organization's investigation into the Douma incident. The expert provided compelling and documentary evidence of highly questionable and potentially fraudulent conduct in the investigative process. In a joint public statement, the panel was 'unanimous in expressing [its] alarm over unacceptable practices in the investigation of the alleged chemical attack in Douma'. "The panel further called on the OPCW 'to permit all inspectors who took part in the Douma investigation to come forward and report their differing observations in an appropriate forum of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, in fulfilment of the spirit of the Convention'. "T was personally so disturbed by the testimony and evidence presented to the panel that I was compelled to make a public statement. I said then, 'I have always expected the OPCW to be a true paradigm of multilateralism. My hope is that the concerns expressed publicly by the panel in its joint consensus statement will catalyse a process by which the organization can be resurrected to become the independent and non-discriminatory body it used to be'. "The call for greater transparency from the OPCW further intensified in November 2019, when an open letter of support for the Courage Foundation declaration was sent to the Permanent Representatives to the OPCW to 'ask for their support in taking action at the forthcoming Conference of States Parties aimed at restoring the integrity of the OPCW and regaining public trust'. "The signatories of that petition included such eminent figures as Noam Chomsky, Institute Professor Emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Marcello Ferrada de Noli, Chair of Swedish Doctors for Human Rights; Coleen Rowley, whistle-blower and 2002 Time Magazine Person of the Year; Hans-Christof von Sponeck, former United Nations Assistant Secretary-General, and film director Oliver Stone, to mention a few. "Almost one year later, the OPCW has still not responded to that request, or to the ever-growing controversy surrounding the Douma investigation. Rather, it has hidden behind an impenetrable wall of silence and opacity, making any meaningful dialogue impossible. On the one occasion when it did address the inspectors' concerns in public, it was only to accuse them of breaching confidentiality. Of course, inspectors, and indeed all OPCW staff members, have responsibilities to respect confidentiality rules, but the OPCW has the primary responsibility to faithfully ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention as set forth in article VIII, paragraph 1. "The work of the Organization must be transparent, for without transparency there is no trust, and trust is what binds the OPCW together. If member States do not have trust in the fairness and objectivity of the work of the OPCW, then its effectiveness as a global watchdog for chemical weapons is severely compromised. "Transparency and confidentiality are not mutually exclusive, but confidentiality cannot be invoked as a smokescreen for irregular behaviour. The organization needs to restore the public trust it once had, and which no one denies is now waning, which is why we are here today. It would be inappropriate for me to advise you, or even suggest, how the OPCW should go about regaining public trust. "Still, as someone who has experienced both rewarding and tumultuous times with the OPCW, I would like to make a personal plea to you, Mr. Fernando Arias, as Director General of the OPCW: the inspectors are among the organization's most valuable assets. As scientists and engineers, their specialist knowledge and inputs are essential for good decision-making. Most importantly, their views are untainted by politics or national interests. They rely only on the science. "The inspectors in the Douma investigation have a simple request: that they be given the opportunity to meet with you to express their concerns to you in person, in a manner that is both transparent and accountable. This is surely the minimum that they can expect - and at great risk to themselves. They have dared to speak out against possible irregular behaviour in the organization, and it is undoubtedly in your, the Organization's and the world's interests that you hear them out. "The Convention itself showed - great foresight in allowing inspectors to offer differing observations, even during investigations of alleged uses of chemical weapons, pursuant to paragraph 62 of Part II of the Verification Annex to the CWC. This right is "a constitutive element supporting the independence and objectivity of inspections". This language comes from The Chemical Weapons Convention: A Commentary, edited by Walter Krutzsch, Ralf Trapp et al., on verification practices under the CWC, which was published by the OPCW itself during my time as Director General. "Regardless of whether or not there is substance to the concerns raised about the OPCW's behaviour in the Douma investigation, hearing what your own inspectors have to say would be an important first step in mending the organization's damaged reputation. The dissenting inspectors are not claiming to be right, but they do want to be given a fair hearing. "As one Director General to another, I respectfully request that you grant them this opportunity. If the OPCW is confident in the robustness of its scientific work in Douma and in the integrity of the investigation, then it has little to fear in hearing out its inspectors. If, however, the claims of suppression of evidence, selective use of data and exclusion of key investigators, among other allegations, are not unfounded, then it is even more imperative that the issue be dealt with openly and urgently. "The OPCW has already achieved greatness. It if has slipped, it nevertheless retains the opportunity to repair itself and to grow to become even greater. The world needs a credible chemical weapons watchdog. We had one, and I am confident, Mr. Arias, that you will see to it that we have one again." (spoke in Russian) Moving on, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for introducing the Director General of the OPCW's eighty-fourth monthly report (S/2020/961, annex) on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I hope that the Under-Secretary-General understands what is happening as a result of Western delegations exerting their will on this subject and from where it has grown legs when it comes to the anti-Syrian decisions that were taken by the OPCW Executive Council in July. We have already had two meetings in the Security Council to show what is behind these approaches and to give an objective picture of what is happening with the OPCW. Unfortunately, the organization is becoming a conduit for the selfish interests of certain countries. We cannot allow this to happen to the Syrian issue within the United Nations. The United Nations should not indulge unfairness and aggression. We ask that it not act blindly and mechanically on this initiative, and we would like to draw the Secretary-General's attention to this point. What is at stake is the authority of the United Nations, the Security Council and the Secretary-General himself. Today, on the initiative of the Russian Federation, the Council is holding its second open meeting on the Syrian chemical dossier. Our objective as President of the Council is to have a discussion on this very complicated and extremely politicized subject and bring it out of the impasse that it has been in for some time. We advocate a maximally open and honest conversation that will allow us to formulate an objective picture of what is happening in this context. Before this meeting, on 28 September we held an Atria Formula meeting with members of the Security Council on the Syrian chemical dossier involving authoritative independent experts Ian Henderson, Theodore Postol and Aaron Mate. As it turned out, that meeting drew a great deal of interest from those who are following the subject. Since then, we have continued to receive positive messages and thanks for the interesting briefings, from which those lstening were able to receive much new information. We are planning to publish the statements of the participants and disseminate the material. We therefore encourage all of the participants in the discussion to send us the texts of their statements by the end of the day on 6 October. Thanks to the briefers in the Arria Formula meeting on 28 September, we had an open conversation on the basis of facts and real evidence, and not on bare slogans. Unfortunately, not all members of the Security Council were ready for this. Some of them, evidently not finding any counterarguments, tried simply to suppress our experts, accusing them of bias or a lack of competence. However, they did not have any basis for doing that. Each of the experts we invited were ready to defend their positions, argue the facts and their interpretation of those facts, but our Western colleagues were not even ready for that. Their arguments were not new and came back once again to the dubious "highly likely", "everybody knows this is how it is" or "there is no other rational explanation", and so on. The time when we could afford to have this technical discussion of the latest report of the Director General on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) is over. Today there is a critical mass of questions for the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and evidence of machinations and skulduggery in its reports. They are ignoring our protest about the report of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria on Khan Shaykhun in April 2017, despite the fact that there is much evidence that it was staged. Weare also still waiting for the Technical Secretariat to provide clarification on the machinations around the Fact-Finding Mission's report on the events in Douma in April 2018, as well as an answer from the Director General on how he plans to combat the violations that have come to light. There is evidence also from Ian Henderson, who was an eyewitness, that what we are talking about was a direct forgery. The initial report, which said that the incident was not connected with the use of chemical weapons, was replaced with one that makes the West more comfortable, and the authors of the first, objective version were persecuted by the leadership of the OPCW.New examples are coming to light virtually every month. Since spring we have had to discuss the report of the Investigation and Identification Team on the incidents in Ltamenah in March 2017. This isa politically biased, unreliable and technically unconvincing report. The detailed criticism and arguments we voiced previously on this report were published in an official document of the Security Council in June (S/2020/565, annex). However, what this report sets forth in terms of analysis of the military situation in Ltamenah and Hama in March and April 2017 shows that there was hypothetically no need for any chemical weapons to be used by the Syrian Government's forces. During that period, the Syrian army had successfully moved into the Hama province and brought up to 70 per cent of the territory back under its control. There would have been no reason for the Syrian Government to use chemical weapons and draw fire upon itself. Nonetheless this dubious report was the basis for the incriminatory decision of the OPCW Executive Council, which, in its July session, received an impossible number of votes. The conditions required of the Syrian Arab Republic simply could not be fulfilled. It would have meant declaring the existence of chemical weapons and facilities connected with them, when they simply do not exist, because all weapons had already been removed and destroyed, and no inspection since 2013 has been able to establish the contrary. With regard to the most recent reports of the Fact-Finding Mission on the incidents in Aleppo in November 2018 and in Saraqib, Idlib in August 2016, which the Technical Secretariat prepared only after our many insistent calls for them over more than a year, we and the Syrian authorities have been bombarded with requests for new information. There always appears to be something that is lacking, some unsurmountable issue for the Technical Secretariat, samples that have gone missing, and so on. At some point, we grew tired of trying to prove that we had turned over all the material. Why was the investigation of these incidents so difficult and why did it take so long? Was it not because there were allegations that it was the opposition, not the Syrian army, who were using chemical weapons? Against that backdrop, the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission were not a revelation. The Mission could not of course determine the fact that chemical weapons had been used by opposition groups. The Technical Secretariat could have spared efforts pretending that an investigation was under way. Instead, it could have made known that finding right away and, for that matter, admitted that it would not even consider that the Syrian opposition could have been responsible for the use of chemical weapons. The most recent report of the Director General builds on those practices. For example, members should look at the paragraphs that dwell on outstanding issues with regard to the initial declaration. As we learned from former OPCW inspector Mr. Henderson during the Arria Formula video-teleconference meeting, the guidance of the Technical Secretariat instructs the Declaration Assessment Team to keep those issues open. With such an approach, no matter how the Syrians justify themselves, that part of the file will not be closed. I would also like to recall that, according to the same expert, at the initial stage of joining the CWC, many possessor States encountered similar problems when submitting their declarations, but, in their cases, those were interpreted as minor drawbacks that did not undermine the integrity of the declaration. All that indicates the Technical Secretariat's biased stance towards Damascus. We cannot but note that, in his letter transmitting the report, the Secretary-General used the language of the aforementioned biased and unrealistic decision of the OPCW Executive Council that it is imperative "to hold accountable all those who have used chemical weapons" and that it allegedly requires the unity of the Council to uphold this "urgent obligation" (S/2020/961). It is not easy to surprise us anymore. Unfortunately, everything that is marked "done by the OPCW" is immediately associated with some sort of falsification and manipulation. Let us be frank: the Technical Secretariat is increasingly becoming a tool that the West uses to put information and political pressure on undesirable countries. The Technical Secretariat's involvement in anti-Russian campaigns also supports such a conclusion. We have seen that before in the case of the Skripal incident, where unanswered questions still hang in the air. We see that happening again today with regard to the supposed poisoning of Mr. Navalny, which allegedly took place in Russia. For some reason, at Western countries' first call for technical assistance, the OPCW Technical Secretariat readily hurries to "investigate" along the lines of political conclusions drawn made about the existence of some "irrefutable evidence". Nevertheless, we invited OPCW inspectors to Russia to establish the details of what had happened, since we really have nothing to hide. Allegations that Russia is trying to undermine the authority of the OPCW are absolutely unsubstantiated. As Mr. Bustani pointed out in his statement, that organization has already achieved greatness. If it has slipped, it nevertheless still has the opportunity to repair itself. Like all responsible members of the OPCW, we want to restore its good name so that it can continue to fulfil its mandate under the CWC. We know very well what our colleagues are going to say. We have heard all that on many occasions. I will speak frankly: all this looks bleak and unconvincing. Russia remains interested in impartial investigations, but we will oppose disinformation and blatant lies. In conclusion, let me make one more point. When Western representatives disputed today, and previously, the appropriateness of Mr. Bustani's participation in this meeting, they stated that it would have been more logical to invite the current Director General, Mr. Arias. We have never objected to such a scenario. We insisted only on the open format of the briefing. Now the time has clearly come to speak openly. There must be no more delays. We propose that we agree today to invite Mr. Arias to the next meeting on the Syrian chemical file. We look forward to hearing his comprehensive answers to all the issues raised earlier by Mr. Henderson, Mr. Mate and Mr. Postol and today by Mr. Bustani and member States. I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
