Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, and His Excellency Mr. Makhdoom
Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Pakistan. I thank them for their statements. I would
also like to express our appreciation for today's
briefings by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs.

Croatia fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the Permanent Representative of
France on behalf of the European Union. I should like
to focus my statement on several key issues.

First of all, allow me to extend our condolences
to the Governments of Afghanistan and of India, as
well as to the families of the victims of the heinous and
shocking terrorist attack on the Indian embassy in
Kabul.

At the Paris Conference, the international
community reaffirmed its commitment to work closely
under Afghan leadership in support of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy, based on the
Afghanistan Compact. My country supports the vision
and goals outlined in the Strategy. Croatia also
welcomes the review of the Afghanistan Compact
prepared by the Co-Chairs of the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board, as well as its substantive
conclusions. We subscribe to the observation of the
Special Representative that the priorities identified at
the Paris Conference are sufficiently covered by the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) as laid out by resolution 1806
(2008). In that respect, we underscore that greater
human, administrative and security resources will need
to be mobilized in order for UNAMA to fulfil its
mandate and achieve the priorities established in Paris.
Consequently, Croatia fully supports the Secretary-
General's request for additional qualified personnel
and financial resources.

Since the launch of the Afghanistan Compact,
there has been notable progress in many areas, but
daunting challenges remain. We are concerned about
the increased insurgency in certain parts of
Afghanistan. We especially deplore the fact that the
asymmetric attacks on which insurgents heavily rely
have resulted in a large number of civilian casualties.
The threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan
posed by terrorists, criminals and those involved in the
illicit drug trade is real and needs to be continuously
addressed. We look forward to a more active fight
against the production and trafficking of narcotics, and
we reiterate the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1817 (2008), on international cooperation to
strengthen the monitoring of the international trade in
chemical precursors.

In addition, my country welcomes the positive
developments in the areas of health, education,
infrastructure and economic growth, as well as in
building stronger Afghan national security forces.
However, much more remains to be done, primarily in
the areas of the rule of law, law enforcement,
Government capacity, development, the private sector
and the personal security of all Afghan citizens.

We reiterate the importance of consolidating
democracy, including through free, fair and secure
elections in 2009 and 2010. Bearing in mind the
challenges related to practical preparations for the
elections, we support structuring UNAMA's electoral
capacity and its interaction with the Afghan
Government and the Afghan Independent Electoral
Commission.

Regarding support for the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, especially in the agriculture and
energy sectors, we believe that the international
community has to be ready to provide the necessary
resources, in accordance with the priorities set by the
strategy. Croatia supports the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the support should be guided
and promoted by UNAMA and that the new focus will
require new resources and expertise, as well as a new
internal organizational structure for UNAMA.

Strengthening Afghan Government institutions
and improving all public services is another priority
that includes support for police reform, strengthening
the rule of law and supporting public administration
reform. Those steps are critically important to create a
fully functioning State, but also serve as preconditions
for garnering the popular support required to help
combat the insurgency.

The international community agreed in Paris to
deliver its assistance in a more coordinated way and to
channel it increasingly through the national budget in
order to make it more predictable, transparent and
accountable. Croatia fully supports that effort and
stands ready to act accordingly.

Regarding humanitarian assistance, in the light of
recent developments it is necessary to increase
attention to the worsening food situation, and we
welcome the launch of an appeal in Kabul today by the
Afghan Government and the United Nations. My
country further recognizes the essential role of
neighbouring countries in providing support to the
Government of Afghanistan to achieve stability and
prosperity. If I may, I would also like to add my voice
and the voice of Croatia to those who have welcomed
the intensive and constructive dialogue between
Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Croatia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that UNAMA should proceed with
another expansion of its field presence with the
opening of six new provincial offices over the next 12
months, simultaneously taking into account concerns
for the security of staff members as a matter of the
highest priority. Croatia believes that such outreach
activities are of crucial importance in the
implementation of UNAMA's mandate. We hope that
the new plan for the United Nations country team will
significantly contribute to a more coherent and
effective response by the United Nations in
Afghanistan in 2008, while respecting Afghan
ownership.
In conclusion, we believe that with a true
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community under Afghan leadership, based on mutual
trust and obligations, we will achieve our common
goals. We are determined to play our part in the
rebuilding of a democratic, peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.

