Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me an opportunity to once again
address the Security Council on an issue of great
significance to my country. This being my first time to
address the Council under your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
leadership of the Council for the month of May, and to
pledge our support and cooperation with you and your
team. I would also like to commend your predecessor
for successfully leading the Council during the month
of April. I also want to express our appreciation for the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in South Sudan, whose commitment,
dedication and cooperative approach have gained her
wide admiration in the country and internationally.

We have listened with obvious interest to the
statement of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) on the progress of their work. We pledge our
cooperation with the Chairman, his Committee and the
Panel of Experts.

The frequency with which I address the Council
is, needless to say, due to the grave crisis situation in
my country. It is an honour I wish I did not need. This
is a situation that confronts us with a dilemma. On
the one hand, as I have often said, although we do not
always agree, we realize that the Council's sustained
preoccupation with our country's situation emanates
from the concern of the international community
about the tragic conflict in the country and its dire
humanitarian consequences. We are sincerely grateful
for that concern. On the other hand, however, it raises
many issues on which we have genuine differences of
opinion.

There can be no doubt about our common interest
in restoring peace, security and stability in our country.
We are all aggrieved by the death and suffering of our
innocent people. Our differences therefore do not lie
in the overriding goal of peace and the need to protect
civilians, but in the methods of achieving them. For
instance, the many allegations of gross violations of
human rights and humanitarian law can be debated.
In any situation where such allegations are made there
are different perspectives, and therefore controversies.
Moreover, it has been our principle not to be in denial
nor to be defensive about allegations of human rights
violations. As people who believe in the ideals ofhuman
rights, we have a common interest in fighting violations
of human rights, while at the same time the details can
create different perspectives on what actually happens
on the ground.

On the other issue - namely, on sanctions and other
punitive measures - if they were certain to facilitate
and accelerate the achievement of peace, there would be
no controversy over them. Our position has been that,
rather than promote peace, they are likely to harden
positions and generate confrontation. That would
undermine the necessary cooperation on the peace
process. We believe that the international community,
both as a whole and as concerned individual members,
has the moral authority and the leverage to exert
pressure by engaging the parties constructively, rather
than by antagonizing them through threats of punitive
actions.

We also believe that the efforts of the Government,
in particular President Salva Kiir, for the cause ofpeace
are not being adequately recognized and rewarded.
For a democratically elected leader confronted with a
rebellion aimed at overthrowing him to have moved
so fast from the outbreak of the rebellion to engage
his adversaries in a dialogue for peace and to make
the major compromises President Kiir has made is
remarkable. Granting amnesty to those waging war
against the State, inviting them to return and join the
political process, even restoring them to their former
positions in the leadership, not to mention agreeing to
form a transitional Government of national unity and
to share power with them, might strike some people
as encouraging impunity, but they indicate a serious
commitment to the quest for peace.

We acknowledge that pursuing peace requires
engaging the warring parties with a degree of
objectivity, impartiality and parity. But rights and
wrongs, although never one-sided, are also never equal.
The risk with moral equivalency is that the wrongdoer
is equated with the wronged, and that cannot be a basis
for finding a truly just solution.

We remain deeply appreciative of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) mediation efforts.
Indeed, the speed with which those efforts were
undertaken soon after the outbreak of hostilities in
December 2013 was quite impressive. Since then,
IGAD's efforts have received sustained support
from the African Union, the United Nations - in
particular the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) - and a wide array of other international
partners. However, the reports of the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and other United
Nations bodies indicate that the challenge is formidable
and calls for a redoubling of efforts. It is very painful
to read the details of pervasive Violence in the country,
especially in the three most affected states. While some
may see the glass as half-empty and others as half-full,
restoring peace must be a top priority for the parties
and international partners.

As I see it, history is about to repeat itself. The IGAD
initiative in the early 1990s that eventually culminated
in the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement began
with a very promising declaration of drinciples. With
time, the process began to stall as regional partners
began to differ among themselves. The process was then
reinforced and reinvigorated by the friends of IGAD,
who evolved into an IGAD partners forum, with the
troika of Norway, the United Kingdom and the United
States playing a leading, and ultimately successful,
role. It is now widely acknowledged that the IGAD
mediation process is being severely challenged and is
showing signs of exhaustion. It needs to be reinforced
and reinvigorated. The fact that the principle of IGAD
+ 5 is being seriously considered is an encouraging
sign, but it needs to be acted upon and even more needs
to be done, and urgently.

We are also encouraged by what appears to be an
increasing willingness to offer more capacity-building
support in some critical areas in the new order of
priorities for UNMISS, especially in the security sector.
We have always said that, while it is understandable
that the United Nations needed to reorder its priorities
in the light ofthe current situation of conflict, capacity-
building need not be viewed as a means of empowering
the Government to be repressive or oppressive, but
should be seen as a way of developing more responsible
and responsive institutions of good governance that
are capable of protecting the civilian population
and ensuring their general welfare. We have been
receiving very positive reports about the cooperation
of the leadership of the police force with UNMISS.
We welcome the prospects for increased collaboration
to enhance the protection role of the security forces,
particularly the police. Related to police services is the
prison system, which desperately needs reform. Equally
important is the judicial system and the qualification
of the judges, especially in the light of the call for
accountability. Those are some of the priority areas that
call for capacity-building and support from the United
Nations.

Finally, while the sanctions regime now appears
to be in place and about to be operationalized, we still
strongly advocate constructive engagement between the
international community and the parties, in particular
the Government. A great deal can be done through
positive collaboration, while confrontation carries risks
that can be counter-productive. Although war cannot be
ended overnight by the actions of one side, I trust that
an agreement on specific actions that the Government
could take, with clear benchmarks, could encourage
cooperation with the international community. A
great deal of international goodwill has already been
invested in South Sudan. It would be tragic if that were
to dissipate, thus denying the people of South Sudan,
who have already suffered from decades of devastation,
the protection, assistance and development support they
so desperately need.
