Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It
was a good format to listen to the Secretary-General
two working days ago, to consider his words, and then
to have an exchange of views this evening. The
Secretary-General came very close to articulating what
every Member of the United Nations can accept as
common ground. His is therefore an approach on which
we should be building.

These meetings have been taking place against a
backdrop of increasing violence and despair in the
Middle East. The statement which Spain will later
deliver on behalf of the European Union expresses very
clearly the urgency with which we all feel efforts to
end the violence must proceed. As Ambassador Ryan
implied in his remarks earlier, there has recently been a
failure of courage and imagination on both sides. We
all know that the only effective solution is through a
return to dialogue and negotiation. The precise
obligations on each side to bring violence and
terrorism to an end are well spelled out in the European
Union statement.

Our goal remains a two-State solution: a State of
Israel and a viable Palestinian State, both secure within
recognized borders. The recent remarks by Crown
Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia give extra momentum
to that objective. His vision of full normalization of
relations between Israel and its Arab neighbours is very
welcome. We hope that other countries in the region
will build on it.

An end to occupation can be achieved only by
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, leading to a just, final and comprehensive
settlement based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and on the principle of land for
peace. The parties must focus on creating the
conditions for the success of those negotiations. That
can most readily be done by their implementing in
parallel the obligations they have accepted under the
Tenet security plan and the Mitchell Committee report.

But the United Kingdom sees ample evidence that
the parties alone cannot now find their way back to the
path of peace. Mutual trust and confidence have
disappeared as the levels of violence have increased
and the intifada has continued. We therefore welcome
and encourage the sustained engagement of the
Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator, the
Governments of the United States, the European Union
and its Member States and Russia, and those in the
region and further afield who remain determined that
peace can and must be achieved. The United Kingdom,
for its part, will remain an active member of that
category.

We continue to believe that if the Council is to
act effectively it must speak unanimously. An analysis
of the speeches made by Council members so far in
this debate indicates a wide area of common ground.
We must play our proper role and enlarge on that.
Further than that, the international community must
speak with one voice. We must all remain focused on
urging the parties to fulfil their responsibilities to end
the violence and to return to the negotiating table.

