Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I must
apologize. I was going to say that I was grateful for the
briefing. But as I was discourteous enough not to be
here to hear it, other colleagues will tell me exactly
what happened in my absence.

The United Kingdom associates itself with the
remarks to be delivered later by the representative of
the Netherlands.

All sides need to learn the lessons of 17 to 20
March this year. The Council looks forward to seeing
the recommendations of the Secretary-General
following Mr. Kai Eide's report. The United Kingdom
specifically looks forward to a more coherent, focused
and efficient approach by the international community
in Kosovo. We would expect a constructive response
from the communities in Kosovo. The appointment of
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen is very welcome, and he
enjoys our full support.

I would like to set out five priorities that the
United Kingdom sees for future policy.

First, the Special Representative should initiate a
programme by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
transfer competences and authorities to Kosovo
institutions. Economic responsibility should be
transferred progressively to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government over the period up to and beyond
the comprehensive review in mid-2005.

Next, this increased transfer of competences
should take place in conjunction with a
decentralization programme, with the aim of ensuring
more effective local government and protection of
minority rights. In our view, decentralization is basic to
better governance in Kosovo; at the same, it can
respect better the interests and the aspirations of
different communities and regions within Kosovo.

Thirdly, UNMIK should streamline its operation
and focus on priorities for action. We very much hope
that the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General will assess whether UNMIK has the right
structure and resources to meet the challenges
confronting Kosovo. I think I should say that, when
looking to see whether it has the right resources, my
working assumption is that it has too many resources
and that what we need is a more efficient use of fewer
resources.

Fourthly, standards remain basic to the
development of Kosovo. The standards review process
should be maintained, with a comprehensive review, at
the latest, in mid-2005. Implementation of standards
remains the best basis on which to build an inclusive,
multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo in which all citizens
can live in peace and security. The standards which we
set out and which were accepted in the communication
of spring 2004 (S/PRST/2004/13) remain a vital goal.
But at the same time, to be realistic, what we need at
the moment is a robust prioritization focusing on those
standards to which we should try to give immediate
effect; that means minority rights. It should be clear
that this approach of prioritization is not to weaken
conditionality. It is actually to deepen it, but to deepen
it in the areas where there can be maximum impact. So,
we expect to see concrete action taken and having
effect to help minorities: not just pious statements of
commitment but delivery on the ground.

Priority work should continue on the three areas
relating to the minority communities: returns, including
the new ministry of returns; introducing one or two
decentralization pilot projects; and remembering that
decentralization is not only for Kosovo Serbs but is
part and parcel of more effective governance in
Kosovo as a whole. And participation by all sides in
the local Security Advisory Group is very desirable.

We look forward to considering the Special
Representative's assessment of progress towards
meeting the standards. That has been asked for several

times. I hope that in the next discussion we do not have
to remind anyone - for the third time, I think - that
that statement is due. We need that report.

Lastly, there has to be a dialogue with Belgrade.
That is basic. But Belgrade cannot expect to exercise
oversight or veto. Belgrade's proposals on
decentralization are a useful contribution to the debate
that ultimately needs to be held by the people who will
live under the arrangements in Kosovo. But I have to
say that the recent decision by Prime Minister
Kostunica to urge Kosovo Serbs not to participate in
the October elections is extremely disappointing. That
is British understatement. Non-participation will only
disenfranchise the Kosovo Serbs at a time when we
have seen real progress on their key concerns. The
Kosovo Serbs should participate in the elections and
should rejoin the institutions. Our vision - our
collective vision - of Kosovo is of a multi-ethnic
entity looking forward positively to a normal European
existence, reflecting the standards, the aspirations and
the behaviour which, I think, generally characterize the
reconciled Europe.

Those were my five points. It seems to me that
the immediate priority now is to build tolerance and
trust and to reassure the Kosovo Serbs. The Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must demonstrate a
genuine commitment to strengthening the rights and
the protection of Kosovo minorities. We were
encouraged by the open letter of 14 June from Kosovo
leaders calling for all Kosovo citizens to build that
tolerant democracy based on the rule of law and laying
the foundation for establishing a ministry of returns,
communities and human rights. Belgrade and Kosovo
Serbs have an important role to play in that process,
and they have to make a constructive contribution; that
is part of the overall deal. Unilateral statements on
status by any side seem to the United Kingdom to be
totally unacceptable.

What this is all about is a simple decision to
decentralize, to actually give responsibility to people
where it ought to be exercised, to give greater
responsibility to the institutions in Kosovo. But, at the
same time, a new Special Representative needs to exert
himself on that process so that we have less UNMIK,
but also so that the UNMIK we have is more effective
and delivers on those objectives.

