Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation, I am sure like many
others in the Chamber, was puzzled by the process that
unfolded around today's resolution 2334 (2016). While
the resolution has been worked on for many months,
the apparent haste surrounding its adoption does not
promote its ends.

For many years, our country has been involved
in the Middle East peace process, first as co-chair of
the Madrid process, then as a member of the Middle
East Quartet and, of course, as a permanent member
of the Security Council. Our experience confirms
that the issue can be resolved only through direct
and unconditional negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. That is precisely what dictated our work
to arrange a September meeting in Moscow between
Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel and President
Abbas of Palestine. The Palestinian side was ready to
take part in the meeting.

Today, we voted in favour of the resolution on
the Israeli settlements, convinced that it was based
on tested language reflecting the general position
of the international community on the illegality of
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We believe it important that the document
also condemns violent acts against civilians and acts of
terrorism and appeals to both sides to end the violence
and the rhetoric of incitement and provocation, which
only fuel an atmosphere of distrust and confrontation
between Palestinians and Israelis. There is no doubt
that such actions undermine the possibility of achieving
a two-State solution to the Palestinian question.

Russia will continue working on reanimating the
negotiations and restoring Palestinian unity based on
the political platform of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
connection we confirm the importance of the ongoing
work of the Quartet as an effective and approved
mechanism of the Security Council in the Middle East
peace process.

We also note that the July report of the Quartet
(S/2016/595, annex) on the situation in the Palestinian-
Israeli track is still very relevant as a strong signal
from the international community to both sides of the
conflict. Implementing the recommendations contained
in the report would contribute to returning the peace
process to the political track.

