Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (Spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
important meeting on the recent visit by the members of
the Security Council to Bangladesh and Myanmar. Peru
considers it necessary for the international community
and the Council follow the situation of the Rohingya
Muslims in those countries with special attention.

As President of the Council in April, Peru had
the honour of leading the visits, in conjunction with
Kuwait and the United Kingdom. We would also like
to acknowledge the role played by Poland, under whose
presidency the trip we are reporting on today ended.
It was a privilege to work with all of them. We owe
special thanks to the Governments of Bangladesh and
Myanmar for their warm welcome, to the United Nations
country teams in both countries, to the Secretariat for its
unflagging assistance and to the Government of Kuwait
for its generous logistical support, which facilitated the
execution of our ambitious programme.
Following the briefing by my colleague the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait on the activities
in Bangladesh after a brief Visit to his country, I will
report on the main activities carried out on 30 April
in Naypyidaw. We had an opportunity to meet with
Myanmar's most senior officials and to convey the
Council's positions in line with presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, adopted unanimously by the Council
last November (see S/PV.8085), as well as in line with
the agreed terms of reference for the trip.

At our meeting with State Counsellor Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, she expressed her desire for a
prompt return of the refugees from Bangladesh to
Myanmar before the monsoon season. In that regard,
in her opinion, the process was being neglected due to
complications with the required administrative forms.
The State Counsellor stressed the importance for her
Government of implementing the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, which is
the second-poorest region in Myanmar. She recognized
the need to draft legislation like the 1982 citizenship
act, but indicated that the process would take time. The
State Counsellor also pointed to the need to create a
climate of trust between communities to facilitate
access for humanitarian agencies. She noted that the
focus on Muslim minorities had led to a perception of
discrimination against other communities.

During the dialogue, the members of the Council
expressed their willingness to support the Government
of Myanmar both in the process of voluntary refugee
returns and in addressing the root causes of the crisis.
It was also stressed that the Government of Myanmar
had to allow full access to the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies and collaborate with the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The State
Counsellor was also informed, among other things,
of the urgency of respecting the human rights of the
Rohingya community, of resolving the issue of their
citizenship and of allowing independent investigations
in order to provide for accountability for crimes
committed, and thereby promote reconciliation.

We then met with General Min Aung Hlaing,
Commander-in-Chief of the Myanmar Armed Forces,
who argued that the violence in Rakhine state
was generated by attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army and affected all communities in that
region. With respect to the role of the armed forces,
he said that they protected the country from external
threats under direction of the civilian Government. In
response to allegations of human rights violations, he
said the armed forces had respected their international
obligations and that internal accountability processes
had been followed.

Council members stressed the need to ensure
security in Rakhine state to allow for the voluntary
return of refugees, who are still afraid to return. In
that regard, the importance of cooperation with the
United Nations, including with the Special Envoy,
and with Bangladesh was stressed. The need for
transparent investigations and the establishment of an
independent accountability mechanism supported by
the international community to address human rights
violations in Rakhine state were also noted.

Also on 30 April, we met with the members of the
Committee for Implementation of Recommendations
of the Advisory Board on Rakhine State, who
presented various initiatives to promote the economic
development of the region. With regard to the return of
refugees, the members of the Committee stressed that
they were working on the issue and that the problems
encountered should be resolved in bilateral cooperation
with Bangladesh. They also made reference to the
negotiations taking place for a memorandum of
understanding with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme. Finally, we also held
important meetings with the United Nations country
team and civil society organizations.

Peru notes with deep concern the dramatic
situation of vulnerability of Rohingya Muslims in
both Myanmar and Bangladesh. We also stress the
need for the international community to intensify its
attention and assistance to this humanitarian crisis. We
must also underline the need for an independent and
transparent mechanism to ensure accountability for
the numerous allegations of human rights violations,
including numerous cases of violence and sexual abuse.
We support the initiatives and efforts undertaken in
that regard.

Finally, we stress the importance of strengthening
the rule of law and democratic transition in Myanmar
with a View to building confidence in its institutions,

reducing intercommunity tensions and promoting
sustainable peace in Myanmar and the region.

