Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
the members of the Security Council on behalf of my
country, Guinea-Bissau, especially because the analysis
of the situation in Guinea-Bissau contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/628), comes as
you assume the presidency of the Council. I express to
you the congratulations of my delegation, and I echo
the congratulations you expressed at the outset to the
Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso on the
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month. I do so with all the more pleasure because he is
a representative of an eminent member of the countries
of West Africa.

I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
introducing the very important report of the Secretary-
General.

We, in Guinea-Bissau, are very devoted to peace
and stability, as you have just observed, Mr. President.
That is especially true because we know that we
ourselves bear primary responsibility for addressing the
situation in our country and for ensuring that peace and
security become a permanent reality in Guinea-Bissau.

We agree with the representative of the United
States when she says quite pertinently that Guinea-
Bissau needs to show leadership. That is exactly what
we would like to do. However, in order to achieve that,
we need stable institutions, we need to consolidate our
institutions and we need to overcome major obstacles. I
am happy that, in his statement, the representative of
Croatia described the immense nature of the task
before us, which we must accomplish by working
together with our partners.

I would like to say that we are aware that we need
to persevere and that we need to create the favourable
conditions necessary for the holding of free, transparent
and credible elections on 16 November. President
Vieira of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau has stated that
before the General Assembly. We want those elections
to be an opportunity for the people of Guinea-Bissau to
freely declare their will and make their choice.

We hope, and indeed I am convinced, that when
the time comes, the people of Guinea-Bissau will show
not only civic spirit but also civility: civil spirit in
taking the opportunity to freely choose those men or
women who will be called upon to represent the people
in the National Assembly; civility in going to the polls
in an orderly fashion, thus guaranteeing the
transparency of those elections and ensuring that they
will be credible and that their results may be accepted
by all for the greater good of our people.

I would like to say that, yes, there have been
tensions. However, in a country that wishes to learn
democracy and that is devoted to the virtues of
democracy, in a young country that is facing enormous
economic and financial problems, it is almost natural to
consider that there will be differences in point of View,
and even disputes. If I may say so, differences in point
of view are consubstantial with the existence of a
genuine democracy.

We hope that what has transpired in Guinea-
Bissau can serve as a lesson, because we have been
able to overcome those difficulties by turning to
democratic institutions - specifically, to the Supreme
Court. There was no violence, and that is the result of
how strongly democratic principles are anchored in the
mentality of my compatriots, something that I believe
should be celebrated. We will do everything to ensure
that the elections take place. We owe that to the
international community in return for the aid that we
have received. I think that everything suggests not only
that the elections will be held on 16 November, but that
they will take place in full transparency.

Some speakers have mentioned the level of
participation of the people of Guinea-Bissau in
exercising their democratic rights: there has been more
than 96 per cent participation, ensuring that voters
have their voting cards. Despite the fact that this is the
rainy season - and those who are familiar with the
difficulties created by the rainy season in Africa will
recognize the importance of what I am saying - that
figure of more than 96 per cent not only reflects the
level of participation, but demonstrates the importance
of the coming elections to the people of Guinea-Bissau.

I would like to say that we share the Council's
concerns with regard to the drug trafficking problem.
Until five years ago, no one had ever heard of drugs in
Guinea-Bissau. No one had ever even heard of
marijuana. I myself have never seen a single leaf of
marijuana, and I am not the most naive amongst my
compatriots. If we are now facing this situation, it is
because we are the weakest link in the chain of the
subregion. We do not have the institutions we need.

We are talking about a State that is decaying, and
I say that frankly because, as Mr. Pascoe has just
noted, we have been honest when we have come to the
international community to ask for help. We have not
attempted to hide the major drug trafficking problem in
Guinea-Bissau, which could ruin all of our efforts in
terms of democracy and development and have effects
we cannot even measure on the minds of young people
and on their present and future behaviour.

As I said, we are the weakest link. We need the
assistance of the international community. We need
solid institutions. We need a police force that works
and courts that are capable of rendering justice. We
need to build prisons. We need a functioning, credible,
justice system to which both the people of Guinea-
Bissau and foreigners can appeal in their search for
justice. For that reason, I would like to express my
agreement with previous speakers: we must first of all
put much more emphasis on institution-building. There
can be no democracy without the pillars of that
essential structure that is justice.

I do not want to overextend my remarks, but I
would like to note and welcome the statement of the
representative of Brazil, Mrs. Viotti, in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. It is undeniable that
significant progress has been made, progress that the
members of the Council, the international community
and our friends in the Commission have supported. I
would like to say that we are indebted to Ambassador
Viotti for her personal dedication and for the dynamism
she imparted to the work of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration. Through her, I would like to thank the
other members of the Guinea-Bissau configuration for
their speed in adopting the Strategic Framework.

As was so aptly stated by the Ambassador of
Indonesia, the Strategic Framework is the result of a
collective and participatory effort. I am sure that we
have much to learn from this process. For the first
time, the Guinea-Bissau configuration includes all
stakeholders. The Government, the political parties,
young people, women, all civil society - indeed, all
who have something to say about the rebuilding of
Guinea-Bissau and are duty-bound to do so - have
participated. It is truly the result of a collective effort,
and I welcome it, because throughout the process I
have seen my compatriots, who are not used to
discussion, discussing things together.

They spoke to the essentials: how to ensure that
we can study the real problems of our country together;
how, with the help of the international community, we
can find the most appropriate way out of the major
crisis in which we find ourselves. The situation is not a
fatal one. I would stress that we can find a way out so
long as we receive the aid that we need and so long as
we can demonstrate resolve and leadership, as was
underlined again by the representative of the United
States. I hope we can.

I would like to assure the Council that the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau will spare no effort to
ensure not only that the elections are held, but that they
are held in the greatest possible transparency, that they
are credible and that the results, whatever they may be,
are accepted by all as the free expression of the
people's choice.

With regard to the major problem of drug
trafficking, I insist that, together, we can meet the
challenge, as Mr. Pascoe said early in his briefing. He
said that it was an enormous task, a gigantic task.
Everyone will have to cooperate to that end. That is why
the subregional approach is the best, and we are happy
to be meeting in three weeks' time in the capital of Cape
Verde, Praia, in order to consider that issue in depth.

It is an issue that involves all of us. I am sure that
my compatriots are sad to know that Guinea-Bissau has
become a market for drugs. We deserve better. The
people of Guinea-Bissau - as you, Mr. President,
emphasized - want to build their country, adhere to
the principles of democracy, and promote social
development, because that is what we need. In her
statement, Mrs. Viotti identified the myriad challenges
we face, particularly in the social sphere. My country
is now experiencing a cholera epidemic, and I take this
opportunity to appeal once again to the international
community to assist us in halting an epidemic that has
killed dozens of my fellow citizens.

We agree with the Secretary-General that we need
to face the challenge together. The Bretton Woods
institutions, which are aware of the efforts already
made by Guinea-Bissau, can help us in a far more
substantial manner. I can assure the Council that,
through transparency, rigorous management of State
finances, and efforts to clean up our finances - for
which we have been congratulated by the Bretton
Woods institutions - we are sure to succeed. Guinea-
Bissau will be able to meet the challenges posed by
democracy and especially by development, as noted by
the representative of Burkina Faso in his statement.

