Mr. Wyzner (Poland): Allow me to express at the
outset, Sir, my congratulations on your very effective
presidency of the Security Council this month.

I am taking the floor today mainly to present the
views of the Polish Chairmanship-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The reason for doing so is the commitment of
the organization, as a regional arrangement under the
United Nations Charter, to the active pursuit of a
settlement of the conflict in Kosovo. We are concerned as
well at the unfolding crisis in Kosovo and its dangerous
potential ramifications for peace and stability in the
region and in Europe, and at the fact that the provisions
of Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199
(1998) have not been fully complied with.

The OSCE has taken the position that the solution of
the Kosovo problem should be based both on respect for
the territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and on the standards defined in the United
Nations Charter as well as the OSCE documents. The
OSCE insists that such a solution should take into account
the right of the Kosovo Albanians to autonomy and
significant self-government, which would be reflected in

 

a special status of the province within the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia.
Among the demands addressed by the OSCE to the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia were a
cessation of all repression, the initiation of talks on a
peaceful resolution of the conflict, international
participation in the negotiating process, acceptance of a new
mission by the Personal Representative of the Chairman-in-
Office for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as
the return of the OSCE long-term missions in Kosovo,
Sanjak and Vojvodina. These demands were included in the
OSCE Permanent Council Decision No. 218 of 11 March,
which became the platform for the OSCE activities in the
Kosovo crisis.

In accordance with Decision No. 218 and Security
Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199 (1998), the
Chairmanship-in-Office undertook a number of concrete
actions in cooperation with international organizations and
entities, especially the United Nations, the European Union,
the Council of Europe, the Contact Group and others. It is
not my intention to recall on this occasion a detailed
catalogue of those activities. It seems worth underlining,
however, that all of them contributed to the build-up of
international solidarity, which is indispensable to bringing
effective pressure to bear on the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to change their position. In
addition, in the process of implementation of resolution
1160 (1998), the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Minister
Geremek, regularly forwarded to the United Nations
Secretary-General reports on the situation in Kosovo and on
measures taken by the OSCE in this regard. We note with
satisfaction that the OSCE information inputs were utilized
and included in the periodic reports of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council.

A strong message sent by the Security Council in its
resolution 1199 (1998) allowed for the intensification of
efforts by the international community to reach a settlement
of the Kosovo conflict. To mention only some of the
international endeavours in this regard, I would refer to the
significant activity of the North Atlantic Alliance and the
Contact Group as well as the painstaking negotiations
conducted by the American Envoy, Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke.

Thanks to the efforts of the international community,
the process of settling the Kosovo dispute entered into a
new phase. In a letter to the Secretary-General dated 16
October 1998, issued subsequently as Security Council
document 5/1998/978, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office
informed you, Mr. President, and Mr. Kofi Annan that on
that same day in Belgrade he had signed an agreement
between the OSCE and the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on the establishment of the
Kosovo Verification Mission. This agreement, together
with the agreement on the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization-Kosovo Air Verification Regime, constitutes
an important step towards the development of a political
framework aimed at ensuring compliance with the
demands set out in resolution 1199 (1998).

In the talks with Minister Geremek, the leader of the
Kosovo Albanians, Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, in spite of some
reservations, welcomed the agreement and expressed the
view that the Albanian community in Kosovo would
cooperate with the Kosovo Verification Mission. He saw
that act as an important step towards enhancing the
international presence in Kosovo, which should facilitate
negotiations for a political solution to the crisis; the
recognition of Albanian community institutions, including
local police; and deciding the future of Kosovo.

Soon after the signing of the agreement, the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office dispatched to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia a small, 15-person OSCE technical advance
mission to start preparations for the Kosovo Verification
Mission operation, the scope of which goes beyond
previous OSCE experience. We are pleased to note that
this OSCE assessment team has already Visited Belgrade
and Kosovo, and we also welcome the establishment of
a Kosovo Verification Mission support unit in Vienna.

We believe that an effective implementation of the
recently concluded agreements must be secured if the
process of conflict resolution is to gain momentum. This
is but the beginning of an ambitious and difficult
undertaking. We are likely to face numerous obstacles
and difficulties, possibly even attempts to reverse the
process. That is why we must act promptly and with
determination. Decisive action is called for also because
of the humanitarian factor: the urgent need to avert the
impending humanitarian catastrophe among the refugees
which may be precipitated by the forthcoming winter.

We are disturbed by the reports of renewed fighting
in Kosovo, and we urge both sides to refrain immediately
from the further use of force and to search for a peaceful
solution.

We trust that the draft resolution which the Security
Council is about to adopt will facilitate the

 

implementation of the agreements signed in Belgrade and,
by endorsing and supporting them, help to make them
effective and ensure the safety and security of international
verifiers. These objectives require the direct cooperation
and engagement of other organizations, which are duly
foreseen in the resolution.
To conclude, let me assure you, Mr. President, that the
OSCE accords priority to the question of Kosovo and will
spare no effort to contribute, in cooperation with other
organizations, to its peaceful resolution.

