Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's important meeting. We commend
your leadership on the issue. We welcome the adoption
earlier today of resolution 2457 (2019), which we
co-sponsored. Let me also express my gratitude to the
briefers for their insightful remarks.

The goal of silencing the guns in Africa by 2020
is ambitious and worthy. As Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo said in her briefing, it demands that we address
the drivers and root causes of conflict and fragility in a
holistic manner. With that in mind, my remarks today
will focus on three issues - small arms, prevention
and institution-building.

First, we must tackle the guns themselves. Small
arms and light weapons are the greatest common factor
among various types of security threats on the African
continent. Such weapons are a force multiplier of
instability that exacerbate and prolong the conflict in
whatever arena they enter.

In that regard, Japan welcomes the newly
established funding mechanism - the Saving Lives
Entity, otherwise known as SALIENT, launched
under the Secretary-General's disarmament agenda.
Small arms issues are cross-cutting and affect the
entire spectrum of conflict resolution. Japan believes
that that approach, which enables the strengthening
of institutional capacities for controlling small arms,
will pave the way for a more coherent United Nations
response. For that reason, Japan recently decided - and
today announced - that we will disburse $2 million
to SALIENT.

Japan has also decided to provide more than half a
million dollars to the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa (UNREC) in
Lome. Small arms and light weapons are borderless,
and regional cooperation is imperative in combating
their use. We look forward to seeing UNREC enhance
the capacities of disarmament institutions in Africa
through its coordination with regional partners.

In addition, most ofthe UnitedNations peacekeeping
operations in Africa already have mandates associated
with small arms. It would be useful for the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) to look at the issue
horizontally and synergize their efforts.

Secondly, just managing small arms is not enough.
The United Nations and the AU need to boost prevention
efforts. It is better to prevent a gun from being fired in
the first place than to have to silence one that is already
firing. Both the United Nations and the AU have
preventive tools at their disposal, ranging from early
warning and mediation to peacebuilding, which can and
should complement each other in the quest for political
solutions. Japan believes that a greater emphasis on
prevention on the part of the Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council will have a powerful impact on
silencing the guns. We also highlight the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in that regard.

The recent peace agreement in the Central African
Republic is a great example ofthe collaborative mediation
efforts by the United Nations, the AU and subregional
organizations. Japan contributed financially to the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation for the
Central African Republic through the AU Peace Fund.

Finally, strengthening institutional capacity is
crucial. The foundation for sustaining peace is built
on institutions that serve people. That is why Japan
strongly emphasizes institution-building in Africa. We
believe that the United Nations and the AU can leverage
their strategic partnership to strengthen institutional
capacity-building in Africa towards the goal of
silencing the guns. Japan will do its part in promoting it,
including at the upcoming seventh Tokyo International
Conference on African Development in August.

