Mr. Simonovie: On behalf of the Economic and
Social Council, I cordially welcome the convening of
this workshop, the range of issues on its agenda, the
breadth of participation, and its format, which favours
interaction.

I would also like to use this opportunity to note
that during the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council, the level of cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
has been unprecedented. Ambassador Greenstock, in
his capacity of President of the Security Council, has
addressed the Economic and Social Council. I was
invited here today to the Security Council workshop. I
am also invited to participate in the work of the
Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa,
which will be addressing the issue of Guinea-Bissau
during the course of next week.

On Monday the Economic and Social Council
established its ad hoc advisory group on African
countries emerging from conflict. After receiving
requests from interested countries, additional ad hoc
advisory groups dealing with individual countries or
regions will be established. It is envisaged that the ad
hoc groups of the Security Council and of the
Economic and Social Council will work together
closely.

Finally, during the course of this month, we had a
semi-informal meeting of three Presidents: the
Presidents of the General Assembly, of the Security
Council and of the Economic and Social Council.
There was a firm commitment to continue such
coordination and semi-informal meetings. One of the
issues on which we certainly want to cooperate is the
issue of peace-building and sustainable peace and
development in Africa. I thank the United Kingdom for
its strong support and leadership in fostering the
cooperation of which I have spoken.

In order to stay within my time limit, I will refer
briefly to lessons learned in Sierra Leone from the
particular viewpoint of the Economic and Social
Council. First, it is quite clear from the example of
Sierra Leone that even the most difficult situations are
solvable if there is enough commitment and enough
resources.

Secondly, although we have recently allocated
almost $700 million for peacekeeping in Sierra Leone
for the next 12 months, it is quite clear that
peacekeeping has proved to be much cheaper than
conflict. From Foreign Minister Koroma, we were able
to hear some data on the material costs of the conflict
in Sierra Leone. However, conflict prevention is much
cheaper than peacekeeping itself. In that respect, I
would like to emphasize that post-conflict peace-
building represents a form of prevention of the
recurrence of conflict.

In view of our experience - also confirmed by
the words of both ministers - for peace to be
sustainable there is a need for a comprehensive
approach. Every speaker today emphasized that
regional and subregional comprehensiveness is
absolutely necessary to end conflicts and to prevent
their recurrence. However, I would like to add that
comprehensiveness includes other elements as well.
Peacekeeping should be accompanied from the outset
by political and humanitarian measures and should be
immediately succeeded by peace-building, including
the strengthening of security and the rule of law, and
economic recovery.

Demilitarization, which has been mentioned
many times, is sustainable if job opportunities are
created. The reintegration of ex-combatants into
society relies heavily on job availability. Also, in Sierra
Leone, infrastructure should be rehabilitated, and
health and education systems should be substantially
improved. As the Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator clearly indicated, the strengthening of the
overall security and justice system is essential for post-
conflict peace-building in Sierra Leone and elsewhere.
Civilians who have been deliberately targeted during
hostilities require assurances if they are to return to
their homes. The establishment of tribunals with an
international element and of truth and reconciliation
commissions, both of which are being launched in
Sierra Leone, are encouraging in that respect.

Experience teaches us that investments in the
rehabilitation of the justice system and in the rule of
law are productive investments for a country. In the
first phase, it facilitates the return of refugees and
displaced persons as well as reconciliation, but it also
helps to attract more bilateral and multilateral
assistance. In the second phase, however, it is also very
instrumental to track foreign direct investment when
the time comes.

In order to stay within the time limit, I will
conclude by saying that the Economic and Social
Council has great potential because of its coordination
function, which encompasses the entire United Nations
system. We can bring all United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes on board. Our recently
enhanced cooperation with the Bretton Woods
institutions as well as our capacity to engage donor
countries and other stakeholders such as non-
governmental organizations and the private sector
provide great potential for the Council to mobilize key
players. That potential has yet to be put to its best use.

