Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation shares the view
that Haiti is continuing to experience an acute need for
assistance from the international community - first and
foremost, economic, financial and technical assistance -
in order to get back on its feet and overcome its
protracted socio-economic crisis. At the same time, we
want to emphasize once again that overcoming the crisis
depends above all on the Haitians themselves, on the
leadership of that Caribbean country and on the carefully
targeted reform efforts to resolve its domestic political
situation by means of constructive dialogue.

From the very beginning - and even less so now -
the situation in Haiti has not posed a threat to peace and
security. What we have is a typical situation: the difficult
transition of a society that lacks a democratic tradition -
a transition that is made even more difficult by chronic
socio-economic difficulties and widespread poverty. We
do not see how the situation in this country differs from
that of many developing countries, which are also
encountering drastic problems in the establishment of
democracy, economic development and the fight against
galloping criminality.

We also understand the importance of the work to
establish, with the active participation of the United
Nations, a new Haitian National Police - although, of
course, even an excellent police force cannot replace the
work of all the other institutions that are necessary for the
normal functioning of a State.

 

We see that the Haitian National Police is still going
to require international assistance for the protracted process
of enhancing its professional training. We gather that such
assistance will be provided bilaterally, by interested States
as well as by international and regional organizations. A
further role in this effort will also have to be played by the
United Nations, through the relevant specialized agencies
and programmes. We are convinced that they will do a
good job of taking the baton from the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).

The joint United Nations/Organization of American
States International Civilian Mission and the United Nations
Development Programme are already making an important
contribution to the professionalization of Haitian law-
enforcement organs. We believe that it would also be
possible to make use of the institutional experience of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala,
established by the General Assembly, which is carrying out
similar tasks to those of the United Nations Mission in
training Haiti's National Police. In short, there are many
options.

As for establishing in Haiti United Nations
peacekeeping mechanisms under a Security Council
mandate, this option was long ago exhausted. As is well
known, the first United Nations Mission in Haiti was
deployed more than five years ago, in September 1993.
Several times since then, the Mission has been extended
"for the last time" under various names. In November 1997
the Security Council once again agreed to retain the United
Nations Mission in that country, changing its name for the
fourth time - in that case to the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti. Moreover, operative paragraphs 2
and 3 of resolution 1141 (1997) clearly stated that the
Mission's mandate was

"limited to a single one-year period ending on 30
November 1998"

and that

"further international assistance to the Haitian national
police, should it be needed, should be provided
through United Nations specialized agencies and
programmes, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, and through international
and regional organizations and by interested Member
States".

It is precisely that clear understanding that allowed

Russia, despite all its reservations, to support resolution

1141 (1997).

A year has elapsed, and we find ourselves - back
at square one, as they say here. We have had more than
enough time to shift to the aegis of the United Nations
specialized agencies the task of providing assistance to
the Haitian police, and the Security Council is now being
asked for the fifth time to disregard its own previous
decision.

Clearly there is a double standard in the Security
Council's approach to crisis situations in various regions
of the world. We are convinced that the adoption by the
Security Council of the proposed draft resolution on the
extension for the nth time of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Haiti clearly will not enhance
either the Council's authority or confidence in its
decisions.

Our delegation will not be able to support the draft
resolution the Council is to vote on today.

