Ms. Graham (New Zealand): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate, the first on Security Council working methods
since 1994. We especially thank you for preparing an
excellent concept paper (S/2008/528, annex), which
clearly sets out areas where progress has been achieved
and other areas where more needs to be done. The
working methods of the Security Council - a vital
organ in the United Nations system - are of the
utmost importance to New Zealand.

For many Member States, especially those that
rarely have an opportunity to serve on the Security
Council, the working methods have a very considerable
impact on our ability to contribute and to understand
issues before the Council. Improving the Security
Council's working methods is therefore one of the most
important areas for reform, and one on which there is a
broad measure of agreement.

We note that considerable progress has been
made in the implementation of provisions to increase
the Council's transparency, efficiency and interaction
with non-members of the Council in line with the
recommendations of the note by the President
contained in document S/2006/507.

New Zealand is grateful to Japan and Slovakia for
the work they have done and the leadership they have
provided in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
implementing measures such as a higher rate of public
rather than private Council meetings, greater
notification of those meetings and regular briefings on
the programme of work at the beginning of each
presidency.

While progress has been made, there are still
areas in which New Zealand would like to see
improvement. Specifically, while we note that private
consultations are a useful and sometimes necessary
mechanism for Council members, public meetings
allow the greatest participation and should be used
whenever possible. Furthermore, it is vital that
essential information be shared at public meetings, not
just in closed consultations. A clear rationale for the
Council's choice of a particular format for its meetings
should be included in the President's opening remarks.

In conjunction with important closed
consultations of the Council, we would like to see a
systematic process to allow Member States to have
input and an exchange of views with Security Council
members on issues before the Council that affect them.
Although there have been many improvements in that
regard, New Zealand would like to see draft
statements, draft resolutions and other documents
shared systematically with non-members of the
Council, perhaps by e-mail to all Missions, sooner and
with more frequency. We would also like a format for
greater participation by interested parties in the
preparation of those documents.

There is also considerable scope to develop the
interaction with other interested parties, such as troop-
contributing countries, regional organizations, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. Finally, there is a need for more effective
input to the Council from parts of the Secretariat, such
as the Department for Political Affairs, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
In terms of next steps, we agree with the
statement made by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the group of five small nations that the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions could be charged with reviewing
the implementation of the 2006 presidential note and
looking at the proposals made in today's debate. The
Working Group could then present its findings and
recommendations to the Security Council before the
end of this year. The Council could hold a follow-up
meeting, making sure to include the views of the wider
membership and potentially adopting a follow-up
presidential note that reflects the progress made and
outlines areas where further specific improvements
have been proposed.

New Zealand welcomes the ongoing commitment
of the Security Council to enhancing the efficiency and
transparency of its work and to implementing the
measures contained in the presidential note. We now
look forward to the Council's delivering on that
commitment and to actively engaging with the wider
United Nations community on this issue in the coming
months.

Finally, may I reiterate our thanks to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.

