Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for her briefing. We welcome Ms. Guebre
Sellassie's taking on of this critically important post
and look forward to working with her. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report and his leadership on this issue.

As we come together to discuss the implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
it is worth noting that this entire initiative is built on the
premise that the serious security challenges facing the
Sahel are by definitionregional. Whetherwe are speaking
of groups carrying out attacks across borders, droughts
leading to regional food insecurity or a humanitarian
crisis in one country that displaces refugees to several
others, we know that these problems are not confined
to any one State, and their solutions cannot be either. In
order to address such complex transnational problems
effectively, we must come up with regional solutions
and enlist a full range of actors in carrying them out,
including Governments, multilateral and regional
institutions, non-governmental organizations and civil
society groups.

I would divide the challenges we face in the
Sahel - and by "we" I mean all of us who care about
the region and its people and who see its security and
stability as tied to our own - into two categories.
The first consists of emergencies and immediate
crises, such as the current instability in Libya and the
deteriorating situation in northern Mali, where we
have seen renewed fighting. I would also include the
growing threat posed by Boko Haram, because, while
it was that group's brazen kidnapping of schoolgirls
that captured international headlines - and let me be
clear, the outrage their abduction has generated is fully
justified - that was not an isolated attack. Indeed,
Boko Haram was attacking innocent civilians long
before that incident, and since then it has continued to
mount attacks with alarming regularity and increasing
lethality. Just a few weeks ago, the group massacred
scores ofcitizens along Nigeria's border with Cameroon.
It is estimated that the group has killed more than 1,800
civilians this year alone.

There is a clear consensus that the deeds of those
extremists, like the instability in Mali and Libya, must
be met with a coordinated international response. That
consensus was reflected in the ministerial meeting
hosted last week by the Government of the United
Kingdom, at which the Foreign Ministers of Cameroon,
Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, as well as representatives
of the European Union, France, Canada, the United
Nations, the African Union and my Government
agreed upon a unified response to the crisis in Nigeria.
That meeting produced concrete commitments from
all of the participating countries - from beefing up
the multinational joint task force to strengthening
the sanctions against Boko Haram's leaders at the
international and national levels to ensure that neither
their militants nor their coffers find safe haven.

That consensus is reflected at the regional
level, as well, in the ongoing work of the ministerial
coordination platform, which brings together five
Sahelian Governments to collaborate on security and
development issues. That same consensus undergirds
President Obama's announcement a few weeks ago
of the Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund, which is
aiming to work with allies and partners worldwide
to respond to the evolving threat posed by violent
extremism, including in the Sahel.

The second category of challenges in the Sahel
consists of the longer-term chronic problems faced
by the region, such as wide-spread environmental
degradation, chronic food insecurity and the lack
of opportunities for the region's young people. To
cite one alarming statistic, at least 20 million people
are at risk of food insecurity in the Sahel and nearly
5 million children are at risk of acute malnutrition.
Those chronic long-term problems may seem less
pressing on the surface, but left unaddressed, chronic
problems become crises, and crises demand urgent and
often more costly or risk-fraught responses. So if we
know that youth under the age of 25 form the largest
constituency in the Sahel and that they are the hardest
hit by the growing unemployment in the region, and if
we know that young people who have no opportunities
are particularly vulnerable to radicalization and
recruitment into extremist groups, then we must invest
more in expanding opportunities for young men and
women in the region.

I would like to offer a few recommendations as we
continue to work together to address those challenges
in the Sahel. While we are on the right track towards
adopting a regional multilateral approach to those
complex problems, we need to improve our coordination.
That means being more mindful of avoiding overlap in
prioritizing resouces to ensure that the ones we have
provided are used in the most efficient and effective
way possible.

Secondly, we must invest in prevention and we
must invest in resilience. We need to do a better job
of addressing the long-term chronic problems before
they metastasize into urgent and large-scale crises.
My Government is doing that right now through
programmes like the Resilience in the Sahel-Enhanced
(RISE) initiative. Announced in February by the
United States Agency for International Development,
its premise is simple. We invest in making the most
vulnerable populations more resilient so they can
bounce back when the inevitable crisis comes, whether
it is a drought, flood or some other unforeseen but
predictable disaster. The United States has dedicated
$130 million to RISE over its first two years. The
programme is already implementing a range ofprojects,
such as promoting the cultivation of heartier crops in
the Niger and working to reduce acute malnutrition in
Burkina Faso.

We, the United Nations, have also been doing that
through a number of smaller initiatives, like many of
those mentioned by the Secretary-General in his report.
In one of those initiatives in Mali, the United Nations
Development Programme brought together 100 civil
society groups to promote the involvement of women
in the peace process and local-level dialogue. While
programmes like that may not stop the fighting in Mali
immediately, they can help empower communities to
mitigate the violence and they can lay the foundations
for building future peace.

I am convinced that if we can address those
problems collectively and collaboratively, as if we are
willing to not only react to the emergencies, but also
to do more to anticipate them and to address their root
causes, then we will be able to make the Sahel more
peaceful and more prosperous, which is in all of our
interests. We are confident that the integrated strategy
encapsulates those various elements.

