Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As a
country associated with the European Union, Bulgaria
supports the statement to be made by the Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

Bulgaria is deeply concerned about the
continuing crisis in the Middle East. We readily
associate ourselves with the repeated appeals made in
recent days by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
to Israel to withdraw immediately from the occupied
territories. At the same time, we believe that it is
crucial for President Arafat to call on his people to halt
the suicide attacks and to prove that he is in control of
his troops by preventing renewed acts of violence.

Bulgaria warmly welcomed the statement made
last Thursday by the President of the United States,
George W. Bush. We welcome his decision to send
Secretary of State Colin Powell to the region, and we
unequivocally support, and have high hopes for the
efforts of the Special Envoy, General Zinni, on the
ground. We appeal to the parties to the conflict to take
the steps that he suggested to put an end to this tragic
situation. When I describe the situation as tragic, I am
thinking primarily of the humanitarian situation. In this
regard, I would like to echo the analysis of this serious
question made earlier by the representative of Norway,
Ambassador Kolby. I have nothing to add to what he
said. A humanitarian crisis is looming; the Israeli
authorities in particular must take that into account and
prevent such a crisis.

Bulgaria does not believe that destroying the very
infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority will help to
resolve the current problems, particularly the problem
of violence. On the contrary, it will exacerbate them,
since all moderate forces in the Palestinian camp will
be weakened, as will those in the entire Arab world.

We believe that the continued isolation of
President Arafat is destabilizing. We call upon Israel to
guarantee unlimited access by the international
community to President Arafat. In this context, we note
with indignation that the Foreign Minister of Spain,
Mr. Josep Pique, and the European Union High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, have been prevented from
meeting with President Arafat.

Another element in the region with which
Bulgaria is concerned is the tension along the Blue
Line. Hizbullah's violations of the ceasefire and the
provisions of resolution 425 (1978) could further
destabilize the situation in the region. We protest and
condemn any attempt to violate the physical integrity
and security of United Nations staff or of Israeli
civilians. Clearly, if such tensions continue they could
worsen the situation in the occupied territories and
delay the withdrawal of Israeli troops from those
territories.

Before concluding, I would like to make two
important points. The first relates to the need to ensure
unlimited access by journalists covering events in the
region - that appeal is addressed to the Israeli
authorities. Another point of concern to us is the
security of sites associated with all of the major
religions in the region. Not only are such sites of
religious significance for believers throughout the
world, but they have cultural and historical importance.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the position of
Bulgaria. Bulgaria believes that whatever happens the
unity of the Council must be maintained. Resolutions
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) can be
implemented only if there is unity in the Council. Any
future action - and we think that action is not
necessary in the next few days - has to be
accompanied by unity of action in the Council over and
beyond any nuances and differences in approach that
we might have.

