Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome the new Yemeni representative to the Council.
This is a good day for all onemen. I want to congratulate
and commend Mr. Griffiths and his team for the work
they have done to bring about these developments. But,
as Mr. Griffiths himself said, we should also thank
and commend the Swedish Government, the parties
themselves, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin
Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, President Hadi and the
representatives of the Governments of Kuwait, United
Arab Emirates and Oman. My Foreign Secretary Jeremy
Hunt was very pleased to have been able to join his
Swedish counterpart in Stockholm for these important
developments. Above all, I want to stress how much
we owe to Mr. Griffiths and his team and, of course,
to the Secretary-General. IfI may say so, this is what
the United Nations is for. The Council's united support
has helped Mr. Griffiths and the United Nations get to
this point.

I will speak briefly today because I think we all
have important work to do now to support Mr. Griffiths.
I will comment on Mr. Lowcock's remarks afterwards.
I was struck by what Mr. Griffiths said about trust
among the parties and about international consensus.
For the first time in two years, the people of Yemen
have been put first, and we commend all the parties
for taking that important step. We recognize their
leadership and we endorse the agreements they have
reached, but Mr. Griffiths' cautions about it being a
humanitarian stopgap are very well taken.

I want to refer now to what Mr. Lowcock said about
the humanitarian situation on the ground. It is a very
sobering reminder of the human consequences still at
stake and of how many starving, sick and desperate
people remain in the most vulnerable of situations. We
therefore have no time to lose. As Mr. Lowcock said,
we need to bring about tangible improvements for the
people of Yemen, and we need to do that as swiftly as
we can.

Ithank the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
for agreeing to hold a pledging conference. Mr. Lowcock
set out an update on his five asks and refined them. We
support that. As the penholder, the United Kingdom
will resume work on the draft resolution with all of our
colleagues. We plan to endorse the agreements reached,
support their implementation and set out urgent next
steps. As requested, we will want to address the
monitoring requirements with colleagues. We welcome
the news about General Cammaert. That is an extremely
good step forward. We understand the importance
of monitoring compliance and of the United Nations
having a leading role in supporting the ports. We
hope to be able to work expeditiously with colleagues
to bring about a draft resolution that will give the
firmest possible support what has been achieved so far
and provide Mr. Griffiths and the parties with a solid
foundation as they move towards the end of January
agreement and framework. We wish him the best of
luck with that.

It is vital that the parties that have made such good
strides thus far continue to act in good faith and take
urgent steps to fully implement those agreements. I
would ask all colleagues on the Council to join me in
pledging that the Council will do its very best to stay
united and to work tirelessly, together with partners
throughout the United Nations membership, to support
What has been achieved and advance the work to the
desperately needed next stage.

