Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for your congratulations.
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you on three
accounts - first, on the way you and Argentina are
conducting the presidency of the Security Council for this
month; secondly, for organizing this debate; and, lastly,
for the very useful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
that you have provided us with. I also want to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, for their briefings.

I will make a brief summary of the statement that
I have circulated in writing. As mentioned, Spain was
recently elected to occupy a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council. During our campaign, we presented
a series of documents that reflected what Spain would
be ready to do if it became a member of the Council.
That included a document entitled "Responsibility and
Transparency".

What is our understanding of responsibility? It is
very simple. We understand responsibility to be the
exercise by the Security Council of its functions in a
manner that adequately represents the membership of
the General Assembly. We understand that approach in
the sense of enhancing the effectiveness of the Council.
That is why, when we become a non-permanent member
of the Council, beginning in the month of January, we
will get to work to try to improve the working methods
of the Council, as we are discussing today.

With regard to transparency, our understanding
is twofold. First, we need to be capable of adequately
taking into account the concerns and sensibilities of the
Members of the Organization, and, secondly, we need
to keep them abreast of current issues being debated
by the Council. In other words, we have to avoid the
Council becoming a hermetic body, which was the
case several years ago. However, not all the news is
negative. Quite to the contrary, I think the Council has
significantly improved its working methods in the past
decade, particularly in the past year.

I would like to especially note three specific
advances. The first is the wrap-up debate conducted in
the Council at the end of each month's presidency. The
second, which is even more important, is the interactive
debate that occurs at the end of each presidency, and
the third would be the three presidential notes that were
adopted in this past year.

Madam President, you have asked us to focus on
some very specific aspects ofthe working methods. The
first deals with due process with regard to sanctions, and
the second with follow-up to referrals from the Security
Council to the International Criminal Court. With
regard to the procedural guarantees for the sanctions
regimes, I have to say that it is very important to re-read
and re-examine the very interesting recommendations
that the Office of the Ombudsperson has drawn up. I
also agree with many of the speakers who have said
that it would be important to expand the mandate
of the Ombudsperson, first on a case-by-case basis
and then perhaps on a more general basis. Generally
speaking, I endorse the very profound and interesting
statement made by the representative of Norway. The
second point on which we were asked to comment is the
follow-up to referrals by the Security Council of cases
to the International Criminal Court. In that regard, I
would like to say that it would be interesting to set up
a mechanism to ensure interaction with the Court in
line with the commitment that the Council adopted in
February 2013.

