Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is my pleasure to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. I wish you and the dear People's Republic of China every success in your tasks. I also thank you for the invitation to participate in this meeting, at which we are discussing one of today's most important issues pertaining to international peace and security, namely, countering terrorism and extremism in Africa. I further commend the tireless efforts undertaken by the Government of China to address the current global health threat, and express solidarity with all countries and peoples facing this challenge with determination and persistence. In addition, I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United Nations, and Assistant Secretary-General Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for their valuable briefings. The issue of terrorism and extremism in Africa is a very detailed and complex one. Egypt, as an African State, and given its geographical proximity to the most unstable areas on the continent, has in-depth knowledge of the nature of the terrorist threat and its causes, as well as the means to address it on our beloved African continent. There is no doubt that the threat of terrorism has reached many parts of the continent, from east to west, in addition to the Sahel, North Africa and Libya. However, there are other areas as well, but to save time I will focus in my statement on two main elements: the terrorist threat in the Sahel and the terrorist threat in Libya. Both threats are closely related. I will also outline Egypt's efforts to address these threats. With regard to the terrorist threat in the Sahel region, Egypt has closely followed the development of movements that have carried out extremist and terrorist activities in the Sahel for many years. These movements have exploited the economic, social and political circumstances in sisterly nations in order to emerge, recruit youth and terrorize the people with a view to achieving primarily political objectives. The weak institutional context in certain States of the region has allowed some of those terrorist organizations and organized crime groups to emerge, proliferate and gain strength. There are close links between organized-crime groups and terrorist and extremist organizations, whereby they fuel each other. We see terrorist organizations in the Sahel region, for example, benefiting financially from various forms of organized crime, such as the traffic in drugs and human trafficking, by collecting fees from criminal terrorist groups. This helps those groups to increase their capacities and hence the vicious circle between terrorism and crime continues indefinitely. In this regard, Egypt supports all United Nations and regional efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of terrorism and extremism in the Sahel region. We also support all efforts to achieve security and enforce the law in the States of the region, particularly the efforts of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. Egypt is also providing every possible support to the States of the region to increase their capacities to address this threat at many levels, such as by countering extremist thought by sending enlightened religious leaders to promote the real values of religion, or through peacebuilding efforts. Egypt has hosted a workshop focused on the challenges to peacebuilding in the Sahel, and is also host to the African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development, on which we rely heavily in our efforts to build peace in the States of the region and to increase States' capacity to counter terrorism. Egypt believes in the role of the strong States in countering terrorism through their national institutions, which are capable of imposing and implementing law and security. Accordingly, Egypt has granted 1,000 training scholarships in recent years to personnel from the Sahel and Saharan States. We also continue to provide specialized training courses for personnel from the States of the region. This is an effort that we hope will be developed in the coming period through assistance from the Sahel-Saharan Anti-Terrorism Center, hosted by Egypt. In Libya, Egypt believes that the recent terrorist threat requires the international community and the Security Council to take a decisive stance, as it seriously threatens not only United Nations efforts to achieve peace and stability in the countries concerned but also regional and international peace and security. In this regard, Egypt expresses its deep concern at the fact that some States are recruiting and transferring foreign terrorist fighters from Syria to Libya. This is an overt and explicit violation of a number of Security Council resolutions on Libya and counter-terrorism, adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This violation also undermines efforts to achieve peace in Libya following the Berlin conference. In that regard, I would like to refer to the hundreds of Da'esh and Al-Qaida terrorist fighters being transferred from Idlib, Syria, to Libya in order to join the armed militias that are active in areas controlled by the reconciliation Government in Libya. They receive direct and overt logistical support and large amounts of money in a manner detailed in my statement to the Council today. It is unbelievable that this blatant violation of international law and Security Council resolutions is taking place openly and before the eyes of all, as stated explicitly in the Security Council's meetings on Libya and as detailed and documented in the twenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) (S/2020/53). Some of those terrorists had been transferred earlier to the Sahel States and European countries as well. They will use the same methods to achieve the same objectives, thereby creating long-term problems for the international community. That would further complicate already complex issues. In that regard, Egypt calls on the Security Council to uphold its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security by ensuring accountability for violations ofrelevant Security Council resolutions, especially with regard to paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 2396 (2017), on the prevention of themovement of terrorists and the necessary notifications to make in that regard. Unfortunately, those obligations are not being implemented. No respect is being shown for the Council or its resolutions. Resolutions alone are not enough. Resolutions are not the solution. However, implementation and accountability are necessary. Egypt notes that the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities has recently included Da'esh of Libya, Da'esh of West Africa and Da'esh of the Greater Sahara in the sanctions list. We stress the importance of the terms outlined in paragraph 3 of resolution 2253 (2015), on the criteria for adding organizations and individuals effectively linked to Da'esh and Al-Qaida on a sanctions list, following coordination with the relevant States. Egypt also takes note of resolution 2462 (2019), on countering the financing of terrorism, as well as resolution 2482 (2019) on the linkage between terrorism and organized crime. We call on the Council to pursue its efforts to enforce its resolutions on combating terrorism, in particular resolution 2396 (2017), on preventing the movement of terrorists and foreign terrorist fighters. In conclusion, I would like to mention that I am honoured to co-facilitate the seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, together with my friend His Excellency the Ambassador of Spain. The review process is scheduled to hold its first informal consultations with the Member States on 16 March. We hope that, together, we will be able through the current review to reach a new international consensus on the review resolution in a manner commensurate with the terrorist activities that have taken place since the last review in 2018. That consensus would underline the will and determination of the States to decisively counter terrorism with a view to achieving a world that is more stable and secure. That is an important message for the United Nations to send this year, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of our international Organization.
