The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Australia, Canada, Liberia,
New Zealand, the Netherlands, Sierra Leone, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe), Mr. Antonio
(Angola) and Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania) took seats at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, requesting
that the Security Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Lila H. Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent
Observer of the African Union.

It is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana to take a seat
at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/447, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Croatia, France, Italy, Liberia, New Zealand,
the Netherlands, Sierra Leone, the United Kingdom of
2
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I wish to draw members' attention to document
8/2008/452, which contains the text of a letter dated
10 July 2008 from the Permanent Observer of the
African Union, transmitting the African Union
resolution on Zimbabwe.

I shall now give the floor to the representative of
Zimbabwe.


