Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks China for
convening this timely open debate.

Let me start by condemning the recent killing of
United Nations peacekeepers from Malawi, Mali and
Tanzania in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic. Our thoughts and prayers
are with the families of those peacekeepers.

We also thank the Secretary-General and the
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security for their valuable comments.

Ever since the Asian-African Conference in
Bandung over six decades ago, in 1955, Indonesia
and Africa have worked together to achieve equality
among all nations and spur decolonization. Indonesia
remains committed to standing shoulder to shoulder
with Africa. We initiated the New Asian-African
Strategic Partnership in 2005 to accelerate cooperation
in politics, the economy, society and culture. The
Partnership was reinvigorated in 2015, and it is currently
manifested in numerous multifaceted support projects
between Indonesia and Africa. At the same time, we
are undertaking South-South and triangular projects
and programmes whereby peace can be achieved
through development, since we believe in the concept
of sustaining peace.

Peace and security in Africa are also among
Indonesia's top priorities. That is being realized, among
others, through Indonesia's contribution to eight United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the African region,
in which nearly 1,400 Indonesian troops and police are
participating. We are in the final stages of sending an
additional 1,000 Indonesian peacekeepers to our recent
rapidly deployable battalion for deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to our formed
police unit to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. As a strong
believer in the important role of female peacekeepers,
particularly in winning over the hearts and minds of
host communities, those two Indonesian contingents
will also include a number of female personnel. We will
continue to play a greater role in helping sustain peace
efforts in Africa.

We warmly welcome various positive developments
in several African countries that are illustrated, inter
alia, by the closure of United Nations missions or the
adjustment of mission mandates. The closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia is certainly a clear
example of such a development. I must say that I am
happy, as the Ambassador of Indonesia to the United
Nations, to see that three of our peacekeepers were
among the last to leave Liberia after honourable service
to Blue Helmet contingents and the people of Liberia.
I am happy to see that the United Nations has been
successful in that regard. The termination of United
Nations sanctions against Eritrea last week was also
another positive development that needs to be nurtured.

Notwithstanding laudable advancements on the
continent, many African countries confront serious
conflict and governance issues. The work of the
African Union - as a strong and principled force for
dialogue, peaceful resolution and cordial relations, with
the promotion of constitutionalism, democracy, human
rights and State building - is crucial. It is also welcome
that the AU and United Nations are increasingly
working better together. As vital as national ownership
by African countries is, a robust partnership among
them and the United Nations, along with other partners,
to support peace and security on the continent, is
essential. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
worthy intention expressed by the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council to formulate
common positions and recommendations on conflict
areas in Africa.

Indonesia fully supports the AU Agenda 2063, with
its key pillar ofa conflict-free Africa, as well as the five
thematic priorities of the AU road map 2016-2020. The
AU master road map of practical steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020 is also laudable. A successful
outcome ofthose will significantly elevate people's well-
being. Those mechanisms need to be fully supported by
all relevant regional and international actors.

Secondly, the question of how to strengthen peace
and security in Africa cannot be answered without
spelling out how the needed financial support will
be provided. The commitment of African leaders to
financing 25 per cent of the costs of AU peace support
operations is a concrete sign of their resolve. It should
be responded to befittingly. Indonesia is pleased
that resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and the
subsequent report of the Secretary-General on options
for authorization and support for AU peace support
operations (S/2017/454) underlined, among other
things, the need for adequate, sustainable, flexible
and predictable financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. We
need to act upon that.

Responding to the proposals of the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the Secretary-
General's report pointed to five financial models
and various decision-making options to support AU-
initiated peace support operations. Recognizing that
each situation may warrant its own particular solution,
we expect that the collective wisdom of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee and the Security Council will lead to a
cogent answer.

Thirdly, and as a final point, we should also
innovatively explore the utilization of the near
universal endorsement for the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to fill gaps in bolstering
support for peacekeeping missions in Africa. All
stakeholders should consider how to actualize their
commitments under the Declaration in the specific
contexts of peacekeeping missions in Africa.

To conclude, Indonesia once again fully stands
behind the United Nations-AU partnership to sustain
peace, particularly by improving peacekeeping
operations. We will continue to work actively in United
Nations and non-United Nations forums to ensure that
robust support is extended to Africa.

