Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General and all our briefers for their remarks
today. We welcome this chance to discuss the Central
Asian region. It is a part of the world that we hear too
rarely about in the Chamber, although the region faces
many unique challenges that directly affect our core
business, namely, international peace and security.
They are challenges that represent the complex history
and geography of the region. Unresolved border disputes
and tension over access to water and other resources
are having an impact on the security and prosperity of
local communities. We therefore welcome the recent
opportunities for discussions to improve relations
between a number of countries in the region on those
important issues.

Environmental issues are also a major regional
challenge, many of them legacies of the region's
history. And climate change is emerging as a major new
risk factor. As a result, the region needs international
support to improve its resource management, especially
of water, and to adapt to the damage that has already
been done. We are pleased to be participating in that.

In parts of the reion those challenges include
strengthening respect for human rights and the rule
of law, promoting sustainable development, tackling
corruption and removing restrictive State controls on
economic and political life. There have been some
improvements on those issues, and that is welcome, but
the speed and extent of progress is not what the people
in the region would expect - or, indeed, deserve.
The c hallenges are clear, and so too are the regional
opportunities and potential. To help realize that
potential, the region can look to regional organizations
and to the United Nations.

Therefore, we strongly support cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
on the challenges facing Central Asia. For the United
Kingdom, such cooperation must be consistent with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
all applicable conventions, covenants and treaties. And
it must uphold United Nations principles, particularly
respect for human rights and universal freedoms. There
are a number of regional and subregional organizations
that are already doing valuable work in Central Asia
to help address those shared challenges. Let me share
three examples.

First, as mentioned by Vice-Chair Ivanov, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) works on a wide range ofsecurity-related issues,
including arms control, confidence- and security-
building measures, human rights and democratization
and economic and environmental issues. The OSCE's
capacity-building activities on preventing and
countering radicalization and terrorism are particularly
welcome, and they are delivered in a manner consistent
with international and OSCE commitments on human
rights. We also welcome the OSCE's work on women's
empowerment, judicial and legislative reform, media
development and conflict prevention, including in
relation to the issue of water management, which I
mentioned earlier.

As a second example, the Council of Europe is
working positively with the region. The Council of
Europe's neighbourhood policy programme with
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan was designed to facilitate
the political transition to democracy, help promote
good governance and reinforce the regional work of
the Council of Europe in combating cross-border and
global threats.

My final example is the European Union (EU).
The EU remains committed to a strong and durable
relationship with the five Central Asian States and
to reinforcing cooperation on security and stability,
including the sustainable management of natural
resources. The EU's approach emphasizes the
fundamental importance of democratization, respect
for human rights and the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. The United Kingdom strongly supports
the work of the EU, including that of its Special
Representative for Central Asia, Mr. Peter Burian, in
taking that forward.

I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. It is well timed,
just two and a half months ahead of Kazakhstanjoining
the Council. The Council will be richer for Kazakhstan's
regional insight. We look forward to working closely
together on this issue and many others next year.

