Mr. Menkerios: Since Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe briefed the Security
Council on 14 October, political efforts towards a
negotiated two-State solution have reached a deep and
worrying impasse, even as security and economic
efforts have continued on the ground.

Members of the Council will recall the Quartet's
support for President Obama's efforts to relaunch
negotiations. In furtherance of those efforts, United
States Secretary of State Clinton visited the region
between 31 October and 4 November and President
Obama met Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu in
Washington, DC, on 9 November. However, it has not
yet proven possible to resume negotiations.

In the absence of mutual commitments to fully
implement Road Map obligations and agreed terms of
reference for negotiations, an impasse has developed
that must be overcome. A key challenge has arisen
from the Israeli Government's proposal to restrain
rather than freeze settlement activity. Such restraint
would not conform to Road Map requirements and
would reportedly not apply at all in occupied East
Jerusalem. The importance of this issue was
underscored on 17 November when a Government
planning commission approved the addition of 900
2

housing units to significantly expand the settlement of
Gilo on the southern outskirts of occupied East
Jerusalem. Furthermore, there were 17 house
demolitions carried out in East Jerusalem during the
reporting period, including 7 over a two-day period on
17 and 18 November, leading to the total displacement
of 99 Palestinians, more than half of whom were
children.

The Secretary-General issued a statement
deploring Israel's settlement activity. He reiterated that
settlements were illegal, called on Israel to implement
its Road Map commitments, and underlined that such
actions undermine efforts for peace and cast doubt on
the viability of the two-State solution. The Secretary-
General separately expressed his dismay at the
continuation of demolitions and evictions in Jerusalem.
Basing their efforts based on well-known Quartet
positions, the Quartet envoys are actively engaged on
those issues.

On 5 November, President Abbas expressed his
deep frustration at the political impasse in a televised
speech. He stated that he had no desire to nominate
himself in the forthcoming presidential elections and
indicated that there were other steps he would take in
due course. The Secretary-General has been in contact
with President Abbas to underline his support for his
leadership.

Earlier, on 23 October, in accordance with the
Palestinian Basic Law, President Abbas issued a decree
calling for presidential and legislative elections to be
held on 24 January 2010, at the end of the four-year
term of the Palestinian Legislative Council. However,
on 28 October, Hamas declared that, in the absence of
an intra-Palestinian reconciliation accord, it would not
allow elections to be held in Gaza, and made threats
against anyone planning to be involved in electoral
preparations.

On 3 November, Hamas shut down the Gaza
offices of the independent Central Elections
Commission. The Commission announced on
12 November that holding elections on 24 January 2010
would no longer be possible. This is deeply regrettable.
We hope that it will be possible in the future to hold
free and fair elections throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.

Throughout this period, Egypt's efforts to secure
factional agreement on its proposed reconciliation
package continued. This package envisages elections in
09-6182]
June 2010. Fatah signed the latest Egyptian proposal
on 12 October, while Hamas has so far failed to do so.
This, too, is regrettable. We continue to support
Egypt's efforts.

The political uncertainty on the Palestinian side
has not interrupted continued Palestinian efforts to
meet Road Map commitments, pursue economic and
security cooperation, and build institutions for
statehood. For instance, the Palestinian Authority
security forces dismantled two unexploded devices
near Jenin on 14 and 18 October. On 15 October, they
handed over some 20 pipe bombs confiscated in Nablus
to the Israel Defense Forces, which detonated them in a
controlled manner. We continue to urge the Palestinian
Authority to maintain its efforts to improve law and
order, fight extremism and end incitement.

In a positive development with significant
economic benefits for the West Bank, on 10 November
the new Wataniya telecommunications company
announced the launch of its commercial services in the
West Bank, although the bandwidth required has yet to
be released. Also on 10 November, the Jalameh
crossing near Jenin was opened for Arab Israelis to
cross by vehicle, allowing them to travel to Jenin, thus
supporting local businesses and strengthening critical
linkages between the West Bank and Israel.

Predictable and free movement and access both
within the West Bank and between the West Bank and
Israel has consistently been identified as an important
factor for sustained economic development. There are
currently 579 movement obstacles in the West Bank,
down from 592 in September.

Despite those positive steps, financial challenges
remain. As we approach the year's end, the overall
projected Palestinian Authority budget deficit for 2009
is estimated at $1.5 billion, for which there is a
projected financing gap estimated at $350 million.
Although some donor funding is anticipated, without
additional support, the Palestinian Authority is likely to
be forced to resort to further commercial borrowing to
meet its obligations. This will place additional pressure
on fiscal sustainability in the future.

Tensions have continued from incidents involving
Palestinians, Israeli security forces and settlers across
the West Bank. During the reporting period, which
coincided with the olive harvesting season, there were
45 recorded instances of Israeli settler attacks on
Palestinians and olive trees, leading to 24 Palestinian
09-61821

injuries. On 12 November, an Israeli settler was indicted
by an Israeli court for the murder of two Palestinians 12
years ago and other alleged politically motivated attacks.
There were 26 incidents involving Palestinian violence
towards Israeli settlers, in which seven settlers were
injured. In addition to continued settlement activity, no
steps were taken in the reporting period to remove
unauthorized outposts erected since March 2001.

During this reporting period, 73 Palestinians were
injured and over 300 arrested during Israeli raids in the
West Bank, representing an increase from the previous
reporting period. Clashes took place on an almost daily
basis around the Qalandiya checkpoint between East
Jerusalem and Ramallah, where an Israeli security
guard sustained moderate injuries after being stabbed
by a Palestinian woman on 25 October. We note that
seven Hamas-affiliated members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council, including the mayor of Jenin,
were released by Israel on 1 and 2 November.

The situation in occupied East Jerusalem
underscores the importance of parties refraining from
provocations or incitement. In this context, in addition
to continued settlement expansion and to the house
demolitions in East Jerusalem I have already
mentioned, armed settlers attempted on 30 October to
take over a Palestinian house in East Jerusalem, leaving
four Palestinians injured. On 3 November, a group of
armed Israeli settlers escorted by Israeli security forces
entered and took control of a Palestinian home in East
Jerusalem, claiming legal ownership of the property.

There were renewed confrontations on 25 October
around Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount between Israeli
security forces and Palestinians who were throwing
stones. The clashes left 24 Palestinians and nine Israeli
security personnel injured. Twenty-one Palestinians
were arrested. We commend the efforts of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in lowering tensions.
We remind the Council that Palestinian institutions in
East Jerusalem remain closed by Israeli order, contrary
to Israel's Road Map obligations.

I now turn to Gaza. It is more than 10 months
since the conclusion of Operation Cast Lead, but key
elements of Security Council resolution 1860 (2009)
are yet to be fulfilled. We remain worried about the
longer-term consequences of the blockade of the Gaza
Strip, particularly in terms of deteriorating public
infrastructure, environmental degradation and the
destruction of livelihoods. During the reporting period,
3
imported truckloads into Gaza mostly consisted of food
items and hygiene products, and there were no exports.

To cope with immediate needs, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is finalizing a
winter response plan, representing the bare minimum
required to address the most urgent humanitarian needs
for winter, focusing on fuel requirements for the
electricity plant; emergency infrastructure items such
as sheeting, glass and roof tiles for repairs to houses,
schools and clinics; and immediate water and sanitation
material, such as water pumps. Full Israeli cooperation
will be required to secure the urgent entry of these
items.

The Israeli Government has indicated a readiness
to facilitate water and sanitation projects. Two
desalination units for UNICEF are currently being
installed in the Gaza Strip after their entry was
approved, but no materials have yet entered Gaza for
three other projects whose approval was reported in
previous briefings. The United Nations is compiling a
comprehensive list of both urgent and long-term water
and sanitation needs, along with material required,
which will be presented to the Israeli Government in
response to its stated willingness to work in a
comprehensive and systematic manner on water and
sanitation.

Beyond immediate humanitarian needs and the
water and sanitation sector, I regret to inform the
Security Council that the United Nations has not yet
received a satisfactory response from the Israeli
Government to the proposal, put forward in May, to
complete $77 million-worth of stalled projects of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Development Programme in the area of housing units
and school and health facilities. The United Nations
has left no stone unturned in seeking approval of this
package in extensive consultations with the Israeli
authorities, and is confident of its capacity to ensure
the integrity of programming. It is completely
unacceptable that no meaningful progress has been
made in kick-starting United Nations civilian
construction activities essential to the well-being and
recovery of a war- and blockade-affected population,
half of whom are children.

According to Israeli Government officials, arms
continued to be smuggled and increased-capability
rockets have been test-fired from the Gaza Strip,
including rockets with a 60-kilometre range capable of
reaching Tel Aviv. Egyptian efforts to counter
smuggling of such materiel into the Strip have
continued. During the reporting period, 12 rockets and
mortars were fired from Gaza into southern Israel.
There were no Israeli casualties. Israel conducted 19
incursions and nine air strikes on the Strip, which left
one Palestinian child dead and 22 Palestinians injured.
Five Palestinians are reported to have been killed and
22 injured in accidents involving the collapse of
tunnels between Gaza and Egypt.

Within Gaza, on 9 November, Hamas closed down
the International Federation of Journalists and public
assembly remains severely restricted. On a positive note,
practical cooperation between the Palestinian Authority
Ministry of Waqf and Hamas in Gaza has so far allowed
2,500 pilgrims to leave Gaza to perform the pilgrimage.
An immediate concern is that approximately 750
students in Gaza have been unable to leave the Strip in
pursuit of higher education opportunities abroad and
are now at imminent risk of losing their places at
university, tuition deposits and visas.

Efforts continue to secure the release of Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit, along with a number of the more
than 9,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. The
Secretary-General has continued to reiterate his call for
Corporal Shalit's release. Likewise, he has underscored
the importance of the release of Palestinian prisoners,
as emphasized by President Abbas.

On 5 November, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 64/10, entitled "Follow-up to the report of
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict". In accordance with the request contained in
the resolution, the Secretary-General transmitted the
report of the Fact-Finding Mission to the Security
Council on 11 November.

Regarding comprehensive regional peace, during
the reporting period both the Israeli and Syrian
leaderships were engaged through third parties in
efforts to explore prospects for making progress.
However, there have been no concrete developments in
this regard. On 15 October, two Syrian prisoners from
the occupied Golan were released by Israel. On the
ground, the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
remained quiet during the reporting period, although
Israeli settlement activity continues.

On 9 November, President Sleiman and Prime
Minister-designate Saad Hariri signed the decree
09-6182]
forming Lebanon's seventieth Government, five
months after the parliamentary elections of 7 June. The
Secretary-General welcomed the formation of a
national unity Government and expressed his hope that
Lebanese political leaders would continue to work
steadfastly in the spirit of unity, dialogue and
cooperation. A ministerial statement is yet to be agreed
upon, after which Parliament is expected to express
confidence in the new Government and its programme.
The United Nations looks forward to working with the
new Government to implement Security Council
resolutions and to address the substantive challenges
facing Lebanon.

Since the briefing made to the Council on the
report (S/2009/566) on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), the situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has
remained quiet. However, air violations have continued
on an almost daily basis.

Last month, Mr. Pascoe reminded the Security
Council (see S/PV.6201) that, without a credible
political horizon - including commitments made,
monitored and kept, and a calling to account when
obligations are breached - forces of violence, tension
and extremism on both sides will fill the vacuum. We
now face the very real danger of such a vacuum, with
no Israeli-Palestinian negotiations under way, no
agreed terms of reference for such negotiations and no
framework in place to ensure the implementation of
Road Map obligations, as demonstrated by the
incidents reported on during this period.
09-61821

The decision of President Abbas not to seek a
new term as Palestinian President, in a context of
uncertainty over both elections and Palestinian unity,
reflects a worrying assessment, from a leader
unquestionably devoted to peace, that the political
process lacks sufficient content and credibility at this
time. This is a loud and clear wake-up call. If we
cannot move decisively forward to a final status
agreement, we risk sliding backwards, with both the
Palestinian Authority and the two-State solution itself
imperilled.

Together with Quartet partners, the Secretary-
General remains active in seeking a clear strategy on
the way forward. He believes that this requires
immediate actions on the ground to strengthen the
process, a reaffirmation of Road Map requirements and
the need for their implementation, and clear terms of
reference for negotiations on all core issues that are
grounded in the resolutions of the Council and
agreements reached between the parties. It is vital at
this juncture that the international community take a
clear and united position.

