Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I wish to thank you and congratulate you, Sir,
for having organized this meeting on Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It comes on the heels of the rich, long
and intense debate we had on 24 and 30 September, on
justice and the rule of law and the role of the United
Nations.

Today's debate provides us with the opportunity
to reflect - deeply, I hope - on the efforts of the
international community to establish normality in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We were pleased to learn
from Lord Paddy Ashdown this morning that Bosnia
and Herzegovina is the first Balkan country today to
have met the prerequisites of a state of law 4 the
separation of powers and judicial independence, in
particular. We welcome that.
In that connection, I would like to express my
delegation's full appreciation to Lord Ashdown, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. He has done
outstanding work. I also wish to express appreciation
for the work done by Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the ICTY, and to thank him for his detailed briefing.

After having heard the statements made by
eminent members, I will restrict myself to a few
comments. The report submitted by Lord Ashdown
highlights significant and praiseworthy progress that
has been made in a relatively short period of time -
promoting jobs, building a viable economic and
administrative infrastructure and, most important, the
establishment of a State of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Those achievements contribute
decisively to the improvement of the political
panorama and to rationalizing the security and defence
systems of the country, as well as to normalizing its
relations with its neighbours. For all those very
meritorious reasons, my delegation wishes to reiterate
once again its confidence in the activities of the High
Representative.

It goes without saying that, in order to be lasting
and effective, such activities must be based on a solid
legal foundation, without which all our efforts will
remain fragile.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
justice aspect. We have followed, with great interest,
the observations made by Judge Meron and the
comments contained in the report submitted by
Lord Ashdown on the subject. The Completion
Strategy by 2010, defined by the ICTY Judge in June
2002, and the possibility of sending some cases before
national jurisdictions, which the Council supported, is
relevant now more than ever.

Success of the de-localization process, which will
require acceleration of various processes, depends, in
my delegation's View, on three conditions that are
essential to us. The first is the simultaneous
commitment and sustained efforts of the Council, the
international community and all parties concerned. The
second is the efficient implementation by the Tribunal
of the strategy defined to ensure such completion. The
last is the harmonious functioning of the special War
Crimes Chambers.

We are convinced that reforming the judicial
system, particularly the establishment of the special
War Crimes Chambers, responsible, among other
things, for supplementing the work of the ICTY, will
make it possible to contribute solutions for concerns
related to the Completion Strategy.

To that end, my delegation welcomes certain
initiatives: the establishment within the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Tribunal of a criminal division, the War
Crimes Chambers and a War Crimes Department in the
Prosecutor's Office; the amendment of the law setting
the course of judicial training; the elaboration of the
Criminal Code in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
24 January 2003 and its entry into force on 1 March
2003; the entry into service of new judges of the
Prosecutors Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina; the
recruitment of special prosecutors for the ICTY; and
the special division in the Office of the Prosecutor for
Bosnia and Herzegovina of judges and international
prosecutors; and the establishment of the Anti-Crime
and Corruption Unit. Those are important factors that
my delegation welcomes. We also appreciate the
cooperation that the judicial system of Bosnia and
Herzegovina enjoys with numerous institutions.

Cameroon considers that the criteria and the
terms of cooperation between the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the special War Crimes Chamber must be clearly
defined. While the foundation of this delocalization
process has been determined, we nonetheless would be
pleased to increasingly get more information
concerning this. We also would like to know what
strategies have been envisaged to reconcile the
requirements of justice and those of national
reconciliation, particularly with regards to a domestic
tribunal.

By way of conclusion, my delegation wishes to
reiterate its support of the request made by the High
Representative of the Secretary-General and by the
President of the ICTY that the necessary significant
resources be allocated with a view to enabling efficient
implementation of the judicial delocalization process
and the reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

