Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank the President of the Security Council,
Ambassador Wang, for having convened this open
meeting to consider the situation in Haiti. We have
listened attentively and with much appreciation to the
statements made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Jamaica and Bahamas, who shared with us the View of
the member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) in the search for a peaceful solution to
the crisis besetting that fraternal country.

To those expressions we can add the continental
appeal set out this morning by the Organization of
American States (OAS), urging the Security Council of
the United Nations to take the necessary and
appropriate steps to restore peace to Haiti and security
to the people. My country was an active promoter of
this appeal from the regional organization, with the
purpose of ensuring that it had the greatest possible
resonance in the Security Council. On the basis of that
continental consensus, and in light of the gravity of the
Haitian crisis, Mexico reiterates its support for the
mediation initiative by CARICOM. countries and also
expresses its sternest condemnation of violence and
calls for its immediate cessation.

The two priorities in the current situation are
absolute respect for human rights and facilitating the
work of international agencies involved in
humanitarian assistance and protection of the civilian
population. Mexico reiterates its solidarity with the
Haitian people. In this connection my country is in
contact with other Governments in the region and with
the Group of Friends to study possible joint measures.

In light of the gravity of the crisis and the
possibility of a violent takeover, Mexico believes it
necessary to consider confidence-building measures, to
secure support from financial institutions and to weigh
the dispatching of a multinational force, mandated by
the United Nations, to contribute to the pacification of
Haiti. We consider that a return to dialogue and
negotiation acceptable to all actors is a matter of
urgency to avoid further bloodshed and the spillover of
the humanitarian crisis to neighbouring countries. We
support a political solution that makes room for all
opinions and forces in the country to promote national
unity. We appeal to the opposition to reconsider, with a
sense of responsibility and urgency, the offers of
international mediation that have been put forward.

Mexico emphasizes that it is important that there
be a presidential statement at the conclusion of this
debate. We consider that that statement should, in and
of itself, be an initial tool to hasten and facilitate the
immediate cessation of violence and the start of
political negotiations. We trust that this message from
the United Nations would be heeded by the Haitians so
that order, security and institutional life can be restored
without delay.

It is still possible to reach a peaceful solution to
the conflict. In this connection we call upon the
Secretary-General to deploy the necessary media forces
to ensure that the presidential statement is clearly heard
by the entire Haitian society. Furthermore, we support
the intention of the Secretary-General to name a
Special Adviser for Haiti.

The gravity of this crisis demands a study of the
mandate and actions that could determine the Council's
activities. In our opinion, the mandate should have five
components: first, the protection of the civilian
population; secondly, the distribution of humanitarian
assistance; thirdly, to contribute to the restoration of
order and the cessation of violence; fourthly, to assist
in disarmament; and lastly, to guarantee any political
agreements reached by the Haitian people.

We are sure that members of the Security Council
will take into account the views that have been
expressed this afternoon when it adopts a decision.

