Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Madame President, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security and the
interdependence between security and development.

This is the second open debate on this topic
following the fruitful meeting in September last year,
at which the Council highlighted the need to address
the underlying causes of conflict and noted that peace
and security, development and human rights are
intrinsically interlinked. Indeed, as we have witnessed
in the past few years with the convergence of the
global financial crisis, the food crisis and the energy
crisis, insecurity and conflict are often present in areas
that are lacking in development. Ways to address the
interdependence between security and development
should be faithfully pursued in a more comprehensive
and synergistic manner. This must include not only
problems that stem from the environment and food and
energy crises, but the overall issues of development as
well.

My delegation believes that underdevelopment is
the root cause of insecurity and conflict and that it
must continue to be engaged by a variety of
stakeholders including the Council, the General
Assembly , the United Nations Development
Programme, international financial institutions and
civil society. By harnessing our collective efforts on
elevating sustained, long-lasting development today,
we can, in effect, tackle the root causes of the security
conflicts of tomorrow. In this regard, the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) should continue to be the
centre of United Nations efforts, and United Nations
leadership should be further strengthened in ensuring
sustained political support and mobilizing collective
efforts towards the MDGs.

One tangible way that this could be pursued is to
actively focus on promoting employment opportunities
for youth. This would give many young people in
regions of insecurity another option beyond joining
armed groups, who are often the only providers of
immediate wages and sustenance. As such,
11-23198
development, and especially economic development,
must be pursued in a sustained, inclusive and equitable
manner. This is the best way to ensure that the world is
both more secure and peaceful for both current and
future generations.

In this connection, the Republic of Korea
believes that the Seoul Development Consensus for
Shared Growth, an integral part of the recent Group of
Twenty (G-20) Summit in Seoul, could be a helpful
guiding force as we strive to create a more secure
world. In this regard, we look forward to concrete
follow-up measures to the Seoul Consensus being
taken under the French leadership of the G-20 this
year

In May, another important international forum
focusing on development issues will be held, namely,
the fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries in Istanbul. We hope that steps
will be taken in the right direction with the preparatory
process of Conference, focusing on the overwhelming
vulnerabilities and situations of insecurity affecting the
development of least developed countries - those
living with extreme poverty, hunger and inequality.

Only in a stable security environment is sustained
development possible. In this regard, not only
peacekeeping but also preventative diplomacy and
peacebuilding activities can play an integral role in
buttressing the security environment in various
situations, with a view towards ensuring sustained
development.

Likewise, an essential goal of peacebuilding is to
provide a blueprint for the political and socio-economic
development of the recipient country in a post-conflict
situation. Each situation is different, however, and any
peacekeeping and/or peacebuilding activity must be
undertaken with early engagement, clear mandates and
tangible exit strategies. Economic and social
opportunities are also possible through various
peacebuilding initiatives, including the establishment of
good governance and the rule of law, and also through
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform activities. Such
integrated strategies in post-conflict situations can be
useful tools in bridging the gap from insecurity to
development.

The Republic of Korea has learned from its own
experience about the interlinked challenges of
development and security. During a period of extreme
45
insecurity, we suffered from crippling and
interconnected underdevelopment. However, with the
support of the United Nations and the international
community, Korea, once one of the world's poorest
countries, with a lower gross domestic product per
capita than many sub-Saharan African nations in the
early 1960s, was able to recover from the ashes of war
and successfully rebuild itself into a flourishing
democracy with a vibrant market-based economy
within just one generation. I sincerely hope that the
United Nations and Member States will work closely
together to turn the various ideas we have proposed
today into concrete action. For its part, the Republic of
the Korea will devote its utmost efforts to this end.

