Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council during its deliberations
on the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

I shall confine my remarks to the question of
progress in regard to negotiations between the Sudan
and South Sudan on the final status of Abyei. It is the
resolution of this issue above all else that would allow
for a timely exit by UNISFA from Abyei.

As Council members will recall, the African
Union High-level Panel, under the chairmanship of
President Mbeki, has considered this question and, in
2013, formulated a proposal to resolve the question
of the status of Abyei by means of a referendum. Its
proposal, including modalities for such a referendum,
was considered and then adopted by the African Union
Peace and Security Council in 2013. The Sudan opposed
the proposal and no further action has been taken to this
day. Indeed, in 2014 the Abyei file in each country was
transferred to the offices of President Omar Al-Bashir
and President Salva Kiir. Since then, notwithstanding
occasional meetings between the Presidents over the
past five years, the invitation to include Abyei on the
agenda of such meetings has been consistently declined
by the two principals.

The eruption of civil conflict in South Sudan in
2013 and again in 2016 has seen the issue of Abyei
relegated to the sidelines. The two countries' internal
predicaments have precluded a discussion on this
matter, not least because of the mutual recriminations
between them regarding allegations of their support for
the respective internal insurgencies in their countries.
South Sudan, in particular, was not in a position to
drive negotiations on this difficult topic, given the
imbalance of power between the two countries. The
prevailing tensions between the two countries impacted
down the chain of authority. The regularity and tone
of meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee
intended to deal with the interim administration of the
Abyei box reflected this combative approach. The Juba
delegation insisted that the Oversight Committee was
not empowered to deal with matters relating to the joint
administration of the territory.

We now believe that there is good reason to hope
that the parties' reluctance to deal with the final-status
issue and even the interim administration issues
will change. In the past few months, we have seen a
remarkable shift in the willingness of the States of
the Horn of Africa region to engage neighbours with
which they had long-held hostile relations or even
open conflict. The rapprochement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea has triggered if not the resolution of
disputes between the States of the region, then at least
a willingness to engage each other to seek solutions.
There is now pervasive peer pressure to deal with the
conflicts that beset the region, hold back its development
and economic integration, or exacerbate political
instability in the Horn of Africa. This shift is nowhere
better represented than by the efforts of Khatroum to
mediate an agreement between the competing parties
in the civil conflict in South Sudan.

Sudan has insisted that it is acting in the interests
of peace in the region and the building of good-
neighbourly relations with South Sudan. Its endeavours
have been publicly appreciated by Juba and the other
signatory parties of the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan. There is no doubt that the successful
mediation by the Sudan of the outstanding issues in
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
peace process has contributed to reducing tensions
between Juba and Khartoum. It is notable that part of
the agreement is concerned with building a concrete
modality of cooperation between the two countries
specifically on the rehabilitation of oil fields in Unity
state. In my engagements with the Governments of the
Sudan and of South Sudan, I have encouraged them to
extend their cooperation in the oil sector to intensified
engagements in other fields of mutual benefit. It also
seems that the reduction in intensity of both countries'
internal civil conflicts, particularly in South Sudan,
may enable consideration of a solution to this question
as well as the other matters covered in the mutually
agreed cooperation agreements.

The new mood has enabled eminent personalities
concerned with Abyei, including former Foreign
Minister Francis Deng, to generate an informal series
of discussions in Khatroum. Their aim is to identify a
road map that would rejuvenate cooperation between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya and and open a window
to discuss the final status of Abyei. It is the first time
since 2012, when the Presidents took responsibility
for handling the Abyei issue, that it has been possible
for the Abyei lobbyists in both countries to undertake
direct discussions on this sensitive matter.

The more positive posture between the two
countries has encouraged the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel to invite the two Foreign
Ministers, Deng Alor Kwol and Eldirdiri Mohamed
Ahmed, for discussions on Abyei's final status next
week. That meeting was intended to take place on
the sidelines of an extraordinary session of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism. Ipersonally engaged
the two Ministers of Foreign Affairs to assess their
willingness to engage on this issue and to confirm that
the timing for such a discussion was appropriate. They
were positive while being clear not to overpromise on
a successful outcome. We have just heard that both
Governments have now declined the offer to discuss it
on the margins of the Mechanism meeting scheduled
for 23 and 24 September, but this is most likely because
of the unavailability of the two Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, owing to their presence here in New York. I
remain hopeful, however, that such an engagement
will indeed take place. Even if it only serves to put the
issue of Abyei's final status on the agenda, it would be
a positive move.
Against that backdrop, on two related issues, I can
confirm first that, in regard to the Secretary-General's
proposal on UNISFA, I believe that the provision of
political depth to the UNISFA mission will enable it
to better manage the intercommunal relations in Abyei
and the adjacent border areas, pending a final solution.
Secondly, I can confirm that both the Sudan and South
Sudan acknowledge that UNISFA has indisputably
contributed to the maintenance of peace and stability in
the Area, including through intercommunal dialogue,
and that it has prevented a relapse into conflict in Abyei
and consequently between the two countries.

