Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. Let me assure you that we believe that the
Council will be successful under your wise and competent
guidance.
We would also like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Gambari of Nigeria, for the
excellent manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.

Slovenia wholeheartedly welcomes the conclusion,
at Dayton, of the Peace Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). We commend the
United States for its crucial role in the efforts to resolve
the crisis in the Balkans, and for the decisive contribution
to the peace process which has resulted in the initialling
of the Agreement for peace. We urge the parties to sign
the Peace Agreement and thus open the way to the
establishment of peace and stability.

In a statement made earlier today, the Foreign
Minister of Slovenia, Mr. Zoran Thaler, emphasized the
following:

"We hope that the Dayton Agreement will be
brought to life and will, as soon as possible, produce
practical effects which will put an end to four years
of bloodshed and devastation and will bring peace to
the crisis areas.

"Slovenia continues to insist that Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be preserved as a single State and
that its territorial integrity be respected.

"Slovenia wishes the situation in its vicinity to
stabilize and the life of people to be brought back to
normal in conditions of respect for territorial
integrity, internationally recognized borders and
human rights. Slovenia is also prepared to
contribute, to the best of its abilities, to the
stabilization of political, social and economic life in
the crisis areas."

Efforts now should be devoted to the establishment
of durable and real peace. Peace is not merely the
absence of war. It requires that the right steps be taken
throughout the process so that normal life is restored and
that justice prevails.

Two important measures among the series of steps
towards peace were adopted by the Security Council
today: first, the suspension of sanctions and, secondly, the
lifting of the arms embargo imposed by Security Council

 

resolution 713 (1991) more than four years ago. We are
confident that we shall have the opportunity in the Council
to address various issues related to the establishment of
peace, at the appropriate stages. On this occasion, we would
like to make a few comments on the resolutions the
Council has adopted.

Let me first address the resolution on the suspension
of sanctions (resolution I 022 ( I 995) ).

In the ninth preambular paragraph of that resolution,
the Security Council reiterates that

"the State formerly known as the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia has ceased to exist".

This is an important element of the resolution. It states
a basic fact and a basic principle, upon which practical
solutions can be sought with success.

The dissolution and extinction of the former Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has affected the disposition
of the assets of that former State, as is accurately
mentioned in the ninth preambular paragraph of the
resolution.

Obviously, with the suspension of sanctions, we are
about to enter an important stage in this matter. It is crucial
that this suspension does not apply to those frozen assets
that are the common property of the former State. These
assets are subject to succession by all successor States and
should accordingly be divided among them. Therefore, all
necessary measures should be taken to prevent the
unfreezing of these assets and their use to the benefit of
any single one of the successor States. This issue is
addressed more specifically in operative paragraphs 5 and
6 of the resolution on the suspension of sanctions.

Slovenia officially requests that the respective
authorities of all States Members of the United Nations
consider, first, all assets of the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), including
any of its subdivisions, as well as those of its agencies,
including the National Bank of Yugoslavia; and secondly,
the assets of the entities owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by the Government or any governmental agency
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), as assets on which the Republic of Slovenia,
as one of the successor States to the former Yugoslavia, has
a legal and legitimate claim.

In this context, we wish to stress that we agree with
the interpretation of paragraph 5 of the resolution
provided in the explanation of vote of the representative
of the United States.

We urge all States to consider these assets frozen, in
accordance with operative paragraph 5 of the resolution,
until a final resolution regarding the distribution of these
assets and liabilities is reached by the successor States.
Any unilateral disposal of the relevant funds will force
the Republic of Slovenia to take appropriate legal steps to
have any such transactions declared null and void.

Finally, I wish to stress that we disagree with, and
shall oppose, any interpretation that would limit the
meaning of the term "claims" - used in operative
paragraph 5 of the resolution - only to claims raised in
current legal proceedings. Such a limited interpretation
would harm those who are negotiating the issues of State
succession in good faith and could indeed have a very
negative impact on negotiations on the issue of State
succession in the future.

The second resolution addresses the issue of the
termination of the arms embargo imposed by Security
Council resolution 713 (1991) four years ago.

That embargo has been one of the least fortunate
measures taken by the Security Council. It was originally
imposed on the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which was then still in existence and a Member of the
United Nations. It was maintained after the dissolution of
that former State, without any consideration for the
specific situation of each of the successor States. It has
been an example of a measure that produces harmful
effects because of its indiscriminate and across-the-board
character. The time has now come for a radical change.

Slovenia welcomes the resolution on the termination
of the arms embargo. It is focused on the situation of
those successor States of the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia that are parties to the conflict and
signatories of the Peace Agreement. This is a wise
approach, and the concept of gradualness is correct in this
context. The link between the final lifting of the arms
embargo with respect to the signatories of the Peace
Agreement and the implementation of their arms control
agreement contained in Annex IE to the Peace
Agreement, is justified. We hope that these measures will
contribute to peace and stability and will strengthen
confidence among the parties to the Peace Agreement
reached at Dayton.

 

On this occasion I wish to reiterate that, as far as
Slovenia is concerned, the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 713 (1991) has been unjustified throughout.
Slovenia, an independent, sovereign State and a Member of
the United Nations, is at peace. We are at peace with
ourselves and with our neighbours. Slovenia has not been,
and is not, a party to any military conflict and has never
had a peace-keeping mission established on its territory.
Furthermore, Slovenia considers that the arms embargo
in question is rendered utterly obsolete in view of the
development of cooperation on security matters in Europe,
in which my country participates as a responsible partner.
Slovenia has participated in the Partnership for Peace from
the beginning and has developed an extensive network of
cooperation with most European and many other countries.
In these circumstances, the application of the arms embargo
represents an impediment to our international cooperation
and a totally unjustified limitation of our sovereignty.

Let me therefore, in conclusion, state the following
formally and on the record: Slovenia is satisfied that the
Security Council today adopted a resolution that is
terminating the arms embargo imposed by resolution
713 (1991), and we expect the immediate termination of the
arms embargo as far as Slovenia is concerned.

