Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Since this
is the first time I am addressing the Security Council this
month, I should like, Sir, to express to you our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council. I should like also to express my thanks and
appreciation to you for holding this important meeting on
a very important subject: the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Today we cannot but devote greater attention to the
suffering of unarmed civilians in situations of armed
conflict. Civilians are terrorized, brutalized, tortured, and
murdered at the hands of parties to conflicts, despite the
fact that the inadmissibility of attacking civilians is
enshrined in international humanitarian law and in human
rights law.

The situation calls for immediate and prompt action
that is not restricted to the agreements and rules
governing this issue but also extends to working towards
ensuring greater respect of these agreements and rules by
the parties to a conflict.

While we must deal with the root causes of armed
conflict in a drastic and comprehensive manner in order
to provide long-term protection for civilians through the
promotion of economic growth, the elimination of
poverty, the realization of sustainable development and
national reconciliation, we must also take immediate
measures to force the combatants to show greater respect
for the rights of civilians in armed conflict. Dealing with
any armed conflict in a comprehensive manner requires
a long period of time, during which civilians should not
be kept without protection.

At previous open meetings held by the Security
Council on the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, there was unanimous agreement on
condemning the targeting of civilians in armed conflict

 

and attacks against targets that are subject to the protection
of international law. At those meetings it was stressed that
it was of the utmost importance to implement appropriate
protective measures.

On 17 September 1999, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1265 (1999), which deals with two major aspects
of the problem. The first one relates to encouraging the
parties to a conflict to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law, in particular those contained in the Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 Additional Protocols.

The resolution also stresses the issue of responsibility,
so that the phenomenon of impunity can be dealt with,
thereby ensuring that those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and other serious violations of
international humanitarian law are brought to justice. It
stresses also that it is extremely important to guarantee
unhindered access of humanitarian assistance personnel to
civilians in armed conflict, and to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.

Here we would like to emphasize the importance of
this aspect, bearing in mind recent incidents in which
parties to a conflict launched attacks and used force against
United Nations personnel and against other personnel from
international humanitarian organizations.

The second aspect of the problem that is dealt with in
that same resolution concerns the role of the Security
Council and the United Nations in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. In this regard, we believe that
greater importance should be attached to the issue of the
excessive stockpiling of small arms and light weapons, in
View of their negative effects and the destabilization they
cause, and that we should do our utmost to prevent the use
of these weapons and their proliferation. In this regard, I
would like to stress that the States exporting such weapons
bear the greatest responsibility.

As for the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict - many of which will be adopted by the
Security Council at the end of this meeting in the form of
a draft resolution - they contain many positive measures
that could improve the situation of civilians in armed
conflict. However, those measures should be implemented
in a manner consistent with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, as set out in the Charter. I say this
because if certain measures are applied without taking
into account the special characteristics of each situation,
or without due regard to the principle of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, they may harm not only
individuals, but also States. Of course, harm to States
results in harm to individuals, since individuals make up
States. Such an outcome would be undesirable, and we
therefore believe that our objective should always be to
ensure full protection for civilians and, at the same time,
to preserve the principles on which the United Nations
was established.

I should like to refer to one more important issue
with regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. When efforts to provide such protection fail,
there is always the possibility that such civilians,
particularly refugees, may, willingly or unwillingly,
become participants in the fighting on one side or the
other, thereby contributing, deliberately or otherwise, to
the conflagration and further complicating and
perpetuating the conflict, with undesirable consequences.
It is clear, therefore, that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is an imperative for all of us.

