Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his briefing, to welcome the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
representative of Rwanda, and, of course, to thank the
Foreign Minister of Belgium for his statement and for
spending time with us today on this important topic.

I will have more detailed points that I would like
to make in consultations, but as this is a meeting with
the wider membership present, there are just a couple
of points I would like to take the opportunity to
highlight now.

The first of those points is that we would like to
underline our very strong support for the Special
Envoy, President Obasanjo. We very much welcome
his appointment and are committed to helping him in
any way he thinks can be useful. We believe his
activities have already had a significant positive impact
in refocusing attention on the need for a political
solution to the crisis in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He is already helping to bring
the parties together, and I understand he has another
trip to the region planned for later this week. We wish
him every success, and we call on the international
community to give him whatever support he needs over
the coming weeks. As I mentioned, that is certainly
what we intend to do.

The second point I would like to make is to stress
the importance of the earliest possible deployment of
the 3,100 additional personnel for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) which the Council mandated in
its resolution 1843 (2008). We understand that a target
of two months has been put on this deployment. We
think that is a bit too leisurely. We note that in certain
other cases - and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon is the one that springs most readily to mind -
it was possible to get troops there within a matter of
weeks. We think that the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is one of those that would
benefit from the earliest possible deployment of
additional personnel.

We stand ready to support the Secretariat's efforts
to identify suitable troop-contributing countries. We
stand ready to help troop-contributing countries deploy
their own forces, and we stand ready to contribute
equipment and, as necessary, personnel to help with
specialized functions, notably on the command and
intelligence side.

Those were the two points I wanted to make in
the Chamber.

