Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The Jamaican
delegation is pleased, Sir, to see you presiding over the
Council's deliberations for the month of February. We
wish to assure you and the delegation of Tunisia of our
full cooperation and support. Let me also express our
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Kishore Mahbubani
and to the delegation of Singapore for the dynamic and
effective manner in which the affairs of the Council
were handled last month.

Let me join others in welcoming President Joseph
Kabila to the Security Council. On behalf of the
Government and the people of Jamaica, I wish to
extend condolences to President Kabila and to his
family on the untimely passing of his father, with
whom the Security Council had the honour to meet in
January of last year. Now that the mantle has passed to
President Joseph Kabila, we assure him of my
delegation's continued support for and solidarity with
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Our message to President Kabila today is one of
encouragement as he and the people he leads face the
daunting challenges that lie ahead.

As the Secretary-General indicated, President
Kabila may be assured that the international
community stands ready to assist in bringing peace to
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and to the entire
Great Lakes region of Africa.

The fact that he has come to New York to meet
with the Security Council so soon after his
inauguration is a clear indication of his wish to move
the process forward. We are indeed heartened by his
recent diplomatic initiatives, both regional and
international, and are encouraged by his call to all
parties to come to the peace table. These gestures,
reiterated in his important statement to the Council
today, could be important confidence-building
measures, which we hope will be reciprocated.

My delegation is well aware of how seemingly
intractable the problems in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo appear to be. But no matter how difficult it
might seem to be to find solutions, the suffering of the
people involved impels us to use our best efforts to put
an end to their misery. My delegation continues to
believe that the Lusaka Agreement remains the most
viable basis for sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this connection, we support
the call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and
reaffirm our support for the unity, stability and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Charter of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU). We also call
on all concerned to demonstrate their commitment to
implement the Kampala and Harare agreements, as
well as to cooperate with the Libreville process.
Jamaica fully supports the pursuit of the inter-
Congolese dialogue. We believe that this political
dialogue is an indispensable step towards national
reconciliation. We therefore welcome the commitment,
stated here today by President Kabila, to resume the
process of national dialogue, and we emphasize the
need for full cooperation by all concerned with the
office ofthe Facilitator.

We urge those who believe that they have a
legitimate right to justice and to governance in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to pursue it through
the processes provided for at the bargaining table and
not through the barrel of a gun. We firmly believe that
there is no military solution to the crisis in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Another issue of concern to my delegation is the
continued illegal exploitation of mineral resources. The
interim report of the panel of experts clearly indicates
the link between the conflict and the exploitation of
resources which should be used for the economic and
social development of the people of the Congo. As the
conflict widens, with some 16 million people being
affected, including over 2 million internally displaced
persons and refugees in neighbouring States, we have
the makings of an immense humanitarian tragedy, the
extent of which is unknown, given the lack of access
for humanitarian workers to the populations in need.

We realize, however, that the humanitarian and
security situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be addressed in a lasting manner only
within the framework of a comprehensive peace in a
regional context involving the entire Great Lakes
region. Jamaica therefore fully supports the holding of
an international conference on the Great Lakes, in
parallel with the national dialogue, under the auspices
ofthe OAU and the United Nations.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General, to his Special
Representative, Ambassador Kamel Morjane, and to
the men and women of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for their efforts to bring peace to the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

We look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General, which will set the stage for the Council's
discussions later this month with the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement and for further
action by the Security Council.

