Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I would like to congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I also express my appreciation for the convening of today's open debate on such an important topic as upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders for their constructive briefings. Maintaining peace and security is an issue of top priority for the entire international community. For this reason, in order to stop wars and settle conflicts the international community must shoulder its responsibility to undertake urgent collective measures. The norms and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations retain their fundamental significance in international relations. We fully subscribe to what the Secretary-General has said: "Peace, justice, human dignity, tolerance and solidarity are enshrined in the Charter and bind us together". Indeed, we can succeed only if we work together. During the existence of the United Nations, the world has made considerable progress in technological, information, economic and social development, which through globalization is spreading across the world. However, the negative aspects of such phenomena as international terrorism, extremism, transnational organized crime, drug trafficking and the exacerbation of environmental issues pose a serious threat to the international community. The current situation requires all countries to take more robust action and make firm commitments by facilitating region cooperation and partnerships based on fair, effective and mutually beneficial economic relations. My country, Tajikistan, therefore calls on all those concerned to maximize their efforts towards a speedy and full settlement to the long-standing and current conflicts in different parts of parts of the world, and especially in the Middle East. The United Nations plays a key role in coordinating Member States' efforts in order to effectively meet the challenges of our time and attain the Sustainable Development Goals. The notion of war and peace is not alien to Tajikistan. From their own experience, the Tajik people are well aware what death, devastation and pain war can cause. My country had to face such challenges in the initial stages of establishing itself as a sovereign State. The consequences were deplorable. The five years of imposed civil war claimed extensive human casualties, displaced a million people and caused enormous economic devastation. But as a result of successful progress in peacebuilding, we managed to deal with those difficulties. Over the past two decades, under the leadership of President Emomali Rahmon, the country has come a long way and, despite many challenges, succeeded in achieving peace, stability and sustainable development. We are proud of these accomplishments. One of the main lessons that can be drawn from our experience is that it is only through cooperation and joint actions that we will win the fight against the forces of evil and global threats. The United Nations, regional organizations and other partners - such as the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and others - played a successful and important role in achieving a peace process in Tajikistan. Upon the successful completion of the mission of the United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia was established in Ashgabat. Today it promotes dialogue between the Governments of the countries of the region on finding solutions on how to address emerging problems and eliminate potential threats to peace and security. The upcoming commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nation, in September, will provide an opportunity to reaffirm our collective commitment to multilateralism and to the United Nations. In this regard, we are looking forward to adopting a unifying declaration that captures Member States shared vision for a common future. In conclusion, I would like to underscore that as an advocate of broad-based cooperation, Tajikistan believes that only collective and coordinated efforts and effective regional and international cooperation can serve as a foundation of our common success in maintaining peace and security. The mutual understanding and cooperation that have prevailed in this Organization since its establishment remain the only path towards a bright and clear future and universal peace and prosperity.
