Ms. Willson (United States of America): I
apologize to members who are being detained at this
late hour, but I will try to be as brief as possible. It is
necessary for us to add to our previous statement.

The Council, of course, is here this morning to
review the work of the three Committees that strive to
counter terrorism. Most speakers have engaged
constructively in discussing ways to increase
cooperation and advance the work of the Committees,
and we appreciate that. It is disappointing, therefore,
that two representatives departed from the focus of the
debate to introduce allegations that detract from the
positive tone of the discussion and distort the facts of
two cases being adjudicated in the United States.

In the case of Mr. Posada, the facts are that he
was detained on 17 May after entering the United
States without inspection, and he remains in custody
while his case is being processed within the United
States legal system. The Venezuelan extradition request
is under review in accordance with a bilateral
extradition treaty and United States extradition law.

In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
in 2001 the individuals in question were convicted in a
United States federal court of conspiracy to commit
espionage, among other charges that include
conspiracy by one of the individuals to commit murder,
having supported and implemented a plan to shoot
down civilian aircraft, both inside and outside the
United States.

The United States Department of Justice has
asked for a full hearing by the Court of Appeals,
Eleventh Circuit, of a panel decision reversing the trial
court's decision. The five accused remain detained
while the case is being processed in the United States
judicial system.

The United States has always provided the five
accused with all the guarantees of due process inherent
in the independent and impartial United States judicial
system. Despite the frustration expressed by the two
speakers who raised these cases, we assure them that
United States courts and administrative proceedings are
independent and that they fairly and impartially
interpret and apply the law.

