Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States supports the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 2218 (2015), which renews for another
year the mandate of the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
MINURSO is indispensable in its role of supporting
stability and security in Western Sahara, as it has for
the past 24 years. The United States believes that the
United Nations has the legitimacy and impartiality
necessary to facilitate a lasting political solution to this
conflict.
The United States is hopeful that the adoption
of this resolution will encourage the parties to
demonstrate their serious and genuine commitment to
the United Nations-led political process to achieve a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
that provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara and to engage in negotiations as soon
as possible. We look forward to both sides bringing
forward new ideas to that dialogue.

We witnessed several developments of concern this
past year: stalled family Visits, dwindling humanitarian
assistance and rising tensions inside Saharaoui refugee
camps, as well as greater security concerns in the
region, which illustrate that the status quo is clearly
untenable. Over the past year, the United Nations also
suffered a significant and regrettable loss of diplomatic
engagement. The loss of valuable time and diplomatic
engagement must not be repeated.

The United States is determined to see that parties
make significant progress towards a mutual political
solution and to improve the human rights situation
throughout the next year. We encourage the resumption
of family reunification visits, which underscore the vary
real human dimension to this conflict. We also look
forward to the United Nations briefings in October, and
we hope we will hear of greater progress at that time.

We call upon the parties to demonstrate their resolve
in implementing all the elements of this resolution,
including facilitating full access for MINURSO staff
to all interlocutors. We further remind the parties of the
ongoing need for the Council to receive reports from
the United Nations on the situation on the ground in
Western Sahara and in the refugee camps near Tindouf.
We encourage the parties to continue to cooperate with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and its visits to the region, as well
as to continue to promote and protect human rights in
both areas.

The United States remains committed to the
United Nations efforts for Western Sahara, including
those led by Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
Christopher Ross, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kim Bolduc and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The United
Nations has our unwavering support for its efforts to
achieve a political solution.

