Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, thank you for this opportunity to
contribute my Government's observations on the
contents of the report under consideration (S/2008/760).

First of all, I would like to welcome the briefing
on the report of the Secretary-General given to us by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Angelo, and also for this opportunity to make my
observations on the report.

Our experience with the European Union-led
military force (EUFOR) offers us many valuable
lessons that can inspire us in the design of the new
force to ensure an effective implementation of the
original mandate, which strikes us as being both good
and clear, given that the international presence in
eastern Chad is not a classic peacekeeping operation,
as we have often been reiterated.

In this regard, in the context of the fruitful
ongoing consultations that will continue to take place
in the future between the competent Chadian
authorities and the team of the Secretary-General, we
believe that we are not far from arriving at definitive
shared conclusions that will enable the immediate
planning of that force with a view to an effective
transfer of authority on 15 March 2009 between
EUFOR and the new force. At the same time, of
course, we underscore our support for the request made
by our Central African brothers and neighbours, as
stated by their representative, for the renewal and
strengthening of the presence of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in the North-East of their country.

Furthermore, allow me to reiterate my
Government's position whereby, in order to guarantee
the lasting effects of a United Nations presence in
eastern Chad, there are no grounds for giving it a
political mandate, given that the political questions
related to the situation in eastern Chad are being
addressed in frameworks with which we are well
acquainted. Here, too, our position aims simply to
ensure heightened efficiency so that the ongoing
mediations are not uselessly complicated or
duplicative. However, we welcome the fact that the
United Nations is supporting this process and will be
involved in it.

With regard to the deployment of the
Detachement Integre de Securite (DIS), the 850
planned personnel are late in being deployed, given the
slowness and limited capacity of the United Nations
centre responsible for their early training. We do have a
sufficient unit of police officers and gendarmes to offer
to MINURCAT. At the same time, we have
recommended the increase of the level of the DIS to
1,700 troops. We reiterate our desire that the financing
of the DIS should come from the United Nations
budget. In its absence, however, we appeal to the
international community for its contributions to the
Trust Fund.

We agree with those who are of the view that no
military force can sustainably guarantee security if the
political context underlying the original insecurity does
not change. Let us not forget, however, that this force
must serve the law, that is, the democratic rule of law
that is being established within Chad, and that it must
be stronger than the illegal groups that are being
maintained from abroad. That means that the
establishment of the rule of law and democracy that we
hope to consolidate within Chad will necessarily
require stability and peace in the country to thwart the
obscure strategies of armed groups.

For us, the source of our insecurity comes from
the East of our country, which is destabilized by the
effects of the crisis in Darfur: Sudanese refugees,
displaced Chadians who are victims of Janjaweed
attacks, repercussions in eastern Chad of the
intercommunity conflicts in Darfur, the exploitation of
these conflicts by politicians to establish and use
armies to overthrow democratic national institutions,
widespread cross-border banditry, and so on.

Without wishing to poison the relationships with
our Sudanese neighbours and brothers, we must state
nevertheless that we do not understand the
observations that certain parties have made in seeking
to equate the aggressor and the victim, and to engage in
a bizarre dialectic that seeks to justify the causes by the

consequences. Refugee camps, displaced persons
camps, forced recruitment, including of child soldiers,
trafficking in weaponry, violations of human rights in
the area and impunity are all clearly the consequences
of the Darfur crisis. We would have favoured moving
the camps or a true neutralization of the area, while
assuming the responsibility of securing our own
border. That is the truth of the matter. In Chad, there is
no political resolve to favour insecurity or impunity.
We do not have sufficient capacity to address the
magnitude of the challenges we face in the field. The
international community is called on to help us to
strengthen our capacity, although clearly not at any
price.

Without a doubt, settling the crisis in Darfur will
be the fundamental political solution the situation in
eastern Chad. We shall spare no effort, if so required,
to enable a successful outcome to the negotiations to
achieve peace in Darfur. No Sudanese rebel movement
in Darfur has received or will receive Chad's support
unless it is in the service of peace. The rebels may
enjoy of local support owing to the intra-
communitarian border war, but that is not the
responsibility of the Chadian Government.

To strengthen national cohesion, the Chadian
armed groups must renounce the use of force and must
return to the country, in full respect of Syrte Agreement
of 25 October 2007, rather than refuting the Agreement
on the pretext that it has expired or by inventing an
alibi in order to continue their subversive operations
against the interests of their country.

Additionally and above all, establishing a lasting
peace in Chad will require the strengthening of the
democratic rule of law in the country through a
genuine implementation of the provisions of the
political agreement of 13 August 2007. In spite of the
inevitable criticism on the part of the opposition, the
Chadian Government believes that the process is still
headed in the right direction and is committed to seeing
the process through to its conclusion in the form of
free, transparent elections.

While we are discussing replacing EUFOR with a
MINURCAT military component, I would like to
convey my country's the gratitude and
acknowledgement to the European Union, which has
answered our expectations, as well as those of
humanitarian workers, seeking to protect people
exposed to the prevailing insecurity in eastern Chad.

08-6445]
In particular, we would like to thank France, who
initiated this rescue operation and serves as its
principle component. We would like to underscore that,
in contrast to allegations launched by some against
France, which is a long-standing friend of my country,
this operation is not seeking to support a regime, but
rather to help a country and its people remain standing
and survive in view of a security and humanitarian
catastrophe that threatens peace and security in the
subregion.

We also wish to commend humanitarian workers
who, through their activities, risk their lives on a daily
basis for the sake of vulnerable people.

Finally, it would be remiss to conclude without
repeating the ongoing readiness of the Chadian
Government to cooperate with the United Nations with
a view to the preparation for the replacement of
EUFOR by a military component of MINURCAT.

