Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to express our great
satisfaction in seeing you assume presidency of the
Security Council. We assure you of our support for the
Turkish delegation in the exercise of its presidency. We
also express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation and his
delegation for the great skill with which they
stewarded the work of the Council last month.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Croatia, His Excellency Mr. Ivo
Sanader, in the Security Council today.

I would also like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia for presenting their
six-monthly reports. These briefings clearly confirm
that the deadline laid down in 2003 and 2004 in the
completion strategy for the Tribunals will be missed
and that their work will continue beyond 2010.
Constraints of procedure, the vagaries of justice,
belated arrests of fugitives and, for the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the obstacles to
referring low-ranking indictees to national jurisdictions
explain this delay in the timetable. Whatever the case,
the Security Council must now take into account the
reality of a horizon for the completion of appeals
delayed until the first half of 2013 and draw the
necessary conclusions from that.

The first thing to be done is to equip the
Tribunals with the means to carry out the trials and
appeals as soon as possible, in full respect for the rules
of fairness and justice. In this regard, the joint request
of the two Tribunals concerning redeployment of trial
judges to the shared Appeals Chamber reflects to real
need and must be honoured.
We also welcome the principle of extending the
terms of office of permanent and ad litem judges. The
Working Group on international tribunals will have to
propose modalities for this extension, but we hope that
the decision taken by the Council will clearly establish
its resolve to ensure that the Tribunals are in a position
to carry out their work to the very end.

Affording the Tribunals appropriate predictability
is a necessity, especially in order to maintain the
quality of staff, whose members, forced into a state of
uncertainty, are inevitably tempted to seek more stable
jobs. The success of the completion strategy obviously
depends on the participation of a qualified and
motivated staff, and the current attrition rate is
worrying in this regard. The President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) made that point earlier.

Once again, I would like to express to the
Tribunals and their staff France's appreciation for the
considerable efforts that they will have to make in the
difficult phase of completing their work. I would
highlight with satisfaction the ongoing efforts to
improve the management of proceedings, which will
make it possible to intensify the rate at which the Trial
and Appeals Chambers work.

The activities of the Prosecutors are also
essential, especially with respect to tracking down
fugitives, whose arrest and transfer to the Tribunals are
a priority. The existence of fugitives from justice is one
of the main elements of uncertainty looming over the
completion strategy, but the mission of the Tribunals
will not be fully completed as long as those accused
have not been arrested and tried.

We are firmly committed to the principle that
those responsible for the most heinous crimes must be
tried by the International Criminal Tribunals. The
arrest of Mr. Karadzie was a major breakthrough for
the ICTY. We now await those of Mr. Mladie and
Mr. Hadzic', and we note with satisfaction Prosecutor
Brammertz's positive assessment of the cooperation of
the Serbian authorities in this connection. Once again, I
would like to recall that full cooperation with the
ICTY, be it in the search for fugitives or the conduct of
proceedings, is an essential element of the stabilization
and association strategy vis-a-vis all the countries of
the region of the former Yugoslavia, which is a strategy
that the European Union is pursuing. We call on all of
these countries to extend all necessary assistance to the
Tribunal.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, 13 accused, four of whom are
high-ranking indictees, are still at large. We call on all
States concerned to afford Prosecutor Jallow the
requisite cooperation. In particular, we call on Kenya
to honour its obligations to arrest and hand over
Felicien Kabuga to the ICTR.

We hail the efforts made by Rwanda to reform its
legislation in order to lift all legal obstacles to
transferring cases to its jurisdiction and allowing low-
ranking fugitives not to be tried by the Tribunal. I
would like to recall that if the fugitive issue is not
resolved quickly, it will have to be dealt with in the
context of managing the legacy of the Tribunals,
because it would be unacceptable for their closure to
represent impunity for fugitives. This function will fall
to the management mechanism for the essential
residual functions to be established after the Tribunals
are closed.

The Council's Informal Working Group on
international tribunals has continued to work on this
issue under the efficient stewardship of Austria. The
past six months have made it possible for the Group to
deepen its consideration of the subject with the
participation of new Council members and the very
useful contribution of the Secretariat's Office of Legal
Affairs. I would also like to thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors and Registrars of the two Tribunals for
continuing their excellent cooperation of the Working
Group.

The Permanent Representative of Austria made a
specific point a moment ago on the state of play in the
Working Group. I shall not dwell on that point. My
delegation would simply like to stress that my country
takes part in its work in the hope that the Council will
in due course adopt a decision conducive to fully
safeguarding the integrity of the Tribunals' legacy. It
would be inadmissible for the United Nations to
neglect its duty to ensure that the residual functions
necessary to the administration of justice will be
guaranteed after the end of the Tribunals under its
auspices and in the context of an effective mechanism.

Various possibilities can be contemplated for
devising this mechanism, which will need to be
appropriately modest and lean. But it is essential that it
allow the judicial work of the two Tribunals to go on
uninterrupted and in respect for the highest demands of
fairness and justice.
The ICTY and the ICTR have embodied the
international community's rejection of impunity for the
most serious crimes against the human conscience.
They must conclude their task soon, and it is up to the
Council to adopt decisions conducive to fully ensuring
their legacy.

