Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union. I thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Special Representative Mariano Fernandez
for today's briefing.

At the outset, let me underscore our continued
willingness to help and support the Haitian
Government in its efforts to build a better life for its
people. Since the earthquake Germany has, bilaterally
and through the European Union, provided
€146 million for reconstruction and €41 million for
humanitarian assistance, apart from €230 million in
private donations. At the same time, we wish to
underline that the primary responsibility for recovery
and reconstruction lies with the Government of Haiti.

Against that backdrop, we note with concern the
continued stand-off between the executive and
legislative authorities and the resulting state of
blockage and inaction, which prevents Haiti's State
institutions from delivering on promises made to their
people. Haiti and the Haitians simply cannot afford to
wait any longer for effective Government.

We join the Secretary-General in his call on all
political actors in Haiti to engage in constructive
political dialogue. Haiti's political leaders must work
together in a spirit of compromise. A new, widely
accepted Prime Minister must take office
expeditiously. The appointment process must not again
become the object of partisan infighting, but rather
must be accomplished without delay in the best
interests of the country.

Germany strongly encourages Special
Representative Fernandez in his efforts to advocate a
political pact to advance the stabilization and
development of Haiti. In that context, we cannot
overemphasize enough the importance of the rule of
law and good governance. A lack of political and legal
certainty is a major impediment to development,
including to increased foreign investment.
I would like to focus on three aspects, namely, the
Haitian National Police, elections and human rights.
First, we note the Secretary-General's assessment that

"the Haitian National Police is gradually
improving, [but] the institution is not yet in a
position to assume full responsibility for the
provision of internal security." (S/2012/128, para. 11)

That indicates that political support of the Government
in building the capacity of Haiti's National Police is
key and must be enhanced. The United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) still has a
crucial role to play in maintaining a secure
environment and protecting human rights, including
the fight against sexual and gender-based violence.

With the primary focus currently on enhancing
policing capacity, the Council should consider further
downsizing MINUSTAH's military capacities, in line
with developments on the ground. Efforts aimed at
enhancing the Haitian National Police should not be
diluted by plans to reintroduce Haitian armed forces. In
that context, we note with concern that armed groups
consisting of former members of the Forces armees
d'Haiti have resurfaced in several departments, and
former army elements and new recruits were witnessed
conducting training exercises throughout the country.
Haiti's international partners have clearly indicated
that they are not willing to fund any military in the
country. Germany strongly shares that view.

Secondly, regarding elections, we urge the
political leadership to take the steps necessary to avoid
a continued institutional vacuum, in a timely manner,
as discussed with representatives of the Security
Council on 1 March in Port-au-Prince. In order to build
confidence and trust, Germany encourages the Haitian
leadership to invite external missions to observe the
upcoming electoral processes. Haiti cannot afford to
enter into another period of political stalemate - in a
phase when the ability of the administration to act and
govern is of the utmost importance.

Thirdly, Germany joins the Secretary-General in
his call on Haiti's authorities to spare no effort in the
fight against impunity. The establishment of
accountability and of the rule of law remains a central
benchmark for success. Accountability and the rule of
law are not only of key importance in their own right,
but they also help to create conditions for sustainable
economic development. Strengthening the rule of law

is an investment that pays off. Capacity-building,
including in the justice system and corrections
facilities, must therefore remain a priority. Germany
also underlines the importance of continued
enforcement of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on misconduct by its personnel, and appreciates
the steps that have been taken so far, as outlined by the
Special Representative. Indeed, that is important for
the acceptance of all peacekeeping forces - not only
in Haiti.

In conclusion, MINUSTAH remains a
prerequisite for the stability and development of Haiti
and for peace and security in the region. At the same
time, it is evident that the agenda for MINUSTAH
needs adjustments, streamlining and focus in line with
developments on the ground. While Germany is open
to discussions on the scope of MINUSTAH's mandate,
we are of the opinion that civil reconstruction is best
placed in the hands of specialized United Nations
organizations dedicated to that task. Given the
multifarious nature of MINUSTAH's mandate, the
Council might also wish to look into ways of making
the priorities among MINUSTAH's tasks clearer for all
concerned.

Finally, I would like to join previous speakers in
thanking all countries that have contributed troops to
MINUSTAH and would like extend sincere thanks to
the personnel of the Mission in Haiti for their
dedicated work.

