Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
thank Peru for convening this important debate. We
also thank all the briefers for the most valuable insights
they provided today.

At a time when peacekeeping operations face
constant and evolving challenges, as States Members
of the United Nations we feel even more compelled
to fulfil the objectives set out in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. In that regard, it is imperative that we
recognize the essential roles that the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs)
play in entrusting, planning, managing and executing
peacekeeping operations. That is why we need to
strengthen that triangular relationship to promote
collaboration, cooperation and mutual trust.

Triangular cooperation has been the focus of various
debates and discussions, and they continue to identify
the lack of timely information and effective dialogue
among the three parties, which, in turn, has led to a
sizeable challenge. In that regard, we understand that
a balance must be struck between formal and informal
consultations with efficient formats and effective and
timely interactions. Similarly, such consultations are
necessary in situations of transition from a peacekeeping
operation to a peacebuilding operation and in cases ofa
reduction or withdrawal of a mission.

It should be stressed that it is important that the
triangular dialogues be conducted in a participatory,
timely and inclusive manner, while paying greater
attention to the concerns expressed by the TCCs and
PCCs and bearing in mind their knowledge of the
existing realities on the ground, which can contribute
to making effective decisions on peacekeeping
operations, especially before the renewal, adjustment
or reconfiguration of troops in a mission by the
Security Council. That is why we understand that the
suggestions made by troop-contributing countries are
key in the design ofpeace missions.

With regard to the preparation of meetings, we
underscore the importance that TCCs and PCCs receive
updated and regular information from the Secretariat
on the situation in each peacekeeping operation.
Similarly, rapid responses from the Secretariat to their
requests for information are crucial. The open debates
that are convened by the Security Council are another
way of exchanging information on peacekeeping issues,
in which the participation of TCCs and PCCs should
be highlighted.

The joint work of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and troop-
contributing countries is an additional mechanism
that allows for close dialogue on peacekeeping issues.
We should encourage the further strengthening of
mission-specific meetings more actively to create an
exchange of ideas and information that will contribute
to boosting the efficiency of such dialogues. We believe
that the meetings of the Working Group should be
held on a more regular basis to follow the issues and
processes of peace missions and therefore foster the
most effective communication among the three pillars.

In conclusion, we once again wish to reiterate our
commitment to peacekeeping and our conviction that we
must all shoulder responsibility for it. It is only through
our determination and joint efforts that we will be able
to successfully achieve lasting and sustainable peace.

