Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to thank the United
Kingdom for the very useful proposal of holding this
meeting today. The Secretary-General's report entitled
"The rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies" (S/2004/6l6) identifies a
number of issues that require thorough consideration
by the Security Council, Member States and organs of
the United Nations, including the Secretariat. In
particular, peacekeeping mandates must be improved.
Many of them simply do not include tasks relating to
transitional justice and ensuring the rule of law or do
not always reflect the actual needs of the States in
which missions are deployed. We share the Secretary-
General's concern about this.

In that connection, I recall that a number of years
ago in the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization, the Russian Federation made a
proposal to consider the question of the legal basis for
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we
submitted a document in that regard. We think that
perhaps the Special Committee might now resume
work on our proposal.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
one cannot count on the success and stability of
reforms aimed at ensuring the rule of law when such
reforms are imposed from outside and are not based on
local traditions and conditions. The United Nations and
the international community as a whole should not
replace, but rather supplement and promote, national
initiatives, including those in the areas of justice and
law and order.

As members are aware, in the initial stages of
United Nations efforts to ensure the rule of law in post-
conflict societies, there was an emphasis on
establishing rather expensive international criminal
tribunals. Experience has now enabled us to introduce
a number of corrective measures. For example, now we
have mixed tribunals in which, in addition to
international judges, there are local jurists. That not
only makes it possible to train national cadres in the
law, it also assists in the establishment of national legal
systems to introduce democratic standards of justice
and to enhance the overall level of a society's
understanding and awareness of the law. Undoubtedly,
one important stage in establishing the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict societies was the
establishment of the International Criminal Court,
which has just begun to consider its first criminal
cases.

Here, I should like to touch upon one other
fundamentally important aspect. Certainly, ensuring the
rule of law and justice must be regarded as a
fundamental goal of United Nations work for peace.
However, that cannot be a goal in, of and by itself. In
an attempt to provide justice in a number of cases,
excessive zeal becomes a hindrance to peace,
complicating the attainment or implementation of
peace agreements. In such cases, one should make
more active use of alternative mechanisms - truth and
reconciliation commissions, for example.

The Secretary-General is currently working with
Member States to reach an agreement on the
formulation of a list of experts to provide assistance to
post-conflict countries. Such a list would include
experts to assist in organizing transitional justice, re-
establishing a justice system that has been destroyed
and ensuring the rule of law. It is understood that such
specialists would be made available to the United
Nations when necessary. We support that proposal, and
we are prepared to work with the Secretariat to reach
such an agreement.

In general, Russia agrees with the contents of the
report of the Secretary-General (5/2004/616) on
strengthening the role of the Organization in
establishing justice systems and ensuring the rule of
law in conflict and post-conflict societies. In that
connection, I should like to make the following point:
there is one view on the need to establish a new
coordinating structure within the United Nations on
issues relating to the rule of law and transitional
justice. We do not reject that idea; we are prepared to
study it. But at the same time, we feel that increasing
the number of bureaucratic mechanisms does not
always lead to enhanced functioning and effectiveness
of the system. We therefore urge the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security - which the
Secretary-General has asked to submit
recommendations on matters covered in the report -
to focus on finding ways to improve coordination
within existing mechanisms.

