Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having given me the opportunity
to speak at this important meeting of the Security
Council. I also congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and I wish
you and your delegation success as you discharge that
lofty mission.

I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her comprehensive briefing on the work of the ICC
regarding Libya. Ms. Bensouda spoke in detail about the
excellent cooperation between her Office and Libya's
judicial authorities. It is clear that that relationship is
based on complementarity and cooperation. It is also
clear that both parties are guided by the common goals
of ensuring thatjustice is done and impunity eradicated.

Without a doubt, the talks between the ICC
Prosecutor and the Libyan Prosecutor-General have
paved the way for further initiatives in that vein.
They may lead to a shift in that relationship, seeing
it become a genuine partnership in the framework of
complementarity, in the light of the suggestion that the
Office of the ICC Prosecutor would investigate those
who stand accused of perpetrating heinous crimes but
are located outside of Libya.

The ICC Prosecutor addressed in detail the cases
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
and the proceedings relating to those individuals. I have
little to add to her statement in that regard except to
reiterate that the circumstances of their arrests were
in full conformity with international standards. They,
like all persons responsible for heinous crimes, will
be prosecuted in line with internationally recognized
legal principles. All technical arrangements have been
made to commence trials following the completion of
investigations.

Today I would like to state anew Libya's
commitment to the rule of law and to eliminating any
links with the practices of the previous regime. Libyan
judicial authorities have indicated their commitment
to conducting impartial, objective and transparent
trials of all those accused of committing crimes and
perpetrating serious violations of human rights in the
course of the revolution against the tyrant Al-Qadhafi,
as well as under his 42-year regime.

When we talk about the rule of law, we mean
that no one can be above the law. No amnesty will be
given to any perpetrator of serious crimes, except by
general arrangements in the framework of transitional
justice and national reconciliation, with the consent
of the victims or their relatives, and in a manner that
promotes social harmony in the spirit ofletting bygones
be bygones.

I would like to emphasize that Libya views the ICC
as a necessary and important partner for achieving
justice, preventing impunity and providing assistance
in building technical capacities. Libya hopes that all
States will cooperate with the Libyan authorities and
the ICC in conducting investigations and bringing the
accused to justice. States should not provide accused
individuals with safe haven or invoke flimsy pretexts
to delay their surrender to our judicial authorities.
That is especially important as delaying the handover
of perpetrators will deprive our authorities of the
opportunity to verify a number of claims made in the
course of investigations, thus impeding the delivery of
justice.

I would like to state once again that many
Al-Qadhafi officials accused of perpetrating crimes
remain free and are continuing to work daily to conspire
against Libya and other States. I would like to remind
all States that, by virtue of paragraph 8 of resolution
2040 (2012), other resolutions and the Rome Statute,
all States are duty-bound to closely cooperate with our
authorities to bring an end to impunity. I would like
to take this opportunity to affirm that the failure to
respond to calls for surrender of the accused by the
States that are sheltering them will be viewed as the
obstruction of justice. It is an unfriendly action that
will have an adverse effect on relations between Libya
and those States in the future.

I am well aware that many would like to know about
the latest incidents that took place in Libya, namely, the
siege of the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs
as well as the pressures being put on the General
National Congress to legislate gender segregation.
Those actions are the result of many fanciful and rash
notions held by young people following the end of the
dictatorship and are rooted solely in personal interest.
It is natural and expected in a situation like the one
my country is going through. We are seeing immature
political action and party wrangling guided by national
ambitions, not necessarily ideological ones. In the case
of Libya, political action has generally always been
reasonable - which serves to hamper the spread of
immature behaviour. In any case, it will definitely not
undermine the process of political transformation.
The temporary Government is not too weak to
deal with such excesses. However, it is aware of the
daunting challenges it faces and is behaving wisely with
respect to the difficulties presented to our fledgling
institutions. Those institutions are resolved not to use
force against excessive actions undertaken by armed
groups who purport to operate under the Ministry of
Defence. However, those groups are not very familiar
with military rules or practices.

The Government is absolutely committed to
preventing Libyan infighting. It will not use legitimate
force, except in the cases of serious violations of the
law, demonstrable threat to the lives of our people, or
harm to property of the State or foreign nationals.

Despite everything I have mentioned, the
Government is eager to entrench respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. It is constantly
looking for assistance from the international
community and the United Nations in order to achieve
democratic transformation and the building of a stable
and democratic State.

In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that the transitional phase in Libya is a decisive
and momentous one for our people. The transitional
Government faces a number of complex and intertwined
challenges that require judicious and patient treatment
that takes into consideration all aspects, with a view
to improving the security situation and creating the
conditions necessary for the achievement of justice and
the building of State institutions on a sound basis. In
turn, that will serve to energize the economy and to
respond to the ambitions and aspirations of our citizens.
There is no doubt that the understanding shown by the
Council and the international community and their help
in building the capacity of our Government will greatly
contribute to the transition and the transformation of
our country into a real democracy.

