Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my warmest welcome
and appreciation to you, Mr. Minister, for chairing this
Security Council open debate on the issue of small
arms. I would also like to pay tribute, through you, to
Ambassador Camilo Reyes, who guided us to the
successful conclusion of the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

My delegation believes that the Programme of
Action adopted by the Conference, spelling out
concrete measures to be implemented at national,
regional and global levels, provides a solid framework
to monitor and review its implementation. At the same
time, I would like to stress that the adoption of the
Programme of Action is just the beginning of a long
process to address this issue. Indeed, what lies ahead is
a concerted effort to translate specific provisions
contained in the Programme of Action into concrete
action.

My delegation finds today's forum very timely
and useful, not only because it will provide added
momentum for our global efforts, but also because it
will deepen the Security Council's understanding of its
role in this field.
In recent years, there has been growing concern
over the impact of the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, as they claim innocent lives, exacerbate
conflicts and impede post-conflict peace-building and
rehabilitation. As the United Nations body bearing
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should remain committed to finding a remedy to the
problem of small arms and light weapons.

It has been nearly two years since the question of
small arms was explicitly addressed in the Security
Council. Recently Member States have highlighted the
need to tackle the small-arms problem in the context of
other Council open debates, most notably during this
past June's debate on the prevention of armed conflict
and April's debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. We believe that the small arms
question requires the continued attention and active
engagement of the Security Council, and that the
Council should be brought more fully into the fold of
international efforts to address the issue.

I would like to take a moment to comment on a
few of the points in the Programme of Action that I
find particularly relevant to this debate.

I believe that the Security Council is well
equipped to foster the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in conflict and post-
conflict situations. Recalling that the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons contributes not only to
the outbreak of conflicts, but also to their recurrence,
we cannot stress enough that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes are a
core element of conflict prevention and post-conflict
peace-building efforts. At the United Nations
Conference last month an overwhelming majority of
States called for more substantive assistance from the
international community for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. This call
was based on the recognition that, if the deep-rooted
reasons for the demand for small arms were not
addressed, it would be impossible to do away with the
culture of violence.

As was made evident by recent events in Sierra
Leone and Liberia, a lack of resources and political
will for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
efforts often leads to renewed violence in conflict-
prone areas. It should be noted that the Programme of
Action encourages the Security Council to consider, on
a case-by-case basis, the inclusion of relevant
provisions for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the mandates and budgets of
peacekeeping operations. This issue has particular
relevance for the Security Council, as its peacekeeping
missions have increasingly engaged in post-conflict
reconstruction and even nation-building activities,
where the collection and destruction of small arms and
the rehabilitation of ex-combatants are critical not only
for the success of the mission, but also for the
sustainable peace and development of States
concerned.

In addition, we recognize that the Security
Council's arms embargoes can be powerful tools for
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. We welcome the fact that the Programme of
Action calls upon each and every State to take
appropriate measures, including legal or administrative
ones, against any activity that violates a Security
Council embargo. However, we find it deeply
disturbing that small arms and light weapons continue
to be smuggled into areas where Security Council arms
embargoes have been imposed. We recommend that the
Security Council further study ways and means to
improve the effectiveness of its arms embargoes.

We would also like to stress the particular
importance of preventing the excessive and
destabilizing accumulation of and illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in areas of actual and potential
conflict. Certainly, a comprehensive approach to
tackling the problems associated with these weapons
will help minimize the incidence and intensity of
violent conflicts and alleviate the suffering of innocent
civilians. With this end in mind, the Security Council
should strengthen its role in combating both the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons and preventing
their excessive and destabilizing accumulation.

Finally, we would like to encourage the Security
Council to become involved in the follow-up to the
Programme of Action. To this end we believe, as noted
in the document prepared by Colombia for this open
debate, that a follow-up report of the Secretary-General
identifying, inter alia, areas in which the Security
Council can play a more active role, would be of great
value.

The Security Council has a valuable role to play
in preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. As a strong
advocate of curbing this illicit trade, my Government
stands ready to support the Security Council's
initiatives to facilitate the implementation of the
Programme of Action.
