Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We wish to express our appreciation for the
informative briefing by High Representative Inzko on
the latest report of his Office on the political, security
and humanitarian situation in the country (S/2019/364, annex).

We welcome the progress made between the
parties in discussions on the State-level Government,
as well as the international community's support for the
parties. South Africa concurs with the views expressed
by the High Representative as we look forward to the
formation of a new Council of Ministers as soon as
possible. We remain concerned, however, about the
continued disagreement between the political parties,
which has the potential to undermine the fulfilment of
the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board. We encourage all parties
to exercise restraint and refrain from provocative,
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric that could weaken the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State.

The Security Council, in its support of the parties
concerned, should promote an environment that is
conducive to dialogue and cooperation and that would
ease the challenges and hardships faced by the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to reiterate that
a new coalition Government should be formed soon
so as to allow the country and its people to implement
the 5+2 agenda in its entirety, which would enable
its assumption of full sovereign responsibility and
authority over its domestic and international affairs.

Recent human rights developments are of concern
and have the potential to exacerbate the tensions
between the parties. Such developments could have
negatively implications for local communities and
the broader region. Any country wishing to achieve
sustainable peace must respect international human
rights law and the relevant Council resolutions. In that
regard, South Africa calls on all parties to respect the
rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin
the political structures in the country, guided by
international norms and standards.

The political impasse is not sustainable. Political
dialogue is critical to resolving outstanding issues.
In that regard, we call for inclusive, consultative and
constructive dialogue among all stakeholders, including
the different ethnic groups and entities, youth and
women, as well as among the various Bosnian structures
through the Office of the High Representative, the
European Union and the United Nations.

In the spirit of finding a long-term, peaceful
solution for all, we encourage all parties to recommit
to the full implementation of their obligations under
the Dayton Agreement. Political will and national
ownership are essential to moving the process towards
long-term peace, stability and reconciliation.

In conclusion, the support of the international
community for the Government and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is critical to achieving
security, stability and an inclusive democracy in the
country and in the region.

