Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like
to welcome the Ministers present with us today in the
Chamber. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo for her briefing.

Indonesia abstained in the voting based on the
following considerations.

First, we believe that today's briefing should be
considered under a different agenda item, namely,
the agenda item "Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security".

Secondly, Indonesia has always been consistent
in upholding and respecting the principles of
non-interference, sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of all countries, including Venezuela. But at
the same time, we are also cognizant of the fact that
the humanitarian situation in Venezuela is of concern
and requires proper attention. The fact that millions of
Venezuelans are seeking refuge across the border shows
that Venezuela is facing serious conditions. According
to data provided by United Nations agencies, more
than 3 million Venezuelans have left the country. This
situation should not be left unattended. The safety and
prosperity of the people of Venezuela are at stake and
should be prioritized.

Indonesia hopes that today's meeting ofthe Security
Council could make it its main priority calling on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid
the escalation of tensions and further exacerbation
of the situation. The Council must also encourage
the promotion of a political solution involving all the
relevant stakeholders to conduct a national dialogue
through a credible, transparent and democratic process.
The inclusion of Venezuela on the Security Council's
agenda must reflect a commitment to supporting
the realization of sustained peace and stability in
the country.

It is high time for the Council to play its pivotal
role in bridging differences. With this approach, we
would find solutions to problems without creating new
ones or further complexities and without contradicting
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

