Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and
Executive Director Michele Coninsx for their excellent
briefings and for their leadership and demonstration of
cooperation, which we appreciate very much.

I would like to make three remarks today.

First, with regard to the situation on the ground,
countering terrorism continues to be at the top of our
international security agenda. While we have seen
broad progress in the fight against the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in Syria and Iraq, to which
Germany is contributing substantially as part of the
Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, it is now crucial to
remain engaged. The job is far from being done. We
need to create conditions on the ground that disallow
the continuation of ISIS as an underground network.

In spite of recent losses by ISIS, the threat it poses
remains imminent and very substantial. The military
campaign in the last areas under ISIS control in the
Middle Euphrates Valley continues. However, ISIS is
no longer in a position to levy taxes and has also lost
significant sources of revenue. The loss of territory
and decrease in resources do not mean the end of the
terrorist organization. Fighters who have dispersed are
more difficult to locate and terrorist networks, such as
ISIS and Al-Qaida, have proven time and again that they
are quick to adapt to changing circumstances. I could
not agree more with the statement by Under-Secretary-
General Voronkov, who said that recent Islamic State
losses must not lead to any complacency whatsoever.
I think that that is the key message. ISIS obviously
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and stability.

My second remark is about human rights, conflict
prevention and gender. During our campaign for a
seat on the Security Council, Germany stressed the
importance of conflict prevention, respect for human
rights and the inclusion of the gender perspective in
the work of the Council. The discussion today proves
our point. The situations in northern Iraq and Syria
show that we need to remain vigilant and try to solve
conflicts before they degenerate into violence. They
show that disrespect for human rights is a factor that
can lead marginalized people to violent extremism and
into the hands of terrorist networks. They also show
that women find themselves in horrific conditions in
violent conflict situations.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/103)
highlights the role of women for good reason. I would
just like to make three very short points on that issue.

First of all, I would like to stress that Germany has
welcomed many Yazidi women, men and children from
the territory formerly controlled by ISIS in northern
Iraq. Secondly, I would like to refer to the Arria Formula
meeting held in January on the women and peace and
security agenda in the Middle East and North Africa as
a milestone. We feel that we should build on that with
a view to our future work. Against that background,
Germany intends to initiate an open debate on conflict-
related sexual violence during our upcoming presidency
in April. Thirdly and lastly, the representative of the
United Kingdom referred to resolution 2242 (2015),
which contains important language on women and on
preventing and countering violent extremism. Germany
also feels that it is essential that this very important
resolution be properly implemented.

My third and last remark is on the broader strategic
way forward. Terrorists need to be vigorously pursued
and prosecuted. However, for sustainable long-term
success in the fight against terrorism, it is crucial to
follow a holistic approach with a balance of preventive
and repressive measures. To deal with the challenges
posed by returning foreign terrorist fighters and their
families, a broad approach that includes criminal
justice and police measures, as well as deradicalization
and reintegration, is also needed.

With regard to what specifically can and should
be done, let me just mention some such measures that
are crucial from our point of view. As many previous
speakers have said this morning, we must work against
radicalization in prisons. Another point is that law
enforcement and border control agencies need to be
equipped with the necessary tools to do their job. We
should also highlight the necessity of electronically
accessible terrorist watch lists. All Member States
that are not doing so already should consider working
closely with INTERPOL and making full use of its
databases, such as on lost or stolen travel documents.
We must also stress the role of biometrics and advance
passenger information systems.

In addition, let me highlight that last autumn,
our Dutch friends made their passenger name record
software available to the wider United Nations
membership. The so-called Travel Information Portal
can be used by United Nations Members free of charge.
We feel that that is a very important initiative and
we would like to encourage the widespread use of
the software.

We would also like to applaud the French initiative
to present a resolution on combating the financing of
terrorism. Drying up the financial sources of terrorism
is crucial to the overall success of counter-terrorism.
We strongly support the French commitment.

In the same vein, we are strongly committed to
supporting the work of the Financial Action Task
Force as the body for setting international standards on
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing
of terrorism. We support and implement all relevant
Security Council resolutions in that regard and will
use our membership on the Security Council to further
streamline international efforts.

Wemustalso ensurebroaderrespect forhumanrights
and the rule of law. They should be no less important
in the international fight against terrorism and are a
crucial component. Lastly, we should support the work
of Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, Ombudsperson of the ISIL
(Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, which is
vital to the credibility, fairness and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.

To conclude on a more general note, I would like
to say that we need to uphold the level of fairness and
respect for human rights in our reactions to terrorism.
Only by upholding our values and standards will we
be able to defeat the terrorist ideology. International
cooperation remains key to our success. We must
keep prevention, foreign terrorist fighters, terrorist
financing, information sharing, terrorist use of the
Internet, aviation security and all the other issues that
many previous speakers have mentioned this morning
very high on the international agenda.

