Mr. Morales Troncoso (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presiding over the
Council this month, and I should like also to thank
your country for the welcome initiative to convene this
special meeting on a topic of such great importance to
our region.

Today I have the honour of addressing the
Security Council to convey my Government's position
on the situation in Haiti - a nation with which my
country, the Dominican Republic, shares the territory
of the island of Hispaniola.

The historical, geographic, political and social
relationship between the Dominican Republic and the
Republic of Haiti is a source of mandatory solidarity
between our peoples. As a result, the Dominican
people are not indifferent to the poverty and despair or
to the recurring episodes of violence that have so
deeply affected the well-being of the people of Haiti
and threatened the viability of the Haitian State. We are
convinced that it is urgent - and I emphasize "urgent" -
that we adopt effective measures to arrest the accelerated
process of disintegration that seems to afflict Haitian
society.

In Haiti, which is characterized by a context of
extreme and generalized poverty and an atmosphere of
violence and intransigence, the Government has been
unable to cope with the most urgent problems facing
the population or - as aptly noted earlier by Mr. Juan
Gabriel Valdes - to deal with the dysfunctions in the
legal system, Parliament and the security forces.

We must help our sister republic of Haiti. We
must make every effort to restore the rule of law and to
develop and strengthen institutions and electoral
processes - as was so rightly pointed out this
morning, particularly by the Acting Secretary General
of the Organization of American States - and we also
have to create the foundations for good governance and
improve the general standard of living.

We have come here, Sir, in response to your kind
invitation in order clearly to express our solidarity with
the other nations of Latin American and Caribbean and
with the efforts of the Security Council, which, even as
we speak, are together firmly committing themselves to
cooperate with efforts to stabilize Haiti in order to
guarantee the restoration and preservation of its
institutions.

Our foreign policy has consistently expressed its
solidarity with Haiti and called for generous
international assistance to help its people, crushed as
they are by poverty and requiring all types of
humanitarian assistance on an emergency basis.

In keeping with that position, our Government
has taken action at the national and international levels
aimed at preventing the gradual fragmentation of
Haitian society, in hopes of promoting and
strengthening tolerance and solidarity among the main
actors in public life in that country.

The main guidelines of our initiative are to
directly or indirectly contact and persuade the leaders
of the various sectors of Haitian society to reconcile
their differences, to promote reciprocal respect, and to
coordinate activities that will sow the seeds for the
future and that will serve as an example to promote
national unity and integrity.

The Dominican Government is convinced that
this type of institutional initiative - at both the public
and private levels - will motivate and convince those
Haitian leaders who have the capacity to influence
others and help them change the opinions of those who
are currently acting in an isolated and bellicose
manner.

The overarching commitment of the international
community towards Haiti must be aimed at achieving
the reconciliation of the various elements of Haitian
society, so that its leaders can move from confrontation
to cooperation and begin the economic reconstruction
of the country, in order to relieve the crushing poverty
of its people - an extreme example of survival in a
context of far-reaching and longstanding social
injustice on a territory experiencing an advanced
degree of erosion and desertification.

To achieve those lofty goals, we need what we
have consistently asked for and what all previous
speakers have requested: a long-term commitment on
the part of the international community to provide
massive, sustained and timely assistance on the part of
developed nations, as clearly underscored by Minister
Celso Amorim of Brazil, as well as international
solidarity that is strong enough to overcome Haiti's
problems.

In that respect, as proposed by President Leonel
Fernandez, our country is planning a ministerial
summit, to be held in Santo Domingo, aimed at
strengthening the joint actions of donors and those
countries participating in the peace mission to Haiti.

