Mrs. Nufiez de Odreman (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the
outset to thank the representative of the Republic of the
Congo for convening this meeting of great importance
for the international community. We also wish to thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for the information they have presented today.

Terrorism in all its forms - particularly State
terrorism - is a grave threat to international peace and
security, including to the very coexistence of the
community of nations. We wish to reaffirm the position
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: we condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, by
whomsoever and against whomsoever committed.

In its firm resolve to fight terrorism, our
Government has ratified many international
conventions in this area. At the domestic level, we have
developed a broad set of counter-terrorism laws and
34

have created a national counter-terrorism authority.
Thus, we have complied in a committed, responsible
and consistent manner with our obligations in this
field. We have also regularly submitted the relevant
reports to the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee and to the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism. With the same conviction and
perseverance with which we are fighting this scourge,
we wish to express our condemnation and repudiation
of the use of terrorism as a political instrument for the
outright killing or intimidation of innocent, weak and
helpless people anywhere in the world.

In the fight against terrorism, the international
community has no other choice but to work together
and to adopt policies aimed at combating this scourge
in order to mete out effective justice. Policies
employing double standards compromise the
credibility, trustworthiness and good name of any
organization or State that deliberately uses such
policies to elude terrorism, particularly State terrorism.

At present, penalties against acts of terrorism
committed by the armed forces of a State are
insufficient under the norms provided by international
humanitarian law. The so-called collateral damage of
today's military actions is not really collateral damage,
but rather principal damage, every time innocent men,
women and children are killed. Moreover, in the
current asymmetrical war, the concept of collateral
damage of military action makes no sense, since the
most powerful State is confronting an entire people.
Acts of mass destruction produced by weapons of mass
destruction are directed against people without any
distinction. That enables us to describe such acts as
State terrorism pure and simple. Examples abound,
such as the terrorist actions carried out by the
Government of the United States of America against
Nicaragua or the current case of the people of Iraq.

However, what is regulated and considered
inadmissible is support in any form for entities or
individuals who participate in terrorist acts or provide
safe haven for those who commit such acts. Such
support would be in flagrant non-compliance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). In paragraphs
2 (c) and 3 (g) of that resolution, States are prohibited
from offering safe haven to those who commit acts of
terrorism and from recognizing claims of political
motivation as grounds for refusing requests for the
extradition of alleged terrorists. Here too, examples
abound. Public opinion is aware of the protection that

Sll'V.5446

 
the Government of the United States of America is
providing to one of the most infamous terrorists in the
Western hemisphere, Luis Posada Carriles, a well-
known assassin on the CIA's payroll.

Another case worth mentioning in this Chamber
is that, on 15 March 2004, a formal extradition request
was made for the citizens Jose Antonio Pulido and
German Varela Lopez, accused in Venezuelan courts of
having planted explosive devices in diplomatic
headquarters of Spain and Colombia. On 28 April
2006, the current United States authorities granted
those terrorists freedom within United States territory.
The current Government of the United States has not
responded to the request made by the Venezuelan
judicial system to extradite - in compliance with
existing treaties and international law - those citizens
accused of carrying out terrorist acts in Venezuela and
to bring them to justice for their actions. On the
contrary, it is protecting them with baseless excuses
that are indefensible in the eyes of the international
community.

The double standards with which this subject is
being addressed are obvious. Will the following
questions remain unanswered? Who is the terrorist?
Who is the destabilizer? Who does not implement its
national counter-terrorism laws or even international
agreements when it is convenient?

Finally, our Government, which is committed to
the true fight against terrorism and does not justify any
form of terrorism, formally requests that the item of
State terrorism and the consideration of actions by the
international community against such cases as the
United States of America, which we consider to be
dangerous to our peoples, be included in this meeting
and subsequent deliberations of the Security Council.

