Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
Sweden for its leadership during the negotiations of
resolution 2427 (2018), adopted today, which we had
the pleasure of co-sponsoring and which undoubtedly
provides a framework for the integration of protection,
rights, welfare and empowerment of children
throughout the conflict cycle, reinforcing in turn the
mandate of the Special Representative and emphasizing
reintegration as an essential part of demobilization
and disarmament processes, as well as accountability
for all violations against children. We also appreciate
Sweden's role as organizer of this open debate, whose
focus is on protecting children today in order to prevent
conflicts tomorrow.

We welcome the presence of the Prime Minister of
Sweden, Mr. Stefan Lofven, and the Prime Minister of
Aruba, of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Ms. Evelyn
Wever-Croes.

Likewise, we appreciate the briefings provided by
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba; the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Henrietta Fore; and the representative
of Colombian civil society, Ms. Yenny Londofio, who
shared her experience and recommendations with us.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465)
and the information provided by Ms. Gamba today
reflect the harsh reality faced by children immersed in
conflicts, who account for an increase of 27 per cent in
violations in 2017 compared to 2016. More than 10,000
children were killed or maimed in 2017. The number
of verified cases of the recruitment and use of children
rose by a factor of four in the Central African Republic
and two in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
in the Syrian Arab Republic, Somalia, South Sudan and
Yemen the figures remained at an alarming level.

We also condemn the constant attacks on
schools and universities, particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territories, where the United Nations has
documented 164 incidents that interrupted access to
education and in many cases have led to the detention
of more than 304 boys and girls in Israeli prisons,
some of whom have been brought before military
tribunals, while many others have simply been subject
to administrative detention.
The main factors in this increase are the
proliferation and expansion of armed groups, wars over
natural resources that provoke and sustain conflicts,
the internationalization of terrorism and the changing
nature of conflicts. Such factors cannot be effectively
combated. We agree with the focus oftoday's debate on
the theme "Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow". The best way to protect children is to
address the root causes of conflicts, including war, lack
of security, illicit human trafficking, arms trafficking,
terrorism, policies of regime change, competition for
natural resources and socioeconomic conditions related
to the unequal distribution of wealth.

Combating these factors should involve a
comprehensive strategy to prevent conflicts and
children's participation in them. The implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is
particularly relevant in this context, as is fighting
poverty and inequality and promoting education and
its accessibility to all children, particularly girls, in
order to confront and end the violations and abuses
of which they are victims, especially in the context of
armed conflicts. To this we must add the importance
of preventive diplomacy, mediation and good offices
in order to maintain peace, build it and enable it to be
sustainable in the long term.

Just as important is compliance with international
regulations on the part of the international community,
including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols of 1977, in addition to the
provisions contained in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflicts. Bolivia calls on States
that have not yet done so to adhere to those important
international instruments. In that regard, and in view
of our commitment to this agenda, we welcome the
Safe Schools Declaration initiative, through which
States commit themselves to protect students, teachers,
schools and universities during armed conflicts.

We also deem it important to reaffirm the important
role that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General plays in contributing to the prevention of
conflicts in the context of her mandate by facilitating
better collaboration between the United Nations, the
Governments concerned and United Nations partners
on the ground, as well as its support for the in-country
efforts of the United Nations Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to improve dialogue with
relevant agencies of the United Nations, Governments
and parties to armed conflict, in order to obtain
concrete commitments and advocate for appropriate
response mechanisms. In that respect, the Special
Representative must continue to engage proactively
with United Nations agencies, Member States, regional
and subregional organizations and non-State armed
groups, and, together with the relevant actors, compile
best practices for their implementation, in accordance
with the resolution adopted today.

We welcome the fact that UNICEF facilitated
the appointment of a Senior Child Protection Adviser
by the African Union, which will undoubtedly help
channel the experiences of countries in the region into
signing and successfully implementing action plans.
In that regard, the Security Council's commitment to
children in armed conflict has been realized through
such plans aimed at both stopping and preventing
serious violations.

The international community must ensure the
allocation of adequate budgetary and human resources
and personnel dedicated to the protection of children
so that the United Nations can respond effectively to
serious violations against children. To that end, the
nexus linking the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, financial institutions and donors must
be strengthened. Similarly, the follow-up process with
the World Bank and the Peacebuilding Fund could be
more systematic so as to ensure and implement the
recommendations of the Working Group. Discussions
could also be held on how to ensure adequate human
and financial resources after the signing of action plans
so as to ensure their effective implementation.

Likewise, action plans should not only support
the processes of demobilizing and disarming children
associated with armed groups but must also place
particular emphasis on reintegration. That includes
rehabilitation, psychosocial support, education, specific
gender- and age-based needs, economic opportunities,
sustained support to families and communities to
combat the stigmatization of former child soldiers, and
cooperating closely with host countries. In the long-
term, they are the ones that must ensure the security
of their populations and implement the necessary
measures to ensure respect for children's human rights
following conflict.

In conclusion, protecting children in armed conflict
is an endeavour that concerns the entire international
community, including the Governments of States
that are victims of conflict, the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil
society. Accordingly, their actions must be guided by
prioritizing their protection, providing them with an
opportunity to enjoy a future in which they can fully
develop their abilities. Achieving that will be a step
towards the prevention of conflicts and towards ridding
humankind of the scourge of war.

