Mr. Normandin (Canada): Madam President, I
would first of all like to thank you and the delegation
of Mexico for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank all the speakers of this
morning. In particular, I thank Ms. Manju Gurung for
her moving and compelling statement, which reminds
us of the relevance and the importance of our work.

First, let me say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of children and armed conflict, an
informal network of over 35 interested Member States,
chaired by Canada. The Group of Friends is pleased
with the Security Council's commitment to
strengthening accountability for persistent perpetrators
of grave violations against children and encourages
decisive action against such perpetrators. We welcome
the briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict to
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as a positive step in this
direction, and in line with Security Council resolutions
1698 (2006) and 1882 (2009). The Group of Friends
also commends the sanctions Committee on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for its ground-
breaking engagement and fully supports the
designation of individuals for targeted measures, as
provided for in resolution 1807 (2008).

The Group of Friends looks forward to the
continuation of such fruitful collaboration between the
sanctions committees, the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and stands ready to work for
greater protection of children in situations of conflict.

The Group of Friends is also pleased with the
work undertaken by the Security Council in
progressively strengthening the protection framework
for children affected by armed conflict. However, the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict is currently the only subsidiary body
of the Security Council that does not receive
administrative support. In order to continue the recent
momentum and ensure day-to-day attention to the
children and armed conflict agenda, the Working
Group will need ongoing support. Therefore the Group
of Friends calls for the immediate provision of
administrative support, as requested in resolution 1882
(2009).

Lastly, the Group of Friends congratulates the
Special Representative, UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Violence against Children, on the launch of
the campaign for universal ratification of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

(spoke in French)

Speaking now in my national capacity, on behalf
of Canada, I would like to formally welcome the
Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict (S/2010/181). This debate is an
opportunity to once again bring to the Security
Council's attention the severity of continued acts of
violence against children, and at the same time to make
recommendations for the full implementation of
resolution 1882 (2009).
The adoption of that resolution last August has
brought forward new improvements to the children and
armed conflict agenda, most notably a higher profile on
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children and on the killing and maiming of children. In
particular, Canada is pleased that perpetrators of sexual
violence against children have been exposed in the
Secretary-General's annual report. Given the on-the-
ground reduction in the number of children used in
hostilities, which is a result of diligent monitoring and
reporting in recent years, Canada firmly believes that
strong monitoring and the exposure of the perpetrators
of rape and other forms of sexual Violence will result in
a significant reduction in the number of these
incidents. With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism's mandate to include these two
new triggers, strong support from the international
community is required on several fronts.

First, the mechanism requires additional financial
support from donors in order to be adequately
resourced to deliver on its mandate. Secondly,
non-governmental organizations and local civil society
are key partners and should therefore be supported.

Thirdly, as noted in the report of the Secretary-
General, the mechanism requires the political support
and cooperation of the national Governments of the
countries in question, which should in particular allow
access to non-State actors. Canada strongly supports
the link between the United Nations and non-State
actors in order to ensure that the crucial dialogue with
the latter can take place and that an action plan to
eliminate grave violations against children can be
adopted.
Canada also welcomes the call in resolution 1889
(2009) for the element of accountability to be
integrated into the agenda of the Working Group.
Sanctions should be imposed more systematically in
order for persistent perpetrators of grave Violations
against children to be held accountable. As
recommended by the Secretary-General, Canada urges
the Security Council to take more vigorous measures
against persistent violators who have been listed in the
annual report for at least five years for committing
grave violations against children.

Finally, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves special recognition for
the wealth of information put forward by her Office
and for its numerous efforts on behalf of children. She
has been a tireless proponent for the protection needs
of children and undertaken countless field missions.
The collective experience and lessons learned by
Ms. Coomaraswamy's Office, the Security Council
Working Group, and the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms are invaluable. They must be shared,
particularly since similar processes on the protection of
civilians issues have been activated.

In conclusion, Canada will continue to play a key
role and help contribute to concrete results both at the
United Nations and on the ground in countries of
concern.

