Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, for his important introduction of the
Secretary-General's quarterly report (S/2016/768). I
thank him for all his efforts since he assumed his post.
We are convinced that he will continue to support the
United Nations presence in Afghanistan and to address
issues of importance to the United Nations and the
Mission he leads.

I commend the Afghan Government for its efforts
to strengthen its national institutions so that they can
address the challenges they face, particularly with
respect to security and terrorism. In that regard, I
stress the historic ties between Egypt and Afghanistan.
We must all come together in support of the National
Unity Government, particularly because the scourge
of terrorism is not limited to its various current
manifestations and affects all of Asia, reaching so far
as the Middle East.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to the
increasing danger posed by the presence of Da'esh
in Afghanistan to the international community. The
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
continues to carry out its terrorist operations in recent
months, despite the attempts of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and the international
forces to suppress them. The head of that group was
recently killed. We must continue, in the context of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to fight and
eradicate that group wherever it is found.

Egypt maintains its cooperation, dating back to
2007, with Afghanistan in the area of strategic training
for the Afghan army and police, under the auspices of
the Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development.
We hope to engage in tripartite cooperation in that area
and that donors will provide the funding necessary to
cover the expenses for that very important training.
Egypt and Afghanistan also cooperate in other areas,
including the fight against human trafficking and
illegal immigration. Al-Azhar University also plays
an essential role in promoting Islamic thought and
moderation and the rejection ofviolence in Afghanistan
by dispatching instructors to Afghan teaching
institutions and providing annual study grants.

Egypt attaches great importance to the strengthening
and political development of Afghanistan and, in the
light of that country's key geographical position in the
region, welcomes the various economic initiatives,
such as the transfer of energy resources to the Central
Asian region, the oil pipeline under development, and
a dam that will help to enhance friendly relations and
stability.

Drug trafficking represents a serious threat. We
call on the Afghan authorities to combat such trade
and to cooperate at the regional and international
levels in the context of the war on terrorism. Egypt
firmly supports efforts to develop Afghan society and
restore infrastructure. We have answered the appeal to
participate in the Brussels Conference in October, and
hope to play an active role there in our capacity as a
guarantor of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

