Mr. A] Habib (Iran): 1 would like to begin by
wholeheartedly thanking the Bolivian presidency for
convening this meeting. No one can forget Bolivia's
principled and rational position or its dedication and
tireless efforts during its presidency of the Council,
which will remain forever in Council history. I also
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his efforts and briefing.

The implementation of the agreement to create
a demilitarized zone in Idlib continues, in particular
thanks to the cooperation of the Syrian Government.
To review that process, a ministerial meeting of the
Astana guarantor States was convened here in New
York on 26 September. It was underscored that every
effort should be made for the full implementation of
the agreement, and it was emphasized in particular that
in order to preserve the Idlib de-escalation zone and to
build on that achievement, all terrorists must leave the
zone. The guarantor States also reiterated their strong
resolve to continue fighting terrorists.

With respect to terrorists, one thing should be made
crystal clear: foreign terrorist fighters should return to
their country of origin, and terrorists of Syrian origin
must be dealt with according to Syrian law. In any case,
and as a principle in combating terrorists inside or
outside of Syria, international humanitarian and human
rights law should be strictly observed. Regarding the
armed opposition groups, it is essential that all States
with an influence thereon encourage them to end the
fighting in order to join the political process. That is
crucial to making any progress in the political domain.

Concerning the political process, our ministers
expressed satisfaction at the fact that there is
increasingly strong international support for the efforts
initiated within the Astana process, aimed at solving
the Syrian crisis through political means. That is also
confirmation of the fact that the Syrian crisis did not
and does not have any military solution. We appreciate
the efforts of Mr. De Mistura with respect to the
establishment of a constitutional committee. At the
same time, we would like to stress that measures related
to the constitutional committee should be carried out
according to the understandings reached between the
Astana guarantor States and the Special Envoy. The
proposal that was submitted in that regard should be
further examined and adjusted. In their upcoming
consultations in Geneva, the representatives of the
Astana guarantor States will discuss that issue with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.

We underline the importance of making progress in
launching the constitutional committee. Nevertheless,
exerting political pressure to set artificial deadlines,
deviating from the understandings reached or any other
political manoeuvring is not acceptable and would
prove to be counterproductive. No success can be
achieved and no progress can be made through making
hasty decisions, ignoring the realities on the ground or
making political miscalculations. Ultimately, the right
to determine the future of Syria belongs exclusively to
Syrians. We should therefore only facilitate a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned political process.

One of the key factors that can contribute to national
dialogue and accelerate the reconciliation process is the
return of all refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), and every effort should therefore be made to
facilitate their voluntary return. Unfortunately, there
have been attempts to deliberately discourage refugees
and IDPs from returning to their homes. That is an
irresponsible approach. They should not be forced to
stay where they are or prevented from repatriating.

Equally important is the reconstruction of Syria.
This is critical to facilitating the return of refugees and
IDPs and to launching a significant political process.
While the Syrian Government has already started the
reconstruction process, the international community
needs to contribute to the country in order to enable
it to rebuild all of its infrastructure. That should not
be politicized, delayed or made conditional. Just as the
Islamic Republic of Iran supported Syria in defeating
terrorists, it will also play a constructive role in bringing
peace and prosperity to the country.

Finally, with regard to the allegations made by
the United States, I must stress that they only reflect
the failure of that country's policies in Syria. Rather
than making such claims, the United States must end
its occupation of Syrian territory and stop supporting
terrorist groups.

I always hesitate to respond to our colleagues
from Saudi Arabia, but, unfortunately, they misuse
every meeting here in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly as an opportunity to go against Iran
and encourage a few small States of the region to follow
them. That is very sad for our region. That country has
played a very destructive role. Everyone around this
table knows about Saudi Arabia's destructive role in
the region, which recent events have demonstrated.
It should cease its fabrications and disinformation.
Terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq were nurtured by
Saudi ideologies, funded by its petrodollars and armed
with its weapons. Saudi Arabia should stop talking
about Syria or Iran's legitimate presence in the country,
which is only to fight the terrorists backed by the United
States and Saudi Arabia.

