Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): We are
grateful to you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We would also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Louise Frechette, and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mrs. Mary Robinson, for the important statements they
made.

More than a year after the Secretary-General
submitted his first report on this important issue and
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1296
(2000), it is the right time to do some stock-taking and
to look at the gap between the humanitarian diagnosis,
which is one of tragedy experienced by millions of
refugees and displaced persons, and the political
diagnosis, which calls for swift and appropriate action.

The current report of the Secretary-General
contains practical and useful recommendations that
deserve our full attention and thorough consideration.
At this stage, my delegation will not comment on the
proposals in detail. Given the guidelines we agreed on
in the Council about how to organize today's debate, I
would like to focus on the recommendations of the
Secretary-General that are regional in their scope.

The first point I wish to make in this connection
is that we welcome the importance the Secretary-
General has attached in his report to more regular
cooperation with regional arrangements and bodies.
This is an essential recommendation, because in my
delegation's view it provides a kind of framework for
testing almost all of the other recommendations made
by the Secretary-General. We welcome the decision
that the next high-level consultations between the
United Nations and regional organizations will focus
on the question of strengthening civilian protection in
armed conflict.

In this same connection, we believe that it is
urgent to implement a regular follow-up mechanism on
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations. It is essential to provide the regional
organizations with material, financial and technical
support. For example, it is necessary to give such
support to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) which, through its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, has
established an early warning system to collect and
analyse information. The ECOWAS area has been
divided up into four areas for monitoring and follow-
up, with local offices in Banjul, Gambia;
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso; Monrovia, Liberia; and
Cotonou, Benin.

Because one of the best ways of protecting
civilians in armed conflicts is prevention, the fight
against the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons should remain a priority for the international
community. From this perspective, the Moratorium on
the Import, Export and Manufacture of Small Arms in
West Africa, which was adopted by ECOWAS, is a
positive initiative that responds to the concerns
expressed in the Secretary-General's report, and it
therefore should be fully supported.

We believe it useful to disseminate information in
local languages about the culture of peace and the
obligations incumbent on the parties under
international humanitarian law. This could contribute
effectively to protecting civilians in armed conflicts.

The second point I wish to make is that Mali
believes it essential to make the vulnerability of
civilian populations in armed conflict a more important
factor in political decision-making. The decision by the
ECOWAS heads of State and Government to deploy a
multinational force along the borders of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone is based on that belief. This
initiative, which is intended to give humanitarian
agencies on the ground free and secure access to
populations at risk, should also help to separate
civilians from armed elements, especially in the
Parrot's Beak region. The initiative responds to the
concerns expressed in the current report of the
Secretary-General and will help to deal with the most
devastating humanitarian crisis of the day. It is for that
reason that it deserves the full support of the Council.

My third point is that, from a regional
perspective, the Secretary-General's other
recommendations should be coherently and specifically
implemented by all bilateral and multilateral actors,
including civil society, non-governmental organizations
and the private sector.

Given the massive killings of civilians in armed
conflicts, the Security Council has an obligation to act,
in the exercise of its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
two reports of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and the many relevant
proposals made in today's debate offer us guidance for
action in this regard.
