Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Le Drian, Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, as he presides over today's meeting in New
York, as well as Foreign Minister Diop. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the European
Union Special Representative for their briefings.

The Sahel region is currently facing multiple
challenges, including a fragile security situation,
spreading terrorism and an increasingly serious
incidence of transnational organized crime, all of which
will require a greater contribution and comprehensive
policies and strategies on the part of the international
community. That is the background on which the Joint
Force ofthe Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) has
been established to bring a combined response to bear
on the G-5 Sahel's regional security challenges. China
commends that initiative and would like to make the
following comments.

First, the Joint Force should receive effective
assistance and support from the international
community. It represents an important embodiment
of African countries' self-empowerment, solidarity,
cooperation and coordination and should make a
significant contribution to peace and stability in
Africa, and in the world generally. The Security
Council welcomed the Joint Force in its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2359 (2017). The international
community should fully respect Africa's ownership of
its issues and enable it to play a leading role in solving
them. It should support the efforts of the countries of
the region and regional organizations to maintain peace
and stability in the Sahel and provide assistance to the
Joint Force, especially financially.

Secondly, greater efforts must be made to push
for a political solution to the hotspot issues in the
region. The international community should respect
the sovereignty of the countries concerned and give
them active support, advance the peace process and
promote national reconciliation so as to defuse tensions
on the major issues and lead to their final settlement.
We should support the accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
give particular attention to external issues such as
the Libyan crisis that can have a spillover effect and
reduce the negative impact of external factors on the
Sahel region.

Thirdly, we must step up our contributions to
counter-terrorism cooperation in the Sahel. The relevant
counter-terrorism agencies of the United Nations
should work to improve cooperation in this area among
the countries of the region, while the international
community should help them to build their security
capacity and support their counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind, and it
is vital to fight it whenever, wherever and in whatever
forms it appears. All States should adhere to the same
norms and work to fight all groups that the Security
Council designates as terrorist. In our international
counter-terrorism cooperative efforts and operations
we must ensure that the Council in particular, and the
United Nations in general, play a leading role, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and with the internationally recognized
norms governing international relations, with a view to
strengthening effective coordination.

We should recognize the importance of regional
cooperation and ensure that regional and subregional
organizations play their due part. China acknowledges
the positive roles that the Group of Five for the Sahel,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States are playing in the efforts to resolve
the issues in the Sahel. The international community
should strengthen its coordination and communication
with countries in the region, as well as the relevant
regional and subregional organizations, in order to
closely align country-specific and regional strategies,
as well as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, thereby enabling all actors to play to their
respective strengths and form synergies.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a developing country itself, China has always
supported African countries in solving African issues
in their own ways. We support the specific roles of
regional organizations in addressing African matters.
China is of the View that supporting Africa's efforts
to achieve peace, stability and development is in the
common interests of all of us, all over the world. It is
also the common responsibility of the international
community. China supports the efforts made by
African regional and subregional organizations,
including the G-5 Sahel. We have already approved
a China-United Nations peace and development fund
aimed at supporting counter-terrorism cooperation
projects for the Sahel. China will continue to work with
its international partners to step up its contribution to
peace and sustainable development in the Sahel and the
whole of Africa.

