Ms. Lflj (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. Council President and Foreign Minister, for
convening this meeting and focusing our attention on
peace consolidation in West Africa, a situation which
provides us with hope but at the same time keeps
reminding us that the early stages of peace are fragile
and need continued nurturing.

Before I continue, I should like to associate
myself with the statement to be delivered by Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

Conflicts in West Africa have taken a terrible toll
in human lives, welfare and development, not only in
the directly affected countries, but also in neighbouring
States. The wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone have
tragically demonstrated how conflict and State failure
are contagious and how they leave a deadly trail by
destabilizing their neighbours. Likewise, we know that
the prosperity of one country is interdependent of the
prospects of its neighbours.

I should like to focus on three areas which, in our
View, call for particular attention: more efficient
peacekeeping with a stronger focus on peacebuilding;
ownership, leadership and partnership in peace
processes; and the role of women in consolidating
peace.

In West Africa we have seen increased
cooperation in peacekeeping across borders, but there
is still room for improvement. Better pooling of
operational resources, including police capacity, and
more flexible procedures for the transfer of troops are
just two examples. Ways to enable peacekeepers to
operate across borders should also be further explored.
This could help in monitoring the flow of arms and of
illegally exploited natural resources, as well as
trafficking in humans, et cetera.

But more efficient peacekeeping is only a first
step in post-conflict situations. A far more sustainable
approach is to ensure that national security institutions
are in place early on in the transition process. National
police training and capacity-development programmes
are already part of some integrated missions, but there
is scope for integrating an even broader peacebuilding
perspective into many of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. In doing so, we can provide a foundation

06-4607]

and further facilitate disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security-sector reform, and the rule of
law and help to secure justice. Looking for best
practices in this area could be an important task for the
newly created Peacebuilding Commission.

Turning to the issues of ownership, leadership
and partnership, let me underline that Africa, in
particular West Africa, has provided us with useful
experiences for the future. Regional organizations such
as the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) have
become key partners of the United Nations in the field
of peace and security. Recent experiences have
provided plenty of scope for working with African
leaders seeking peaceful solutions to military crises.
The AU's ownership of African and international
efforts is evident, and the AU has played a
commendable role in creating renewed momentum in,
for instance, the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire.
Furthermore, the new International Working Group has
been pivotal in ensuring necessary regional and
international coordination and unity.

Through its Programme for Peace in Africa,
Denmark has set aside more than $40 million over a
five-year period to support Africa's own efforts to
secure peace and stability on the continent. Through
this programme, we are supporting the African Union,
as well as subregional organizations, including
ECOWAS, in strengthening their capacity in crisis
preparedness and prevention, as well as in crisis
management and response. In addition, we support
strengthened collaboration with civil society, where
many untapped resources, from early warning to
conflict resolution, are available.

Finally, I should like to advocate a greater focus
on women in conflict resolution and peace
consolidation. There is a long history of women's
participation in grass-roots efforts to minimize hostility
and begin reconstruction and reconciliation. Yet
women tend to take little part in formal peace
processes and negotiations. War is hardest on women
and children. They are the most vulnerable when wars
tear apart entire societies, the social and economic
infrastructure collapses and basic security is no longer
present. In such situations of conflict, women take on
multiple roles. They become the heads of families, and
they hold communities together. In building sustainable
peace, it must be recognized - across the board -
that post-conflict initiatives are more successful when
women are given the opportunity to take their
experiences further and to be an integral and equal part
of peacemaking.

