Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to
see Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas and we want to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation on the situation in West Africa,
the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin, as well as the
activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) over the past six months.
We very much appreciate the great contribution that
Mr. Chambas has been making in discharging his very
heavy responsibility with regard to these key regions
of Africa. Sweden, the Netherlands and others have
recognized the contribution of Mr. Chambas, and we
share their View.

We take note of the overall developments and trends

in these regions, as well as the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. We
support the continued role ofthe Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and his good offices in efforts
aimed at sustaining peace in the region, in collaboration
with regional and international partners, through the
promotion of inclusive national political dialogue,
constitutional and democratic reforms, and transparent
and peaceful electoral processes. In such efforts, we
must always keep in mind that the collaboration among
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations like the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is critical, as was amply
demonstrated when it ensured a peaceful and safe
transition in Gambia, in which Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Chambas played a key role.

As I have concluded my introductory remarks, I
would now like to make a few observations focusing
on some of the most important political, security and
humanitarian issues highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/1104). With regard to political
and governance trends, we welcome the holding
of peaceful presidential and legislative elections
in Liberia, marking an important milestone in the
country's effort to build sustainable democracy. As
we celebrate that event and achievement, however,
we cannot - as was stressed by the representative of
cote d'Ivoire a while ago - be oblivious of the great
need the country has for the effective cooperation and
support of the international community to ensure the
sustainability of its democratic institutions. Not only
are these institutions not built in a day, but they also
need to be underpinned by progress in the economic and
social sectors in order to address the needs of society.

In contrast to this, the political tension in Togo in
relation to the amendment of the country's Constitution
is a cause for concern. We support the efforts ofregional
leaders in trying to assist national stakeholders in
arriving at a peaceful resolution to the political crisis.
Here it is critical that care is taken so that the relative
peace the country has had is not taken for granted. That
is why all sectors of society have the responsibility to
contribute to ensure that change is achieved peacefully
and without allowing a slide to the unknown.

Turning to the security dynamics of the wider
region, it is clear that it continues to face multiple and
complex security challenges, including the threats of
terrorism and violent extremism, drug trafficking
and other transnational organized crime. All of these
have been elucidated by Mr. Chambas. The visit by the
African Union Peace and Security Council to the Lake

Chad basin in July and the holding of the first regional
stabilization conference for the Lake Chad basin
region in November last year were indeed important
developments. However, we express our concern over
the withdrawal of Chadian troops from the Multinational
Joint Task Force in the Niger and its impact on the
Force's response effort, as mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report. The circumstances surrounding those
events will have to be looked at seriously with a View to
addressing factors that might have given rise to them.
The contribution of Chad cannot be taken lightly. There
is no doubt that its absence will have implications.

On the other hand, the Security Council's Visit to
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) region in
October; the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) and
resolution 2391 (2017) on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force;
and the high-level meeting held in Paris to mobilize
support for the Force are encouraging developments.
We could not agree more with the Secretary-General
on the need to complement the security and military
response - whether in the Sahel or the Lake Chad
basin regions - with development interventions and
on the need to address the root causes of conflict to
prevent tensions and violence, to tackle poverty and
exclusion, to strengthen the resilience of institutions
and communities and to build peaceful and inclusive
societies. There is no doubt that widespread food
insecurity, forced displacement, climate change,
chronic vulnerability and susceptibility to epidemics
continue to affect people across the wider region, as we
witnessed first hand during our visit to both the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin region last year.

In this context, we believe that accelerating the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel is key to addressing that
challenge. Although the humanitarian response was
further scaled up in 2017, the humanitarian challenge
remains enormous; hence the need for enhanced and
sustained engagement and support on the part of the
international community. The continued cooperation
and partnership of the Governments of the region,
the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
G-5 Sahel, the Mano River Union, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
as well as others, remain indispensable in tackling the
multiple and complex challenges faced by countries
of the region and promoting peace and stability. We
commend the role of UNOWAS and its continued
efforts, in cooperation and partnership with all of those
important stakeholders, in fulfilling its mandate.

Finally, we look forward to constructively engaging
in the discussion on the draft presidential statement to
be proposed by cote d'Ivoire, which has assumrf the
penholdership of this dossier from Senegal.

