Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his useful
briefing this morning. We particularly appreciated his
in-depth analysis of the situation in Kosovo.

At the last Council meeting on this item, held on
26 July 2001, we reiterated our call for the continuation
and strengthening of the dialogue between the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. Council members stressed that the
cooperation of Belgrade was essential for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). In that
context, discussions yesterday, in the latest round of
such talks, between the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, and Deputy Prime
Minister Covic marked a step in the right direction. We
encourage them to continue their efforts at achieving
the shared objectives.

One of our main concerns in Kosovo at this point
in time is the forthcoming election. During our mission
to Kosovo, we stressed the need for participation by all
communities with a view to making the election a
success. We underlined the importance of support for
the democratic process that best guarantees the rights
of all communities. The registration of minority
communities, so far, has been extremely disappointing.
Bangladesh appreciates the appeal made in that regard
to the Kosovo Serbs this weekend by President
Kostunica. We urge the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to continue to encourage
registration for the 17 November elections by Kosovo
Serbs and the internally displaced.

I shall make observations on a few specific areas.
First is the question of missing persons and detainees.
This is a humanitarian issue. It has serious political
implications as well. We flagged this humanitarian
question during our first mission to Kosovo, last year.
We stressed the point again this year in Pristina and in
Belgrade. We are pleased that Deputy Prime Minister
Covic met representatives of the families of missing
persons from Gracanica. Such gestures are crucial in
building confidence and in helping reconciliation. We
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Haekkerup, and Deputy Prime Minister
Covic to continue to work together on the issue with
some determination.

The second area concerns the rights of the
minority communities - rights, and also
responsibilities. We have always stressed that it is
important that the majority ensure that the rights of the
minority communities are respected. In turn, minority
communities too must realize that there is no
alternative to establishing a multi-ethnic society. The
Kosovo Serb community, in particular, must integrate
into the structures being set up by UNMIK rather than
attempting to set up parallel structures. In that regard,
we appreciate the understanding being shown by
Belgrade on the question of transition institutions.

The initiatives taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Haekkerup, to protect the rights of minority
communities deserve our commendation. We should
lend support to the regulation to monitor property sales
in mixed neighbourhoods. That is a positive measure
aimed at preventing irregular sales of property that
would be detrimental to minority rights or to Kosovo's
multi-ethnic character.

The third area relates to security and law and
order. We reiterate that secure conditions for the
elections must be ensured. We earlier recommended the
development of a comprehensive strategy to resolve the
complex situation in Mitrovica. The emphasis there
should be multi-ethnic initiatives in the social,
economic and religious areas that would facilitate
rebuilding confidence among communities. We hope
that progress has been made in that regard.

It is in the interest of Kosovo to facilitate the
participation of all communities in the elections, as
well as the return of refugees and displaced persons.

Fourthly, as regards the role of civil society, as
we underscored during the Council's last meeting on
this item, civil society, including Kosovo women's
organizations, are engaged in reaching across the
ethnic divide, in building confidence, in helping with
reconciliation and in fostering greater tolerance. This is
well recognized. Such organizations should receive the
support of UNMIK and the encouragement of the
international community.

I shall conclude by underlining that all Kosovars,
irrespective of their ethnic background, should accept
the framework established under resolution 1244
(1999) and should contribute to the full implementation
of that resolution. To that end, representation of
different communities in the interim institutions is
essential. Therefore the holding of successful elections
in Kosovo is the most important challenge facing
UNMIK and, if I may say so, the international
community. It is the most important undertaking for the
people of Kosovo. It will be an important step forward
for lasting peace in the Balkans.

