Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to welcome you personally among us
once again in the Council, Mr. President, and to thank
you and your Mission for holding this very important
meeting. It is being held within the framework of the
importance that your friendly country, Mexico, has
given it. It has an historical importance, for this matter
is the core of Chapter VIII and Article 52 of the
Charter, concerning regional arrangements in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
appropriate to the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

The great importance of discussing this issue
stems also from the fact that it comes at a crucial stage
for regional developments, particularly those in the
Palestinian question and the invasion of Iraq. There is
continuous aggression against Palestinian people,
which has increased with the invasion of Iraq. The
Arab-Israeli conflict has continued for decades now,
without the Council and the international community
finding a solution. Now, we are facing a new situation
in Iraq, which is very complicated.

Those two examples alone reveal our dire need,
in the presence of a failure in the mechanism intended
to maintain international peace and security, to improve
the ways and means that the Security Council uses to
maintain peace and security, by providing an
opportunity for regional organizations to play an
enhanced role in that endeavour.

In the light of the bitter realities in the Middle
East, Africa and other parts of the world, Syria calls for
the establishment of a network of mechanisms to
ensure effective international cooperation within the
framework of the United Nations - forsaking the
traditional methods that have failed to date - in order
to implement the principles and purposes of the Charter
and those of international law and legitimacy, to put an
end to international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations - particularly State terrorism - and to
comprehensively put an end to the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction through the establishment
of zones free of weapons of mass destruction in those
regions and through the promotion and strengthening
of agreements and conventions in that regard, not
allowing any country to be exempt from such
comprehensive mechanisms in a way that threatens
peace and security.

We hope that, in the future, regional organizations
will be in a better position to promote cooperation
between themselves and the United Nations in order to
guarantee peace and security in all their aspects,
particularly in the light of an international environment
in which in the past few weeks the Security Council
and we its members have clearly failed to stop the
outbreak of a war and have continued to be unable to
deal with an invasion of a Member State.

We hope that the Security Council will resume its
truly effective role, using diplomacy to prevent the
outbreak of conflicts. Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States - whom we
welcome and thank for his detailed statement, which
focused on the thoughts and feelings prevailing in the
Arab region and the bitterness pervading everyone's
spirit with regard to the developments now occurring in
the Middle East - spoke in detail about the
cooperative role that the Arab League has played
without any reciprocation on the part of the Security
Council. I fully concur with what he said concerning
the situation in Iraq.

I welcome all the representatives of regional
organizations who are present at today's meeting, but I
should especially like to welcome the representative of
the European Union, who just spoke, and to emphasize
that we believe in close cooperation among regional
organizations. We also believe in Arab-European
cooperation in all its aspects - which is a source of
pride to us - in Arab-African cooperation and in Arab
cooperation with regional organizations.

We value highly European Union participation in
meetings of the Arab League during the Iraqi crisis and
in meetings of the Security Council when the Iraqi
question was under consideration, as well as European
partnership meetings - all in the interest of
international peace and security. We believe that there
is an urgent need for the close sharing of information
between the United Nations system and regional
organizations. We must promote cooperation between
the United Nations and all regional organizations,
particularly with regard to issues that those
organizations have in common with the Security
Council and the rest of the United Nations.

We fully agree with the representative of the
European Union that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with the United Nations, particularly the Security
Council. We welcome his statement that the European
Union is determined to support the Security Council in
shouldering its responsibilities within the framework of
the United Nations. I note that we respect that
European Union position, particularly in the light of
what we have recently witnessed with regard to taking
action outside the Council's competence and
leapfrogging the Charter of the United Nations with
respect to the Iraqi question.

