The President (spoke in French): I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Nestor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April 2011.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts

The President (spoke in French): I welcome the
presence of His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
regarding Osama Bin Laden and its condemnation
of the Al-Qaida network and other associated
terrorist groups for the multiple criminal terrorist
acts aimed at causing the deaths of numerous
innocent civilians and the destruction of property.

"The Security Council also recalls the
heinous terrorist attacks which took place on
11 September 2001 in New York, Washington,
DC, and Pennsylvania and the other numerous
attacks perpetrated by the network throughout the
world.

"In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the news on 1 May 2011 that Osama
Bin Laden will never again be able to perpetrate
such acts of terrorism, and reaffirms that terrorism
cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or group.

"The Security Council recognizes this
critical development and other accomplishments
made in the fight against terrorism and urges all
States to remain vigilant and intensify their
efforts in the fight against terrorism.
"The Security Council expresses once again
its deepest sympathy and condolences to the
victims of terrorism and their families.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of all its resolutions and statements
on terrorism, in particular resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 1963 (2010)
and 1904 (2009), as well as other applicable
international counter-terrorism instruments,
stresses the need for their full implementation
and calls for enhanced cooperation in this regard.

"The Security Council further reaffirms its
call on all States to work together urgently to
bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of terrorist attacks and its determination
that those responsible for aiding, supporting or
harbouring the perpetrators, organizers and
sponsors of these acts will be held accountable.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
Member States must ensure that any measures
taken to combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council stresses that no cause
or grievance can justify the murder of innocent
people and that terrorism will not be defeated by
military force, law enforcement measures and
intelligence operations alone, and can only be
defeated by a sustained and comprehensive
approach involving the active participation and
collaboration of all States and relevant
international and regional organizations and civil
society to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism and to impede, impair, isolate
and incapacitate the terrorist threat."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
11-31995

