Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Lacroix for his briefing. I would
like to welcome our friend Foreign Minister Meza-
Cuadra back to the Council.

Today is a historic day for Haiti and for the United
Nations. In so many complex circumstances, the status
quo prevails, but today is different. Today marks the
transition, after 15 years of commitment and sacrifice,
ofa peacekeeping mission to a special political mission.
Our gratitude goes to the brave men and women who
served in both the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is very deep.
Their contributions have been instrumental in helping
lay Haiti's path towards security and stability. We also
acknowledge and welcome the leadership of Helen
La Lime.

The transition of MINUJUSTH to a special
political mission demonstrates that the United Nations
can and should adapt its peacekeeping presence to
reflect evolving circumstances and in support of its
own evaluations. Given the current state of Haiti's
political landscape, a successful transition between the
Mission and the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) is more important than ever. The United
States is ready to support Haiti, BINUH and Ms. La
Lime - a sentiment that I am confident is shared by
the entire Council.

We commend the progress made during the
Mission's work in Haiti, including the expanded
protection of Haitian citizens by the country's human
rights institution and the increased capability and
capacity of civil society organizations to promote
human dignity. We are particularly pleased with the
development of the Haitian National Police, which is
now ready to shoulder Haiti's domestic security burden.
The professionalism it has shown in the face of a
volatile security environment is both commendable and
heartening. As part of that development, we encourage
accountability through timely investigations and
prosecutions in any case where excessive force is used.

We also recognize the serious resource constraints
the Haitian National Police faces. We call on the
Government of Haiti to provide that essential
institution with the support it needs for effective work.
Beyond law enforcement, as the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/805) indicates, Haiti will require
continued assistance in several key areas, including the
following five domains: the organization of free and
fair elections, the continued professionalization of the
Haitian National Police, the protection of human rights,
the strengthening of the justice sector and the reduction
of violence, with particular emphasis on gang-related
violence. We expect that both the Government and
BINUH will continue working towards those goals.

More broadly, we encourage the Government of
Haiti to continue a peaceful dialogue that results in a
parliamentary Government that strengthens the rule
of law and anti-corruption institutions. Likewise,
we urge Haiti's political, economic and civil society
stakeholders to work peacefully to address the most
pressing economic and social challenges facing
the country. We must be clear, however, that the
Government of Haiti is ultimately responsible for the
success of the new mission. That represents not merely
a new challenge but an opportunity to bring long
awaited peace and prosperity to the Haitian people. We
encourage the Government to take full advantage of
that opportunity and to engage comprehensively with
BINUH to that end.

Finally, it is vital for the internationally community,
as a whole, and Member States, bilaterally, to support
Haiti through investments and active engagement. As
we partner with other countries all over the world, the
United States is investing significant economic and
political resources in a better future for Haiti. We remain
its largest bilateral donor, with $5.2 billion committed
for humanitarian relief, reconstruction and development
assistance since 2010. We urge all members to increase
support via foreign direct investment and other means.

Together, we have done the important work of
seeing that peacekeeping mission transition into
something new. May we not tire in our efforts as we
and the Government of Haiti now strive to convert the
new political mission into tangible human advancement
for all Haitians.

