Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to begin by thanking the Prosecutor for her
report and for her presence here.

The goal of combating impunity, as set out in
resolution 1593 (2005), remains as necessary as ever.
The numerous acts of violence that the Prosecutor lists
in her report remain unacceptable, and the reference to
allegations of the use of the chemical weapons in the
report, which of course must be investigated, should
push the Security Council to ensure greater coherence
and determination in the implementation of its own
decisions. In that context, it is more important than
ever that justice be done and guilt assigned so as to
prevent and deter any recurrence of such acts. That is
why France deplores the fact that the arrest warrants
issued by the Court have not been executed.

The Council and the international community are
fully aware of the decisions that need to be taken to
restore stability and peace in Darfur.

First, the resolution of the conflict must be
political. It must involve the Government and the rebel
groups. We regret in that respect the absence of any
genuine progress in establishing an inclusive process
allowing a sustainable peace to be achieved. France
supports the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel to that end.

Secondly, the protection of civilians must be
ensured. It is important to recall here that the primary
responsibility for protecting the population lies with
the Sudanese Government, and to call on all parties to
the conflict to respect international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. We regret that the
Prosecutor's report once again lists restrictions on
access for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as well as obstacles
to its functioning. The Sudanese authorities must
provide full cooperation so as to allow the Operation to
discharge its mandate.

Thirdly, safe, immediate and obstacle-free
humanitarian access to the civilian population and
displaced persons must be guaranteed.

Fourthly, and finally, it remains key that the
perpetrators of the crimes committed be prosecuted
and brought to justice. France reiterates in this respect
the importance of the obligation for cooperation by all
States parties to the International Criminal Court and
by all States Members of the United Nations with the
Court, in accordance with the resolutions adopted by
the Council. Without such cooperation, the prosecution
of the most serious crimes by the Court will remain a
dead letter.

This obligation falls primarily on the Sudan,
which must implement the arrest warrants against its
nationals for crimes committed on its territory and
cooperate with the Court, as demanded by resolution
1593 (2005). The States parties to the Rome Statute also
have a key role to play with regard to their statutory
obligation to cooperate with the Court and to execute
arrest warrants when the persons concerned are present
on their territory. We regret that in recent months this
obligation has not been respected by certain States, and
we are grateful to the Office of the Prosecutor for its
follow-up on this major challenge.

France regularly reiterates, in the context of its
bilateral relations with those States and with the Sudan,
the importance it attaches to the fight against impunity
and its support for the Court, and it calls on those States
to uphold their international commitments in terms of
cooperation with the Court.

In that context, the responsibility of the Council
is clear, and it is two-pronged. Cooperation with the
Court must be made effective, and it must be ensured
that arrest warrants are executed. As the Prosecutor
stressed, it is up to the Council to respond to cases of
non-cooperation with the Court. In that regard, we are
ready to consider modalities that would allow action by
the Council.

It is also vital that the Assembly of States parties
remain mobilized on cases of non-cooperation with the
Court, as must international organizations. Here it is
necessary to limit contacts with persons who are subject
to arrest warrants to those who are deemed essential, in
line with the policy of the Secretary-General as defined
in his two directives of April 2013. France reiterates
the importance of the pursuit by the United Nations
as whole of the implementation of those directives
and of the application of the relevant provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005).

Finally, we should continue efforts to ensure a
cessation of violence against civilians and the quest for
an inclusive political solution. That is the only possible
way to achieve peace and stability in Darfur in the long-

term. To that end, UNAMID has a significant role to
play and must accomplish its mandate. It is essential that
free, unrestricted access to the entire Darfur territory
be granted to it. We will give particular attention to that
point during the next UNAMID mandate extension.

