Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for proposing this
briefing. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his remarks and the representatives
of Bangladesh and Canada for their contributions.

International stability is increasingly at risk.
Therefore all Member States, within their own
capabilities, should provide a qualified contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Italy is doing
its part as a global security provider. Besides being
one of the most generous financial contributors to the
peacekeeping budget, we are also the top contributor
of Blue Helmets from the Group of Western European
and other States. We are currently participating in the
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Lebanon,

with more than 1000 units, Cyprus and Mali, and in the
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.

However, beyond United Nations peace operations,
our defence and police forces are also providing
assistance and protection in other areas around the
world - from Somalia to Afghanistan, from Iraq to
Libya, and in the Mediterranean, the Sahel, the Arab
Gulf, the Balkans and Eastern Europe. Wherever its
assistance is required, my country spares no effort to
build capacity across the board, from border security to
election security, from justice and correction practices
to the fight against organized crime and all types
of trafficking.

Peacekeeping operations have capability gaps.
There is an urgent need for air assets to improve the
mobility of troops, medical assets to provide assistance
and fast medical evacuation and to civilians if needed,
and units for explosive ordnance disposal to remove
mines and improvised explosive devices. Technology
is key to increasing the safety and security of
peacekeepers. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has effectively
and efficiently improved the gathering of information
and provided enhanced situational awareness that is
crucial to the safety and security of peacekeepers and
the protection of civilians.

Italy has provided many resources to the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System in terms of manoeuvre
units complemented by enablers. Since the System was
created in 2015, we have fully supported it, offering
units from the national basket of forces prepared
with dedicated training cycles. We will confirm our
commitment at the next Defence Ministerial Meeting
in Vancouver.

Another major gap in peacekeeping operations is
the role and presence of women. As stated in resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security - in particular resolution 2242
(2015) - we need to increase the number of women
in United Nations military and police contingents.
All Member States should do more to that end. The
recruitment of a growing number of women at the
national level today will result in a greater gender
balance in the medium term. The participation ofwomen
at all levels is key to improving the effectiveness and
performance of missions. Their role is indispensable to
all peace and security efforts.
Training is vital to improving capability and
ensuring that mandates can be effectively delivered
on the ground. Since 2005, the Center of Excellence
for Stability Police Units in Vicenza - which is run
by our Carabinieri, together with instructors from
the United States and other African and European
countries - has offered qualified training for United
Nations peacekeepers, based on high professional and
ethical standards, through specific training modules
on the rule of law, international humanitarian law, the
protection of civilians, the protection of historical and
cultural heritage, preventing sexual and gender-based
violence in conflicts, and the broader women and peace
and security agenda.

Those training programmes develop standards
and common operating approaches to be applied
during robust police activity. We are convinced that
future peace operations will be increasingly based on
specialized police units focused on stabilization, the
rule of law, justice and the protection of civilians, in line
with the reform of the peace and security, architecture
envisaged by the Secretary-General, which emphasizes
the need to focus more on prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding.

It is therefore crucial to train peacekeepers to
protect people, key values and principles so as to ensure
the credibility and reputation of the United Nations. In
that context, let me highlight that Italy has joined the
Circle of Leadership created by the Secretary-General
to prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuses,
signed the voluntary compact to eliminate the scourge
of sexual exploitation and abuses, and contributed
to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse.

In terms of strategic planning, we should not
forget logistics. The capacity of operations to deliver
and accomplish their mandates is closely related
to the swiftness of deployment and the operational
effectiveness of field missions. The United Nations
Global Service Centre, which has been located
in Brindisi since 1994, is a fundamental hub to
provide logistical support to peacekeeping missions
around the world. We should maximize efficiency in
delivering services. We should also pay attention to
the management of the environmental footprint of field
missions throughout their life cycles. A lighter footprint
would allow for cost efficiencies, improved safety and
security for troops and civilians in host countries, and
eventually better mandate delivery.

Finally, we are fully committed to working together
for smarter, more effective and successful peace
missions. Therefore, we need to provide missions with
the capabilities they require to deliver their mandate,
keeping in mind the decisive importance of the human
factor. I therefore wish to thank all the women and men
who are serving, and have served, the United Nations
peacekeeping missions across the world. I also pay
tribute to those that have lost their lives over the years.

