Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, particularly for organizing and sharing
this debate. I also want to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe, Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and Mrs. Florentina Ukonga of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission (GGC) for their briefings.
The United States believes that piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea requires the strongest possible regional
response with international help. That is why, since

2007, the United States has provided approximately
$35 million in assistance to regional States to build
maritime security capacity, including coastal radars,
equipment, boats and associated training.

The United States is committed to working with
our African and other international partners through
programmes like the Africa Partnership Station and the
African Maritime Law Enforcement Partnership. It is
worth noting that Obangame Express 2012, a regional
Gulf of Guinea maritime exercise to help local forces
improve their capabilities to counter illicit maritime
activities, will conclude in the coming days. This
exercise includes the participation of Nigeria,
Cameroon, Ghana, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Sao
Tome and Principe, Togo, Benin and the Republic of
Congo, as well as well as non-African partners.

There can go no doubt that the situation has
become more grave. The impact of maritime crime on
local economies is staggering. By one estimate, the
West African subregion loses $2 billion annually to
maritime attacks - a high price for a region with
extensive development needs and already fragile
economies. Benin saw a 70 per cent decrease in the
number of ships entering the Port of Cotonou following
its designation as high-risk by a maritime insurance
company last August. And no price can be placed on
the loss of life as occurred on 13 February, when
gunmen shot and killed the captain and chief engineer
of a cargo ship off the coast of Nigeria.

The primary responsibility for patrolling and
securing offshore areas rests, of course, with the
Governments and countries of the Gulf of Guinea. As
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/45) states, there
is an urgent need for these countries to develop a
comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the entire
region. No country has the capacity on its own to
tackle maritime crime.

Gulf of Guinea countries need to continue
developing regional coordination mechanisms to
address the lack of a collective surveillance system; the
lack of a joint monitoring and patrolling arrangement;
the absence of a sustainable process for equipping,
funding and maintaining maritime infrastructure; the
lack of a formalized information-gathering and
exchange system; and inadequate legal frameworks.
The need to address corruption and to strengthen law
enforcement capabilities also cannot be overstated. The
Secretary-General's report notes that it is

"unlikely that the pilfered fuel, which
subsequently resurfaces on the black market in
the main ports along the Gulf of Guinea, is being
stolen and distributed without the collusion of
officials at the ports" (5/2012/45, para. 9).

Nigeria and Benin have undertaken joint patrols,
as have Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao
Tome and Principe. This model should be extended to
other countries of the Gulf of Guinea to ensure that the
problem is fully addressed, rather than simply
relocated.

Cameroon's experience offers both hope and a
cautionary lesson. Thanks in part to the donation of
equipment, training and materiel by partners, but in
large part through its own efforts, Cameroon reduced
the number of instances of maritime crime in its waters
from 40 in 2009 to eight in the first eight months of
2011. That was done by focusing on the highest risk
areas in its territorial waters. But while mitigating the
risk within Cameroonian waters, that success appears
to have caused much of the illegal activity to shift
farther north and west, underscoring the need for a
regional approach.

As the Council urged in resolution 2018 (2011), a
summit of Gulf of Guinea Heads of State should be
convened to develop a comprehensive response in the
region and to encourage members of ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission to devise a united
strategy. The international community has a role to
play in supporting these national and regional efforts.
We welcome the suggestion detailed in the Secretary-
General's report that the United Nations play a
supporting, facilitation and coordination role with
respect to Gulf of Guinea piracy and maritime armed
robbery, supplementing regional organizations' leading
role.

Piracy and maritime armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea have threatened the economies, Governments
and people of the region for far too long. National and
regional political will, with the support of the
international community, will be critical to long-term
success in reversing this threat.

