Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to consider the
Palestinian question while the occupied Palestinian
territories are experiencing serious and dangerous
events, especially with regard to Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
which have led to a deterioration of the situation not only
in Al-Quds but throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories - and perhaps even beyond the region,
given the unique meaning that Al-Quds Al-Sharif has
not only for Palestinians and Arabs but also for the
entire Muslim world.

We have already warned of the grave repercussions
of the recent events. We reiterate our call upon Israel
to end the violence and the security escalations at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the grave toll in terms of
dead and wounded among Palestinians. We also call
upon Israel to respect freedom of worship and religion,
as well as the right of the Palestinian people to practice
their faith in freedom and security. We call upon Israel
to refrain from taking additional measures that are
liable to further fan the flames of the conflict, incite
religious passions and worsen the suffering endured by
the Palestine people, thereby undermining prospects
for achieving a fair, lasting and comprehensive peace
based on the two-State solution.

To us it is important to reiterate once again the
Council's own pronouncements concerning the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. In that connection, I refer to the Council's
press statement of 17 September 2015 (SC/12052),
which calls for upholding the historic status quo of
Al-Haram Al-Sharif in word and in practice, including
by safeguarding the right and freedom of Muslim
worshippers to practice their faith. It is also important to
refer to well-known measures adopted by the Council,
including resolution 478 (1980), which reaffirms that
all legislative and administrative measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, that threaten to change
the situation with respect to the holy city of Jerusalem
are null and void and must be rescinded. Moreover,
resolution 2334 (2016) does not acknowledge any
change to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Al-Quds, except with the consent of the parties
through negotiations.

In that regard, I would like to reaffirm that Egypt
welcomes the efforts aimed at de-escalating the current
crisis, including those undertaken by Jordan in the light
of the historic role of the brotherly Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan in connection with its custodianship of the
sacred sites in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We have taken note
of the Israeli decision to remove the metal detectors. We
hope that the situation will return to normal, including
with regard to Jordan.

If the current crisis were to continue, its
consequences would not be limited to Palestine and
Israel. It is necessary for us all and for the Council to
be aware of that. For it incumbent upon the Council to
maintain international peace and security, as well as
shoulder the responsibility to monitor the crisis so that
the situation does not spiral out of control, and maintain
prospects for direct negotiations, including final status
issues encompassing Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

The occupation of Palestinian territories continues
without any glimmer of hope of ending that tragic
situation. Measures taken against the Palestinian
people are increasing at an accelerated rate. Settlement
expansion is also continuing. United Nations and
Security Council resolutions that call for upholding the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations are not
being implemented. I am speaking principally of the
right to self-determination.

All of those factors are causing great frustration,
which has accumulated during the years of siege and
occupation. What we see before us presently, in terms
of risks and dangers, clearly shows that attempts to
bury one's head in the sand are liable to have great
consequences. All those who believe that the Palestinian
question does not have the same importance compared
to other issues plaguing the region have exhibited
poor judgement.

We reiterate that the call to end the occupation and
to implement United Nations resolutions, including
resolutions of the Security Council, which is tasked
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, is not aimed at delegitimizing any State. It is
a call for the restoration of the rights-holders and for
the implementation of international law. Ultimately,
that would have beneficial and positive results for all
the people throughout the region, including, of course,
the Israeli people. We all recognize their right to live
in peace and security within their borders and to enjoy
good-neighbourly relations with the States in the region.

Historically, Egypt has been a pioneer in the
restoration of peace in the region, and we commit
ourselves to persevering in our efforts along that
path with the two sides, Israelis and Palestinians.
Furthermore, the recent visit to Cairo by Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas is part of the coordination
between the two parties. The Egyptian authorities
have reaffirmed their steadfast position, and call for
reaching a comprehensive and just solution that will
guarantee the right of the Palestinian people to build
their independent State, on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as the capital.
The Egyptian Government has also affirmed that the
Palestinian question remains an utmost priority for
Egypt, and that reaching a settlement is indeed a basic
premise for the restoration of security and stability in
the Middle East and for lending new momentum to
development in the region. We reaffirm that our efforts
to relaunch negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis will continue, and that those efforts will also
help to forge closer ties among Palestinians and help
put an end to the divisions.

In conclusion, ifI may, I would like to reaffirm that
the historic call of the Arab States 4 the Arab Peace
Initiative - clearly attests to the fact that Arab countries
have collectively committed themselves to the land-for-
peace principle as the framework and foundation for a
solution. The recent Arab Summit held in Amman led
to a reiteration by Heads of States and Governments of
their support for that very same Arab Peace Initiative.
We have further noted that the Administration of the
United States of America is open to reaching a lasting
settlement, which we applaud. In that regard, we stand
ready to lend our assistance in that regard.

