Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to warmly thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative of convening this meeting
almost a year to the day after the beginning of the
crisis in Rakhine state. I would also like to commend
the personal commitment of the Secretary-General
in drawing attention to and mobilizing international
action to be taken on behalf ofthis tragedy. I would also
like to warmly thank the Goodwill Ambassador for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Ms. Cate Blanchett, and Assistant Secretary-
General Tegegnework Gettu for their briefings on this
situation, which deserves the continued and resolute
attention of the Security Council.

Almost a year ago, before the General Assembly,
the President of France denounced the ethnic cleansing
suffered by the Rohingya (see A/72/PV.4). Since then,
France has consistently stressed its concern about the
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in an organized,
coordinated and systematic manner in Rakhine state. I
would like to make three observations today.

First, commitments have been made by the Burmese
authorities and must now be fully implemented. While
those are first steps that should be encouraged, the
progress seen on the ground remains very limited
and is not commensurate with the scale and gravity
of the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law that have been committed. In that
regard, France is very concerned by the conclusions of
the advance version of the report of the Human Rights
Council's Independent International Fact-Finding
Mission in Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64), according to
which the Burmese army could be accused of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, which fall
within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. France calls on the international community
to undertake determined action to collect and protect
evidence, and to ensure that those responsible for the
crimes committed against the Rohingya population be
brought to justice.

France also reiterates its call on the Burmese
authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur
and the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission. We have
taken note of Burma's establishment of a commission
of inquiry on human rights violations. However, at
this stage, we have no information guaranteeing the
independence or the impartiality of that mechanism,
or on the protection provided to witnesses. We also
condemn the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed against
children. We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, who recently visited
the country, will soon be able to brief the Council on
her mission and provide it with an update.

We also welcome the conclusion in June of a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which is an
essential step to enable the voluntary, safe, dignified
and sustainable return of Rohingya refugees when
the time comes. Nonetheless, we are concerned about
ongoing restrictions of access. Only unimpeded access
to all affected villages and communities will allow us
to determine whether the conditions for such returns
have been met.

With regard to the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by the late Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, figures are regularly put forward
by the Burmese authorities, but we have very little
concrete information on how the measures are actually
being implemented. France reiterates in particular the
importance of the recommendations related to the issue
of citizenship, revising the 1982 law and ensuring equal
rights for all members of the Rohingya community.
We also support the recommendations concerning the
freedom ofmovement, media access and socioeconomic
development in Rakhine state.

Secondly, I would like to focus briefly on the
humanitarian dimension of the crisis. France, both
in its national capacity and within the European
Union, is providing support to Bangladesh, which
continues to host on its territory, with admirable
generosity, almost 1 million Rohingya refugees living
in particularly precarious conditions. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and all of the humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies concerned have done outstanding
work. The international community must continue
to support Bangladesh and humanitarian agencies in
accordance with three priorities: first, by increasing
its contributions to the United Nations humanitarian
response plan, which is currently funded at only 33 per
cent; secondly, by continuing to take the measures
necessary to protect the Rohingya people from security
and health risks in camps; and, thirdly, by continuing
to support Bangladesh, humanitarian actors and
local host populations to make the living conditions
of the Rohingya refugees as sustainable as possible,
while preserving Bangladesh's national prospects
for economic development. Special attention must be
paid to the needs of children, particularly with regard
to education, and to the needs of women who have
suffered untold violence. I still think about the images
and testimonies of the women whom we met during our
visit last spring to Cox's Bazar.

My final point is that the Security Council and the
international community must remain fully committed
to ensuring close monitoring of the full implementation
ofNovember's presidential statement (S/PRST/20l7/22)
and of the tripartite agreement concluded among
Burma's civilian Government, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme regarding the
return of refugees.
The response to the tragedy of the Rohingya
requires addressing the root causes of the crisis. It
also requires justice to be done. The Council had an
opportunity several weeks ago to thoroughly exchange
views with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, and to express
to her its full support in the discharge of her duties.
We encourage the Burmese authorities to continue to
collaborate closely with the Special Envoy in order
to arrive at a lasting solution. The week of high-level
general debate of the General Assembly, to be held
next month, will also be an opportunity to pursue
mobilization. In the absence of tangible progress on
the ground over the coming weeks, we will need to
carefully consider what new steps the Council could
take to respond to the Rohingya refugee crisis.

