Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to start by
commending Italy for holding this debate and for the
adoption today of the important resolution 2388 (2017),
which Israel is proud to cosponsor.

Human trafficking is a crime by humankind
against humanity. It debases our fellow human beings
and erodes societies. It is a multibillion-dollar industry
of lies that can manipulate anyone in its path. It leaves
people trapped and alone. Trafficking in persons takes
many forms but has most recently become a preferred
tool of terror for non-State actors. Terrorists target
the world's most vulnerable people, using trafficking
to exploit innocent civilians, trapped in the crossfire
of brutal armed conflict. And the situation is only
getting worse.

Today, we must remind ourselves of the humanity
of the problem - the names, the faces and the stories
of the victims of human trafficking. Adnan Ali had to
choose between joining the Houthi rebels on the front
lines in Yemen and selling his organs. He chose to
sell his kidney. Zara was kidnapped by Boko Haram
in Nigeria. She was forced to become a prostitute to
survive. Haifa, a Yazidi woman from Iraq, was sold
into sex slavery by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. She was one of thousands of women whose
bodies became commodities for terrorists to trade and
from which to make money.

Too many innocent people die as a result of
trafficking. The ones who survive, those who manage
to escape, are forced to live with the physical and
emotional scars of abuse. The fundamental freedoms
of the trafficking of victims, too many of whom are
women and children, are compromised eternally.

No human life can ever be up for sale. No person's
identity can be stripped away by someone else. As
stated in the political declaration on the implementation
of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons (General Assembly resolution 72/ 1), adopted in September, we cannot reach the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals if we do not end
human trafficking. Every country must do its part to
end that barbarism.

Fighting human trafficking is a high priority
for Israel. We faced a serious trafficking problem
throughout the 1990s and into the early 2000s. So, in
2006 we introduced a comprehensive anti-trafficking
law and adopted national plans ofaction. Israel is a party
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, and is fully committed to the four Ps:
prevention, prosecution, protection and partnership. It
is our goal to make every Government official, student,
business executive, police officer and ordinary citizen
aware of trafficking and of its victims.

To do that, we start by appointing anti-trafficking
coordinators to Government agencies. Then we focus
on training. Israel's National Anti-Trafficking Unit
holds over 50 training sessions for officials annually.
Lawyers in the State Attorney's Office receive special
training to enhance the law enforcement element
of anti-trafficking. For the general public, we offer
lectures, seminars and interviews with survivors at
universities and through the media. We also distribute
leaflets that provide information to raise awareness
among our citizens and work hard to reduce the stigma
that can accompany human trafficking and further
isolate its victims.

On the international level, Israel partners with
other countries to combat trafficking on a global scale.
In Israel, we have hosted delegations from Albania,
Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and the European Union, to
name but a few, for training and consultations. Our
national coordinator participates in the Working Group
on Trafficking in Persons of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime in Vienna. Israel is proud to partner
in the global effort to end human trafficking.

Israel has not been spared from the cruelty ofhuman
trafficking, but we are doing our best to combat it on all
fronts. We are proud to be considered a tier-1 country by
the United States Department of State on account of our
comprehensive anti-trafficking training measures and
services for victims since the early 2000s. Our shelters
are Government-funded and legal aid is free. We offer
work visas and medical and psychological support. We
work closely with civil society and strongly support
our partner non-governmental organizations, which are
invaluable in the fight against trafficking. Ultimately,
our goal is to provide rehabilitation, recovery and
reintegration for every victim of trafficking who walks
through our doors.

Israel is ready to share its best practices with the
world. We are eager to hear the world's best practices
as well. If we shy away from cooperation and from
sharing our knowledge, we move only further away
from defeating human trafficking. Let us work together,
share our knowledge and end this terrible practice
for good.

