Mr. Sidibe (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to join my colleagues in conveying the sympathy and
condolences of the Government of Mali to the families
of the victims of the tragic aeroplane crash this
morning.

Mali welcomes our examination of the important
question of threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts in today's formal meeting of
the Council under your leadership, Mr. Minister. My
delegation is grateful to the Jamaican delegation, in
particular to Ambassador Patricia Durrant, for taking
the initiative of convening such a meeting, which
enables us to further the open exchange of views on
this subject.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General as well as his important statement,
which affirms the clear resolve of the United Nations to
wage the battle against terrorism. I would also like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm that the Government
of Mali firmly condemns the base acts of terrorism that
have plunged the United States into grief, and to
reiterate the solidarity of the Government and the
people of Mali with the Government and the people of
the United States. I would also like to reaffirm our
determination to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

The events of 11 September, beyond their tragic
nature, amply remind us of the vulnerability of the
current international system. In fact, no State seems to
be safe from the scourge of terrorism. That is who it is
now more necessary than ever for all of us to work
together constructively, resolutely and on the basis of
consensus to deal with this threat.

Mali reiterates its firm condemnation of all forms
of terrorism, whether perpetrated by individuals,
groups or States. We believe that terrorist acts targeting
innocent individuals are criminal because they violate
human rights and the sovereignty and integrity of
States and are contrary to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations.

My Government takes the view that we need to
arrive as soon as possible at a precise definition of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. In this regard, we welcome the
substantial progress made in the General Assembly on
the elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
terrorism to fill the gaps in the existing framework of
international law.

Combating terrorism also requires us to tackle
everything that feeds terrorism, such as poverty and
regional conflicts. This will be a long-term undertaking
requiring enhanced international cooperation in the
framework of a concerted global strategy. Such a
strategy under the auspices of the United Nations
involves the signing and ratifying of existing legal
instruments, as well as assistance to developing
countries in order to enhance their national capacity to
combat international terrorism.

In this regard, Mali reaffirms its full support for
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), which marks
an important step in the international community's
awareness in the struggle to combat terrorism. The
Council has also placed front and centre the urgent
need for cooperation among States to combat terrorism
and defeat the networks of terrorist movements the
world over by denying them havens and financial and
logistical support. My Government has already taken,
and will continue to take, all steps necessary to
implement these important measures.

At the level of Africa, my country welcomes the
holding in Dakar on 17 October 2001 of the African
meeting against terrorism, which culminated in the
adoption of the Dakar Declaration, recommending,
among other things, the rapid signing and entry into
force of the Convention of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) on terrorism. In this regard, I would like
to recall that my country has just ratified that
convention, as it has all United Nations conventions. I
would also like to note that the Central Organ for
conflict management of the OAU met here yesterday
for a ministerial-level meeting and issued a number of
recommendations to strengthen Africa's resolve and
capacity to combat terrorism. In so doing, African
leaders clearly expressed their conviction and resolve
concerning the need to make Africa a continent free
from any act of terrorism and any support for terrorism
of any kind. In this context, my country reaffirms its
full recognition of the urgent need to convene, under
United Nations auspices, an international conference
on terrorism as soon as possible.

In conclusion, I should like to stress that my
country, convinced of the relevance of today's meeting,
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us,
believing that it makes a complementary political
contribution to measures already adopted by the
Security Council.

