The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, documents S/ 1998/375 and Addendum
1.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l998/329, which contains the
text of a letter dated 14 April 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, and documents S/ 1998/423 and
S/ 1998/432, containing letters dated 22 May 1998 and 26
May 1998, respectively, from the Permanent Representative
of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council; and to document S/ 1998/372,
which contains the text of a letter dated 5 May 1998 from
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of ll May 1998 (S/l998/375 and Add.l).

"The Security Council is gravely concerned by
the recent outbreak of Violence in the zone of conflict,
which has resulted in the loss of human life and a
significant outflow of refugees, and calls upon the
parties to observe strictly the Moscow Agreement of
14 May 1994 on a Ceasefire and Separation of Forces
(5/1994/583, annex I) (the Moscow Agreement) and
also the ceasefire protocol signed on 25 May 1998, as
well as all their obligations to refrain from the use
of force and to resolve disputed issues by peaceful
means only.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by
the recent slowing of the peace process. The Council
calls upon the parties to display the necessary
political will to achieve substantial results on the key
issues of the negotiations within the framework of
the United Nations-led peace process and through
direct dialogue, with full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia.

"The Security Council reaffirms the right of all
refugees and displaced persons affected by the
conflict to return to their homes in secure conditions,
calls upon both sides to fulfil their obligations in this
regard, and welcomes in this context the efforts
undertaken by the members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS), as set out in document
S/ 1998/372, in support of the return of refugees and
of a comprehensive political settlement.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned that
the deteriorating security situation in the Gali region
gravely impedes the work of aid workers, personnel
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
and of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The Council
calls upon the parties to honour fully their
commitments to take all measures in their power to
improve the security situation, including the creation
of a joint mechanism for investigation and
prevention of acts that represent violations of the
Moscow Agreement and terrorist acts in the zone of
conflict.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to consult both sides on the basis of
paragraphs 26, 48 and 49 of his report, in particular
on the concept of the self-protection unit outlined
therein, and on other options as appropriate, in close
cooperation with the group of Friends of the
Secretary-General, bearing in mind the need to
secure the consent of both parties to the Secretary-
General's proposal. The Council also requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on the
outcome of those consultations as soon as possible
and no later than 12 June 1998."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/ 16.
 

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda,

The meeting rose at noun.
