The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela appreciates the briefing and the presence
of the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Mr. Frank-
Walter Steinmeier, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Germany. We also wish to extend
our sincere congratulations to Germany on assuming
the chairmanship of the organization.

Venezuela supports the work of regional
organizations in promoting negotiated conflict
resolution under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations as an element of support for the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes and where direct
dialogue between the parties is a key element. In that
context, our country supports the work being done
by the OSCE in line with the Helsinki agreements,
which provide it with important tools to respond to
international challenges and to promote peace and
stability in the region.

The OSCE has played an important role in
strengthening relations among its member countries
through dialogue, and, despite their differences,
important consensuses have been successfully achieved
in different situations that required it. The role of the
chairmanship of the OSCE has become increasingly
relevant to promoting dialogue and harmony among
its members.

In the context of certain specific issues related
to Ukraine, we wish to stress the need for the full
implementation of resolution 2202 (2015), in support of
the decision reached by the heads of State of Ukraine,
Russia, France and Germany on 12 February 2015 in
Minsk. We must continue efforts to find a political and
diplomatic solution to the humanitarian crisis under
which the parties are committed to working to achieve
a firm and lasting peace. That is why a definitive
cessation of hostilities must not be delayed, and we
hope that this will come to pass.

As the chairmanship has already indicated, the
complex situation in the Middle East has an impact on
security and stability in the European region. Thus the
destabilization of Libya, Syria and Iraq and the rapidly
expanding terrorist phenomenon is an element that,
along with other pending issues such as the settlement
of the question of Palestine, makes it necessary to call
on the European community to take action to prevent
such conflicts and address the emergence of such
phenomena. The destabilization of the Middle East and
the Mediterranean has led to a difficult humanitarian
situation and a desperate outflow of refugees towards
the European region. In this respect, the OSCE can play
a key role in supporting the countries most affected,
based on a vision of identifying and addressing the root
causes of the conflicts that lead to the displacement
of peoples.

The promotion of security and stability and respect
for human rights through the full implementation of
international norms in this area are vital to fighting
the discrimination, racism, intolerance and xenophobia
that have been expressed in the form of attacks against
the humanitarian assistance required for the wave of
refugees, who come from both from the Middle East
and North Africa.

We must continue to work towards the prevention
of conflicts as a complement to the work of the
OSCE, through a multidimensional approach aimed
at addressing current challenges in this complex and
multifaceted situation.

Finally, communication and coordination between
the United Nations and the OSCE must be strengthened
and intensified so as to promote international peace
and security.

We wish the greatest success to Minister Steinmeier
in his chairmanship of the OSCE so that he can carry
out balanced and inclusive work, taking into account
the views of all members of the OSCE, so as to achieve
the objectives set within the framework of the priorities
of this regional organization and thereby promote
international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.

