Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries of the European Economic Area
Iceland and Liechtenstein align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union deeply regrets last week's
violent developments in the region and is concerned
about their possible consequences. We strongly
condemn any military action directed indiscriminately
against civilian residential areas, whether Palestinian or
Israeli. There can be no justification for the missile
attack carried out by the Israeli air force in a residential
area of Gaza, which left a high number of individuals,
including children, dead or injured. The European
Union and the international community at large have
consistently rejected the Israeli practice of extrajudicial
killings. Neither this nor any other action causing
indiscriminate civilian casualties will bring security to
the Israeli public.

The European Union also reiterates in the
strongest possible terms its condemnation of the recent
terrorist acts against Israeli civilians. We note that the
Palestinian Authority condemns such actions, and we
renew our call on the Palestinian Authority to make
every possible effort in the struggle against terrorism.
The European Union expresses its most sincere
condolences to the bereaved families, as well as its
wishes for recovery to those injured by these cruel
attacks.

Military and violent actions only serve to breed
more hatred and to undermine the attempts by the
parties and by the international community to bring
about reconciliation and a negotiated end to the
conflict.

The ministerial "quartet" met here in New York
just last week. The meeting confirmed the role of the
"quartet" as a key coordination forum for international
efforts to bring about a comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East crisis. The subsequent discussions of
the members of the "quartet" with the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Jordan and Egypt contributed to
ensuring close coordination between the "quartet" and
key players among the Arab States. The "quartet"
agreed on important elements for progress towards a
settlement of the Middle East crisis.

The European Union stressed in particular the
need for parallel progress on political, economic and
security issues; the need for immediate improvement in
the humanitarian and social situation; the holding of
free and fair elections; and the convening of an
international ministerial meeting at the appropriate
time. We also underlined the necessity of drawing up a
road map towards the goal of achieving a final Israeli-
Palestinian settlement within three years, with two
States living side by side in peace and security.
Moreover, the European Union remains of the view
that the current efforts to reform the Palestinian
Authority are key to preparing it for statehood and can,
provided that Israel takes the necessary steps to allow
the reform efforts to go forward, play an important
confidence-building role and pave the way for the
resumption of political negotiations. The recently
resumed negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority on establishing a comprehensive
ceasefire and allowing the reform efforts to go forward
signified the positive will of the parties concerned to
work towards achieving that goal.

We urge the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to do everything in their power to
restore safety and security for their populations. We
also call on the parties to exercise restraint, to prevent
an escalation of violence and to resume negotiations.
The European Union will continue to work with our
partners in the "quartet" and in the Arab world, as well
as with the international community at large, towards
achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement
of the Middle East conflict in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).

