I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. First, France is very concerned by the lack of progress on the Syrian file. The growing instability on the ground is worrying. The ceasefire agreement in the north-west remains very fragile. Shelling continues as well as sporadic fighting. It is of the utmost importance that the regime and its allies do not restart an offensive that would worsen the already dire humanitarian situation, especially in the context of a potential spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Coordinated action is needed to deal with the threat posed by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in respect of international humanitarian law. The resurgence of Da'esh is also extremely worrying for international peace and security. Instability and unrest are also growing in regime-held areas, including in the south-west. That shows that the regime cannot bring stability. On the political side, the lack of progress in the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) is also deeply troubling. The regime's responsibility for the deadlock of the Constitutional Committee is clear. It had first opposed an agreement on its agenda, and now it is taking advantage of COVID-19 to endlessly postpone any meeting of the Committee, including by refusing a video-teleconference meeting. On the contrary, the opposition has constantly showed flexibility and openness. We call on Geir Pedersen to make it clear to the Security Council when he deems that negotiation is no longer possible on the Constitutional Committee. No progress has been made on the detainee file despite the Special Envoy's call to free prisoners and facilitate access to detention centres. It is urgent that the Syrian regime proceed to large-scale releases of detainees and abductees and allow access to all detention facilities. The latest Astana meeting did not bring any progress. It is now time to move beyond the reciprocal exchanges of prisoners. The United Nations needs to be at the centre of those efforts. In this context, we need to work together to unlock the political process and implement all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). The priority is to guarantee a sustainable and complete ceasefire everywhere in Syria. The Secretary-General and the Special Envoy have made this call to allow an effective response to COVID-19. The regime, unfortunately, has not responded to this appeal. A nationwide ceasefire is also necessary to create the conditions for a credible political process. All parties must work with the United Nations to that end, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Finally, it is key to launch a broader political process based on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). That includes establishing a safe and neutral environment, including through the implementation of confidence-building measures. The Special Envoy has our full support in this regard, and we expect him to report to the Council on the progress he has made on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015). France will not recognize the results of any elections that do not meet the standards for a free, fair and transparent ballot. Resolution 2254 (2015) sets the conditions for credible elections: they should take place in a safe country, under United Nations supervision and with the participation of all Syrians, including from the diaspora. Time passes, but the crimes of the Syrian regime cannot be forgotten and cannot remain unpunished. France will continue to firmly support all efforts to collect and preserve evidence and fight impunity. A peace agreement that addresses the root causes of the conflict is more than ever needed to bring peace and stability to Syria and the region. I therefore urge all actors to work together to that end and recall Russia's particular responsibility in that regard. As long as acredible political process is not firmly under way, France and the European Union will not fund the reconstruction in Syria.
