Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Spain for having organized this debate
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). I take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Mr. President, as well as your entire team, on
acceding to the presidency of the Security Council, and
I assure you of the support of Chad. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Sandra Honore and Head of MINUSTAH, for
her briefing.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/667)
under consideration, covering the period of 4 March
to 31 August, mentions concrete progress marked by
the preparation of presidential, municipal and local
elections, the first round of which is scheduled for
25 October. That progress, it must be noted, is the
result of intensive work of consultations and restoration
of trust between President Michel Martelly and the
opposition political parties, which has made it possible
to reach a consensus on the continuation of the electoral
process.

Chad welcomes the improvement of the political
climate and of the security situation in Haiti, after a
very long period of political tensions and institutional
paralysis. We hope that the violence that we saw during
the last part of the campaign, the first legislative round
held in August, does not recur in the coming elections.
We also welcome the solid cooperation between the
Haitian Government and its international partners,
including MINUSTAH. The latter's support in police
training and in the health field is decisive in preparation
of what will come after the United Nations departure.
In that regard, we note with satisfaction that 11,900
police officers, including 1,022 women, have been
trained within the framework of reaching the target of
15,000 officers by the end of 2016.

Despite the significant progress achieved, thanks
to the joint efforts of the Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, a great number of challenges remain
in the judicial, health and humanitarian fields. The

judicial apparatus is encountering major difficulties
owing to inadequate funding and lack of sufficient
infrastructure. That has consequently led to excessive
delays in trying those who have been detained and an
increase in the prison population, already estimated to
number 10,624 prisoners.

The health situation remains deeply disturbing,
owing to the significant increase in cases of cholera,
175 of which have been fatal. The international
community urgently needs to do more to assist
the Haitian authorities to develop and implement
appropriate strategies to improve public health, help the
sick and eradicate that epidemic. From a humanitarian
standpoint, the fate of the 60,801 internally displaced
Haitians, in 45 different camps, deserves the sustained
attention from humanitarian agencies and the entire
international community. The consolidation of the
stabilization process also means relocating and
reintegrating those vulnerable groups, living in
extremely difficult conditions.

With respect to the reconfiguration ofMINUSTAH,
Chad is in favour of the Mission's two-stage drawdown
plan in two stages, proposed by the Secretary-General
in accordance with resolution 2180 (2014). However,
the gradual drawdown of the Mission should take into
account the evolution of the situation on the ground.
Chad also supports the renewal of MINUSTAH's
mandate for a period of one year.

Chad thanks all the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment alongside the Haitian
people. We pay tribute to all the military, police and
civilian personnel who paid the ultimate price in the
course of their duties in Haiti.

