Mr. De Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, we appreciate the presence in the
Chamber today of Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
we thank him for the statement he has just made. We
would also like to welcome Mr. Miroslav Lajeak, High
Representative and Representative of the European
Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like to
thank him for the report he has just given us, as well as
for his efforts in a post that we know is often
complicated and very seldom properly appreciated.

Panama welcomes the signing between Bosnia
and the European Union of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. That is in line with our
position that the future of that country and of the other
States of the Western Balkans lies in Euro-Atlantic
institutions.

Nevertheless, my delegation takes note with great
concern of the level to which nationalist rhetoric has
risen and of the detrimental actions taken by the
respective leaders of Bosnian ethnic groups with regard
to the consolidation of the State and the
implementation of the Peace Accord. It is difficult to
explain how, more than 15 years since the Dayton
accords put an end to the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and after all the violence experienced by
the Balkan region, the leaders of the country's
constituent groups could still be placing their ethnic,
parochial and short-sighted interests above the interests
of political and economic integration at the national
and regional level and the interests of consolidating a
liberal democracy and a multi-ethnic Bosnia.

As everyone here is aware, extreme nationalism
and ethnocentrism were responsible for lighting the
fuse of one of the bloodiest conflicts Europe has
experienced since the Second World War. Were these
scourges to continue, it would not be possible for the
wounds from the violent dismemberment of the former
Yugoslavia to heal nor for the countries that emerged
from it to move on.

This is why we appeal, as we have on many
previous occasions, to the leaders of all the constituent
Bosnian groups to work together, not as representatives
of one ethnic group or another, but rather as citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and ultimately, we hope, of
the European Union, so as to build a more prosperous
and peaceful future for their country and for the region.
Until then, we will continue to support the presence of
the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and the
use, as necessary, of his Bonn powers.

