The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/ 122, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous statements and resolutions concerning
the situation in Somalia, in particular the
statements by its President of 14 July 2005
(S/PRST/2005/32) and 9 November 2005
(S/PRST/2005/54).

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General of 21 February 2006
(S/2006/ 122), and reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia, consistent

with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the President and the Speaker towards
reconciliation and dialogue, particularly the
signing, with the facilitation of the Government
of Yemen, of the Aden Declaration on 5 January
2006, which culminated in the convening of the
first session of the Transitional Federal
Parliament (TFP) inside Somalia in Baidoa on
26 February 2006. The Council encourages all
leaders and members of the Transitional
Federation Institutions (TFIs) to continue their
efforts towards inclusive dialogue and consensus-
building within the framework of the TFIs and in
accordance with the Transitional Federal Charter
of the Somali Republic adopted in February 2004.

"The Security Council welcomes and
supports the convening of the first session of the
TFP and looks forward to sustained sessions of
the TFP as Somali leaders seek to resolve their
differences peacefully. The Council calls on the
TFP to promote peace and reconciliation in its
work towards implementing the Transitional
Federal Charter and encourages the members of
the TFP to use this opportunity to address key
issues of national concern. In this regard, the
Council urges the members of the TFIs to
continue to organize their work in accordance
with the Transitional Federal Charter, such as the
formation of independent commissions and
parliamentary committees, which will provide a
framework for addressing the complex and
divisive issues of the transitional period.

"The Security Council reiterates the urgent
need for a rapid finalization of an agreed national
security and stabilization plan, to include a
comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire
agreement, as well as plans for the restoration of
public safety and security institutions and the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and calls upon all Member
States to provide their full and active support in
this regard.

"The Security Council remains seriously
concerned over the continued intermittent
fighting and armed violence, kidnapping and
other use of force, particularly in recent incidents
in the capital, Mogadishu, and other parts of
Somalia, which have caused loss of life among
innocent civilians and have the potential to
undermine the current progress achieved by the
leaders of the TFIs. The Council calls on all the
parties to cease all hostilities and resolve their
differences peacefully in the spirit of the Aden
Declaration through the framework of the TFIs.

"The Security Council expresses its
growing concern over the situation of 1.7 million
Somalis in a state of humanitarian emergency or
suffering from serious malnutrition, severe
livelihood distress and the rising civil and food
insecurity in parts of Southern Somalia. The
Council urges all Somali leaders to ensure
complete and unhindered humanitarian access, as
well as provide guarantees for the safety and
security of the humanitarian aid workers in
Somalia. The Council emphasizes the importance
of the international commitment and coordinated
support for improving the humanitarian situation.

"The Security Council commends the
neighbouring countries, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African
Union (AU), the League of Arab States, the
European Union (EU), the Organization of the
Islamic Conference (OIC) and concerned Member
States for their keen interest and persistent efforts
in support of the peace, reconciliation and
recovery process in Somalia. The Council
encourages them to continue to use their
influence in support of the TFIs, in particular to
help them in their efforts to move ahead on the
key issues of security and national reconciliation.

"The Security Council welcomes the AU
Summit decision of 25 January 2006 on Somalia,
including the possible deployment of an IGAD
Peace Support Mission to Somalia (IGASOM), to
be followed by an AU Peace Support Mission. In
the event that a national security and stabilization
plan includes the need for a peace support
mission, the Council reiterates that it expects the
AU and IGAD to work out a detailed mission
plan in close coordination with and with the
broad consensus of the TFIs and consistent with

the national security and stabilization plan. The
Council stands ready to consider an exemption to
the arms embargo imposed against Somalia by
Security Council resolution 733 (1992) on the
basis of such a mission plan.

"The Security Council takes note of
resolution A979 (24) adopted on 23 November
2005 at the twenty-fourth session of the
International Maritime Organization biennial
Assembly, concerning the increasing incidents of
piracy and armed robbery against ships in waters
off the coast of Somalia. The Council encourages
Member States whose naval vessels and military
aircraft operate in international waters and
airspace adjacent to the coast of Somalia to be
vigilant to any incident of piracy therein and to
take appropriate action to protect merchant
shipping, in particular the transportation of
humanitarian aid, against any such act, in line
with relevant international law. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the communique of the IGAD
Council of Ministers' meeting in Jawhar on
29 November 2005, which decided to coordinate
its strategies and action plans to face this
common challenge in close collaboration with the
international community. The Council further
urges cooperation among all States, particularly
regional States, and active prosecution of piracy
offences.

"The Security Council takes note of the
annual report of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia (S/2005/813) and the mid-
term briefing of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992).
The Council condemns the increased inflow of
weapons into Somalia and the continuous
violations of the United Nations arms embargo
and further reminds all States of their obligations
to comply fully with the measures imposed by
resolution 733 (1992) and urges them to take all
necessary steps to hold violators accountable.
Continued violations of these measures prevent
the establishment of a stable and secure
environment and undermine the efforts of those
who seek to establish peace in Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the peace process in Somalia and

welcomes the commitment of the United Nations This statement will be issued as a document of
to assist in this regard. In this connection, the the Security Council under the symbol
Council encourages the TFIs and the international S/PRST/2006/ll.

partners to reinvigorate the Coordination and
Monitoring Committee in the interest of a more
effective international engagement in the peace,
reconciliation and recovery process in Somalia."

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

