Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
comprehensive briefing.

We are all aware of the challenges facing Haiti. The
United Nations has supported it through the toughest of
times, and we should therefore approach the drawdown
of MINUSTAH with caution. We should also consider a
new restructuring aimed at intensifying efforts to deal
with the country's current urgent problems, chiefly
those connected to the rule of law, human rights and
building judicial and security institutions. It is also
vital that the international humanitarian response be
strengthened and progress made in the area of essential
social and economic development, so that Haitians
see a concrete improvement in their living conditions.
Otherwise, the grievances of the public may become
entrenched and the violent demonstrations will spread.

The mainresponsibility formaintainingthe progress
achieved in Haiti lies with its Government, leaders
and political elite. In the absence of such progress,
the efforts of the Government may not be successful.
All Haitian patries should resort to dialogue and give
priority to national interests and to improving the
general political climate. We join all calls that demand
the implementation of the provisions of the El Rancho
Accord pertaining to the electoral process. We call
for the holding of free, fair, transparent and combined
legislative and local elections as soon as possible so
that democracy and stability can be achieved and a
backslide towards the violence and chaos that results
from the increased political tensions prevented.

We note the remarks of the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on the drawdown of MINUSTAH
(S/2014/6l7). I would like to point out that any reduction
should take into consideration the upcoming election
period, the surrounding circumstances and the need to
support the relevant security situation. The drawdown
must also be commensurate with building the capacity
of the Haitian National Police so as to maintain the
gains of the past 10 years. In that regard, it would
also be appropriate to focus on building the capacity
of the national police forces, in particular outside the
capital. The current ratio of police to residents is no
more than 0.5 per cent per 1,000 people. It should be
acknowledged that the world standard is a minimum of
2.2 per cent per 1,000 people.

