Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
We welcome this opportunity to extend the gratitude of
the United States and its thanks and appreciation to
Special Representative Steiner for his leadership of the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo over the past year
and a half. The discussion today, Mr. Steiner's report
and the comments of colleagues on the Council
demonstrate very clearly the progress that has been
made in the last year and a half, thanks to his efforts
and the efforts of his colleagues in Kosovo. He is to be
congratulated.

Of course, there is much left to do. Many of those
items have already been cited in other statements:
security, privatization, bringing in investment, getting
the economy running, returns. All that is still on the
agenda, but a good foundation for progress has been
laid. The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
particularly the Kosovo Assembly, must concentrate on
addressing issues that are within the constitutional
mandate and focus on passing legislation for the good
of all Kosovars. Divisive symbolic actions do nothing
to advance Kosovars' material conditions but
exacerbate relations among the communities. Dialogue
among the communities - not calls for mutually
exclusive approaches to the future - has to be the way
ahead. We, too, are especially pleased to note the
unprecedented public appeal on July 2 for minorities to
return to their homes in Kosovo to live in peace.

We have strongly supported Mr. Steiner's efforts
to begin a dialogue also between Belgrade and Pristina
on practical issues of mutual concern, including issues
identified in the Common Document. As reported in
the Secretary-General's June report (S/2003/675),
working-level contacts between officials of Belgrade
and Pristina have already begun. That effort needs to
be expanded by both sides. On a practical matter, we
specifically would urge Belgrade to recognize license
plates and encourage Kosovo Serbs to register their
vehicles with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
The process of transferring all non-reserved
powers to the Provisional Institutions by the end of this
year is an important step in implementing resolution
1244 (1999). We are pleased that UNMIK is moving
forward with developing a work plan on the
benchmarks, as requested by the Council in February.
For its part, the United States is providing technical
assistance to develop the work plan and believes that
the plan will be a major step in assisting the
Provisional Institutions to define what they need to
accomplish in order to create a multi-ethnic society
with a functioning market economy.

Focus on "standards before status" is still
important and is the basis for the way ahead. The
standards lay out the road to a better future for all
Kosovars, and UNMIK and Mr. Steiner's successor
will have the full support of my Government in getting
down that road.

