Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and to the Government of the Republic of Turkey for
having convened this meeting, and I would like
especially to welcome your leadership in today's
debate. We appreciate every opportunity to consolidate
our common efforts and we reiterate our determination
to fight terrorism in all its aspects as the threat it
represents is ever present and will remain so for the
foreseeable future.

Due to its various forms, methods and
manifestations, terrorism poses challenges to the
modern world and our societies and endangers
international peace and security. It is therefore our
common responsibility to collectively prevent and
confront this global plague with both national and
coordinated international action. In that context, the
United Nations, as a universal Organization, and the
Security Council, as the body with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, bear the greatest burden of
responsibility for improving the effectiveness of
counter-terrorism policies and developing the
international legal standards and norms necessary to
that end. Concluding the negotiations on and adopting
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism as a specific international law enforcement
instrument as soon as possible would provide the
international community and Member States with an
effective tool for strengthening cooperation and
coordination in their joint counter-terrorism action.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a central international framework for
the concrete and efficient efforts of the international
community. We therefore call for its full
implementation, welcoming the recent unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 64/297
during the second biennial review of the Strategy.

While the primary responsibility for
implementing the Strategy lies with Member States, the
leading role of the United Nations in coordinating
counter-terrorism activities through the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council continues to be highly
important. On the other hand, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and Associated
Individuals and Entities, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) remain core tools in the global
counter-terrorism campaign. I would like to reiterate
Bosnia and Herzegovina's strong support for every step
that further strengthens these mechanisms and
therefore the campaign in its entirety.

The promotion and protection of human rights
and the rule of law should remain a priority, as they
constitute the fundamental values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Any measures
undertaken by States to combat terrorism, including the
prosecution and conviction of perpetrators of terrorist
acts and the protection of and provision of reparations
to Victims, must be anchored in the rule of law and
comply with State obligations under the provisions of
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

Since the Security Council debate on terrorism in
December 2008 (see S/PV.6034), we have witnessed
significant improvements in respect for fundamental
rights and freedoms in the international sanctions
regimes. The adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) and
the recent appointment of the Ombudsperson reconfirm
the commitment of the international community to
advancing clear and fair listing and de-listing
procedures for the 1267 Committee, thus contributing
to greater transparency in that Committee's work, as
well as to the credibility of the overall counter-
terrorism regime.

The increasing correlation among terrorism,
transnational organized crime, drugs and arms
smuggling, and money-laundering, as well as the
frequent use of new information technologies by
terrorists, requires an integrated global approach and
close cooperation among relevant State institutions and
elements of civil society at the national level, as well
as cooperation and coordination with subregional,
regional and international organizations.

While every State has the primary responsibility
to formulate and implement appropriate policies and
measures, the role of the United Nations in helping
build Member States' capacity to prevent and combat
terrorism is of the utmost importance. Cooperation at
the regional and international levels, including
continuous exchange of information, intelligence and
best practices, and technical assistance for countries
that need it, will enable countries to fulfil their
obligations and requirements under relevant
international instruments and Security Council
resolutions.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
draft presidential statement on terrorism before the
Council today and reiterates its strong commitment to
combating terrorism in all its forms at both the national
and international levels.

