Mr. Cisse (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
Permit me first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of January. I also wish to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his work
last month. I also wish to thank the members of the
Council for having kindly allowed me to speak at this
meeting.

The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/1996/47, dated 23 January 1996, confirms the
precariousness of the situation in Liberia. The

 

Tubmanburg incident and its negative consequences for the
security situation reveal all the difficulty and complexity of
the situation on the ground. The events described by the
Secretary-General in his report underscore the need for
control of the situation in its military and security aspects
so that the peace process in which the parties are freely
engaged can have a real chance.

It is on the basis of this conviction that we that wish
to seize the opportunity offered by this meeting of the
Security Council to launch an appeal to the international
community to supply the troops of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) with the necessary material and
logistical means for their deployment throughout the entire
country, in accordance with the Abuja Agreement of 19
August 1995.

We believe that the success of the important efforts
and sacrifices agreed to in regional and international plans
to restore peace to Liberia depends in large measure, at this
crucial stage of the process, on the capacity of ECOMOG
and the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) to carry out the responsibilities entrusted to
them.

My delegation welcomes the efforts made by the
Chairman of the Economic Community of West African
States, His Excellency Mr. Jerry Rawlings, President of the
Republic of Ghana, as well as by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, his Special Representative and the
countries of the region, to restore calm and avoid
escalation.

The Tubmanburg incident has also made acutely
apparent the need for the full cooperation of the faction
leaders in the implementation of the agreements freely
entered into. In this regard, the signing of an agreement to
clarify ECOMOG's status in Liberia could constitute a first
step in this direction, as the Secretary-General emphasizes
in his report.

In the current Liberian context, the presence of the
international community, through ECOMOG and UNOMIL,
constitutes an essential condition for bringing peace to
Liberia and putting an end to the suffering of the Liberian
people.

The Secretary-General' s recommendation, contained in
paragraph 45 of his report, that the Security Council
consider the extension of UNOMIL's mandate for a period
of four months, until 31 May 1996, deserves the support
of the Council.

Before that date, shortly before the legislative and
presidential elections scheduled for 20 August 1996, the
deployment of ECOMOG and UNOMIL, as well as
disarmament and demobilization, should have been
completed so that security will be improved.

My delegation wishes very sincerely to thank the
Secretary-General for all the steps he has taken with a
View to preparing for the elections to be held in the best
possible conditions and, in particular, his plan to send a
technical mission to work with the National Transitional
Government, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and ECOWAS in order to finalize a framework for the
monitoring and verification of the electoral process.

We also welcome the remarkable work carried out
every day, frequently in dangerous conditions on the
ground, by local and foreign humanitarian organizations
and the various programmes, United Nations organs and
international institutions to alleviate the suffering of the
civilian population and to aid in the rebuilding of the
country.

It is important to note that in areas that are enjoying
a return to security - in particular, near the Guinean
border - the refugees are beginning to return to their
villages, and normal economic activity is being resumed.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General's
observation that the return to peace will depend largely on
a revitalization of the economic sector that generates
opportunities for the successful reintegration of former
military personnel into civilian life.

For the moment, we must create the security
conditions essential for the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement, with a view to the restoration of peace in
Liberia. In this regard, it is important that the leaders of
the factions and the National Transitional Government
undertake to cooperate fully with ECOMOG and
UNOMIL. This open cooperation with the international
community, called for by the Secretary-General,
constitutes the condition sine qua non for the pursuit of
the peace process, which is the only guarantee of the
country's survival. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the positive steps announced earlier by the
Liberian Foreign Minister.

 

I would like to conclude by paying a well-deserved
tribute to the men and women of ECOMOG, UNOMIL and
the humanitarian organizations, who risk their lives
everyday for the return of peace to Liberia, and I bow my
head in memory of those who have died for the cause of
Liberia.

