At the outset, Sir, I should like to thank you for convening this important meeting, coming in the midst of exceptional global circumstances resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has brought about increased threats to the security and safety of civilians in conflict situations. I should also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, for their valuable briefings. This meeting is being convened on the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which strongly condemns the recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties to armed conflict and requests the Secretary-General to establish a monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict. It also marks the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which was ratified by the Kingdom of Bahrain in 2004, and stresses that States parties shall take all feasible measures to ensure that members of their armed forces who have not attained the age of 18 years do not take a direct part in hostilities. These anniversaries have assumed added significance as the COVID-19 pandemic affects education and the movement of humanitarian supplies, posing a grave danger to children in general and children in armed conflict in particular. Bahrain therefore welcomes the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire, and supports the joint statement issued by a group of Member States, expressing deep concern at the continuation of hostilities in various corners of the world, particularly in the midst of the global health crisis, which is taking a severe toll on the most vulnerable, especially women and children. Bahrain also underscores the importance of diplomatic efforts to save lives and mitigate the social and economic devastation. A ceasefire would allow humanitarian workers to reach the populations most vulnerable to the spread of COVID-19. In April, in response to the call of the Secretary-General, the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen announced a comprehensive ceasefire in Yemen to deal with the consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak and stand by the brotherly Yemeni people. That step was welcomed by the Secretary-General. The decision of the Secretary-General to remove the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen from the list, annexed to his report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525), of parties that have not put in place adequate measures to improve the protection of children during the reporting period clearly points to the coalition's unwavering commitment to protecting all civilians in armed conflict, especially children, and the preventive and protective measures the coalition has taken to promote the protection of children in Yemen. The Kingdom of Bahrain affirms its commitment to working with the international community to make progress on protecting children in conflict situations and strengthening frameworks for the effective implementation of international resolutions and international law through confidence-building measures and the resumption of political negotiations for peace and stability in conflict zones so that all children can enjoy their rights to life, health and education without fear of being killed, recruited, abducted or subject to any other kind of violation. The Kingdom of Bahrain also stresses the importance of supporting and activating surveillance and accountability tools against violators of children's rights around the world in order to uphold the principles of security and justice.
