Mr. Leiro (Norway): We would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this meeting of the Council on this
important topic. Let me also join other speakers in
congratulating the Secretary-General on a timely and
highly useful report to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for her inspiring
statement yesterday. We appreciate this opportunity to
take part in an open debate on this report.

The issues before us are vital to many people around
the world and the realities faced by civilians in armed
conflict present major challenges to the international
community. As the report clearly states:

"The protection of civilians in armed conflict would
be largely assured if combatants respected the
provisions of international humanitarian and human
rights law." (S/1 999/95 7, para. 35)

These provisions must be complied with by all. We
urge Member States to ratify the major instruments of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law
and to take the necessary steps in order to fully
implement them. In this context, early entry into force of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court is of
high importance so as to ensure that the perpetrators are
held accountable. Moreover, States are not the only actors
in armed conflicts. Rebel groups and opposition fighters
continue to target civilians. A call to respect the norms
contained in international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law must therefore also be addressed to them.

Women and children are often the most vulnerable
civilians in armed conflict. Not only do they become
victims when war leads to the breakdown of the social
fabric and the disintegration of families; women and
children are also, in some cases, deliberately targeted by

 

combatants for gender-based violence and sexual and other
exploitation. Children are recruited, trained and used as so-
called efficient soldiers.

The particularly disturbing situation of children in
armed conflict was highlighted in the Security Council
meeting held on 25 August and in the resolution adopted at
that meeting. Arms small and simple enough for children to
carry and use are unfortunately highly available on the
international market. Their availability contributes to
destabilization and makes post-conflict rehabilitation more
difficult. The people who enter conflict zones in order to
alleviate the suffering of civilians have themselves become
targets of violence. The picture painted in the report by the
Secretary-General on the situation faced by civilians in
armed conflict is complex and ugly, but unfortunately real.

The Security Council has consistently reaffirmed its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and on several occasions has recognized
that massive and systematic breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law represent a threat to
international peace and security.

The concrete recommendations put before the Security
Council in the Secretary-General's report are therefore
timely and welcome. They merit close consideration and
discussion. Further work is required to ensure proper
consideration of the recommendations and of how they can
effectively be implemented. Norway therefore urges the
Security Council to establish an effective mechanism to
ensure that the recommendations of the Secretary-General
are acted upon.

