Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France voted in favour of the resolution that the United
States submitted to the Council for consideration. We
have always stated that we should pursue the sole
objective of saving human lives. To that end, the
Council must act resolutely and responsibly. Indeed,
that is the message that we have repeatedly heard from
the Secretary-General, whose presence we welcome
here today.

First, we must be resolute. We have heard the
briefing by Mr. Jan Pronk, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Sudan. Some progress
has been made on the ground, as Mr. Pronk noted and
the Council acknowledges in resolution 1564 (2004).
Clearly, we cannot stop there. As Mr. Pronk also
pointed out, we are still waiting for the Janjaweed
militia to be disarmed as soon as possible and for the
perpetrators of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law to be identified and
punished.

To that end, the Council, together with the entire
international community, must tirelessly pursue its
efforts and actions, requiring our unflagging resolve.
We must act with concern for effectiveness in terms of
saving human lives. The situation in Darfur, as
throughout the Sudan, is complex and our path narrow.
Nothing can be done without the exertion of strong
pressure. We must also energetically support the
African Union. Its role is essential if the international
community's requirements are to be met and the
necessary cooperation of the Sudanese Government is
to be secured.

We feel that resolution 1564 (2004) responds to
those objectives and is therefore a good text. France
would have wished, however, that it had obtained an
even higher number of votes in favour. We place great
importance in the Council's unity, which we believe to
be crucial in this crisis. It is in that spirit of desire for
unity and consensus that we will continue to work in
the days and weeks to come to prepare for our next
meeting, because the Council now awaits the
Secretary-General's report on the implementation of
resolution 1564 (2004) by end of the month, pursuant
to resolution 1556 (2004).

In conclusion, I wish to note that today's
resolution offers fresh hope to the civilian population
of Darfur. It is our hope that the very clear message
from this Council will be properly heard and well
understood by the Sudanese Government and all the
parties involved in the crisis. Our demands are clear
and must be followed up by action. As I said earlier, no
one in Darfur, throughout the Sudan or elsewhere
should have any doubt that the Council will continue to
act resolutely.

