Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief the Security Council. Earlier this year, I warned that Yemen was at a critical juncture. I said that either the guns would be silenced, and the political process would resume, or Yemen would slip back away from that road to peace. Unfortunately, this is exactly what seems to be happening. Increased fighting, greater humanitarian needs and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are still taking their toll. That does not mean that, together, we cannot turn the corner and move back towards finding a solution to this conflict, but it requires the parties to choose and to decide. We all know what needs to be done and what choices need to be made if Yemen is to emerge successfully from this conflict. Last week, I sent the two parties an advanced draft text of the joint declaration that, as you know, Mr. President, we have been negotiating over the past six months. The draft document reflects and balances the comments from prior rounds of the talks during those months and, importantly, I believe, incorporates inputs from civil society, women's groups and other components of Yemen's voice for peace.Now is the time for the parties to swiftly conclude the negotiations and finalize the joint declaration. My appeal at this time is very simple: choose peace; end this conflict; work with us urgently on the joint declaration. Nowhere is the importance of this choice more evident than in Ma'rib, the governorate to the east of Sana'a. Heavy fighting continues to take place - if anything it has increased - along its front lines, including along the governorates' borders with Al-Jawf, Sana'a and Al-Bayda governorates. The situation in Ma'rib is of concern in a number of different ways - principally, the high degree of loss of lives and the real threat to hundreds of thousands of people and others in need. Ma'rib has played the role in this war of a safe haven for those people displaced from other parts of Yemen who came to Ma'rib for safety. And a battle there, which is threatened, would tragically displace them yet again, forcing them to move yet further from their homes. The political importance of Ma'rib must also not be underestimated. Military shifts and consequences and events in Ma'rib have ripple effects on the dynamics of the conflict across Yemen. If Ma'rib falls, simply put, this would undermine the prospects of convening an inclusive political process that brings about a transition based on partnership and plurality. In Al-Hudaydah, meanwhile, reports of ceasefire violations continue daily. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA), led by Lieutenant General Guha, continues to experience restrictions that hamper the Mission's operations. You, Mr. President, will recall the tragic shooting in March of Government of Yemen liaison officer Colonel Al-Sulayhi, who later died of his wounds. UNMHA is engaging with both parties to ensure such incidents do not reoccur, and to pave the way for a return to a functioning joint set-up overseen by the Redeployment Coordination Committee. These steps should further the implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement. I am also deeply concerned about the humanitarian consequences of fuel shortages in Ansar Allah- controlled parts of northern Yemen. I want to emphasize the importance of ensuring that civilians can regularly and reliably access adequate supplies of fuel and other essential goods. I know that Mark Lowcock will describe this as a basic principle of humanitarian protection and assistance. The flow of essential commercial imports, including food, fuel and medical supplies, and their distribution throughout Yemen to civilians are of course of the highest priority. I am also deeply concerned that Ansar Allah recently announced the closure of Sana'a airport to humanitarian flights. As I am sure Mark will discuss, this has the potential to seriously impact the United Nations operations, as well as the operations of other humanitarian agencies in that part of Yemen providing critical assistance, which may be thus prevented from entering Sana'a. We, the Council and ourselves together, need to also remain focused on ensuring the earliest possible arrival of the United Nations technical mission to assess the FSO SAFER oil tanker in the ports of Al-Hudaydah. I know that we will be hearing more from Mark on that issue. I would also like to report that, if logistical arrangements permitting, which are always complicated in Yemen and even more so now at the time of the pandemic, we expect to see the parties this week in Switzerland to continue their discussions on the implementation of prisoner exchanges, under the joint auspices of my Office and the International Committee of the Red Cross, to which I pay tribute for its work on that project. The parties committed to releasing conflict-related prisoners and detainees back in 2018 in Stockholm and furthered their discussions to fulfil that commitment in Amman earlier this year. I hope this meeting will actually result in the release of some prisoners and some evidence of the implementation of those commitments, particularly given the threat of COVID-19 in places of detention. I want to emphasize the vital role of Yemeni civil society in demanding an end to the conflict. They truly are champions of peace. Civil society has also vocally advocated for measures to bring relief to the population, including recently in a very marked way the release of prisoners and detainees. Civil society's role is central in maintaining the pressure for a peaceful resolution needed in every conflict, including in Yemen. It has provided analysis, ideas and language on issues of importance to Yemenis - from public service delivery to economic reform to peacebuilding - not only to my Office, but to all of us who are interested in improving the circumstances and prospects of Yemen. We have been engaging with various groups and will continue with respect to the joint declaration negotiations, and discussing in detail plans to ensure their meaningful inclusion in a future political process, which we hope will not be long off. Also, as part of these inclusion efforts, we are organizing a skills-building workshop with the Yemeni Women's Technical Advisory Group - I think we have discussed their role and significance in this Chamber before - but we have also stepped up our engagement with the Group of Nine women's organizations to seek their inputs in our joint declaration. In that regard, I want to pay specific tribute here to the close relationship that we continue to enjoy with UN-Women, for which we are very grateful. I want to close by emphasizing that, although, as I have said perhaps rather boringly before, the situation is very dire, the parties can choose to either continue this trajectory of escalating violence or to make the compromises necessary to revive the political process and allow for a political settlement. These choices are clear and evident and in the hands of the parties. The United Nations and the members of the Council must and, I am sure, will do everything possible to push for and support the latter outcome. We play a supporting role. The outcome lies in the hands of the parties. We are there and we will watch with the people of Yemen to see what choices they make and how they may swiftly be implemented.
