The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), documents
S/1996/248 and Add].

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 4 April 1996 on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) (8/1996/248 and Add.1) pursuant to
paragraph 21 of Security Council resolution 1045
(1996) of 8 February 1996.

"The Security Council notes that some progress
has been achieved during the past two months in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, although it has

been limited and has not fulfilled the hopes
generated by the meeting between President dos
Santos and Dr. Savimbi in Libreville, Gabon, on 1
March 1996. The Council stresses the importance it
attaches to the full implementation of the Protocol.
The Council reminds President dos Santos and Dr.
Savimbi of their commitments and urges them to
take the necessary actions to move the peace process
forward.

"The Security Council notes that the Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA) has quartered more than 20,000 of its
forces, but expresses concern over delays in the
quartering of UNITA troops and urges UNITA to
move expeditiously to achieve full quarterng of its
troops. The Council expresses concern about the
quality of weapons surrendered by UNITA and urges
UNITA to fulfil its commitment to turn over all of
its arms, ammunition and military equipment as the
quartering process continues. It reiterates that the
quartering process is a crucial component of the
peace process and stresses the need for quartering to
be credible and fully verifiable. The Council
expresses its concern at the statements made by Dr.
Savimbi on 13 March 1996 and 27 March 1996. In
this context, the Council urges all Angolan leaders
to consider carefully the effect of public statements
on the climate of confidence necessary to nurture the
peace process. It also urges UNITA to release all
remaining prisoners.

"The Security Council recognizes with
satisfaction the progress by the Government of
Angola in the implementation of its commitments
under the Lusaka Protocol and the current timetable,
and encourages the Government to continue this
progress. The Council emphasizes the importance of
completion of the Calendar of Actions for April,
including, inter alia, the continuation of the
pull-back of government forces from areas near
UNITA quartering sites, the return of the Rapid
Reaction Police to barracks, the resolution of the
question of amnesty for UNITA officials, and the
adoption of a plan to disarm the civilian population,
as well as the quartering of UNITA troops. The
Council encourages the two parties to complete the
integration of UNITA into the Angolan armed
forces.

"The Security Council also encourages the
Government to grant UNAVEM. III the requisite

 

facilities for the establishment of an independent
United Nations radio.
"The Security Council stresses its concern at the
extensive presence of landmines throughout Angola
and expresses support for the efforts of the United
Nations, the Government and non-govemmental
organizations to address this problem. The Council
urges the Government and UNITA to destroy their
stockpiles of anti-personnel landmines. It encourages
them to make a meaningful public gesture towards
destruction of landmines which could have a positive
effect on public confidence and the free circulation of
people and goods.

"The Security Council notes with concern
credible reports of continuing purchases and delivery
of weapons to Angola and considers that such actions
are contrary to paragraph 12 of resolution 976 (1995)
of 8 February 1995 and undermine confidence in the
peace process. The Council reaffirms the obligation of
all States to implement fully the provisions of
paragraph 19 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15
September 1993.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
ultimate responsibility for restoring peace rests with
the Angolans themselves. The Council reminds the
parties that extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III
will be based, to a large part, on progress by the two
parties towards meeting the goals set by the Lusaka
Protocol.

"The Security Council condemns the incident
on 3 April 1996 which resulted in the death of two
UNAVEM. III personnel, the wounding of a third
and the death of a humanitarian assistance official,
and reiterates the importance it attaches to the safety
and security of UNAVEM. III and humanitarian
assistance personnel. The Council notes the
cooperation offered by the Angolan Government and
UNITA with the investigation by UNAVEM. III of
this deplorable incident.

"The Security Council reiterates its gratitude to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the staff of UNAVEM. III, and the three observer
countries whose unflagging service to the cause of
peace has been outstanding. The Council will
continue to monitor the situation in Angola closely
and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it informed of progress in the Angolan peace
process."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/ 19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

