Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and Liechtenstein align
themselves with the statement by the European Union.

The European Union welcomes the third Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region, which took
place between 27 April and 7 May, as a proof of the
Council's determination to maintain a long-term
engagement in favour of peace in the Great Lakes
region. We wish to pay tribute to the leadership shown
by Ambassador Jean-David Levitte as head of that
mission.

The European Union welcomes the results of the
meetings ofthe inter-Congolese dialogue, during which
the various delegations discussed highly sensitive
issues in a calm and constructive climate. We note that
the 37 reports approved establish beyond doubt the
high level of commitment invested in the search for
national reconciliation and peace in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

The European Union also wishes to express its
thanks for the work of the dialogue facilitator's team
and for the efforts of the Government of South Africa.

The European Union takes note of the signed
agreement between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo (MLC), which has been endorsed
by many political opposition parties and
representatives of sectors of civil society. The political
agreement reached at the dialogue between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the MLC, to which a majority of the participants
were also parties, could facilitate the political
transition and help consolidate the regional peace
process in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo based
on the Lusaka Agreement and the resolutions of the
Security Council. The European Union welcomes the
desire expressed by the signatories to extend the
agreement to all Congolese parties and invites them to
pursue discussions in a spirit of openness in order to
reach a comprehensive and all-inclusive agreement on
the transitional institutions.

We support the Council's call to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD)
and the MLC that they continue negotiations on a
comprehensive and integral agreement. We ask all the
Congolese parties to act responsibly, show a
willingness to compromise and abide by the framework
established by the Lusaka Agreements and
corresponding resolutions of the United Nations.

The European Union calls on all countries in the
region to use their influence on all the Congolese
parties so that they respect and support the desire for
peace, democracy and reconciliation expressed at Sun
City.

The European Union remains very concerned by
the continuing clashes in the north and east of the
country and by the increasing instability in Kasai. It
urges all the parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
to refrain from all military operations or acts of
provocation that could threaten the political impetus
that has emerged from Sun City.

Regarding the withdrawal of foreign forces, the
European Union supports the proposal presented by the
Security Council mission for the establishment of a
"curtain" of troops along the eastern borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an interim
measure aimed at ensuring border security in the final
stages oftroop withdrawal.

We recall that the parties will have to work
together to create the climate of confidence and
security necessary to facilitate the process of
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR), and we call on them to
work closely among themselves and with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in this regard. The
DDRRR unit is playing a crucial role in phase III of
MONUC deployment, and it has to be given the means
to fulfil its obligations. The European Union supports
the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his
report S/2002/169 that the military strength of
MONUC be increased, and we encourage the Security
Council in this regard to give due consideration to this
recommendation when it discusses the renewal of the
mandate of MONUC.

We hope that the situation of the combatants at
Kamina will be resolved soon, and that this will
constitute a good start for the DDRRR operations. The
European Union is ready to support any efforts in this
regard, and the European Commission is preparing a
first contribution of 20 million euros to the World Bank
trust fund.

The European Union also supports the Security
Council's strong stance on the immediate and
unconditional demilitarization of Kisangani.

We remain deeply concerned about the serious
violations of human rights and the appalling
humanitarian situation affecting a large part of the
population in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We support the recommendation of the mission that the
Security Council pay particular attention to MONUC's
mandate in the field of human rights and humanitarian
assistance to those who need it most, taking into
account the needs of women and girls. It is to be hoped
that the progressive deployment of humanitarian and
human rights personnel in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will lead to
improvements in this area.

The European Union considers that the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism to the peace
process, as suggested by the mission, would be
important in helping ensure coordination and coherence
in the action taken by the international community.

With regard to the situation in Burundi, the
European Union is extremely concerned by the
continuing violence and worsening humanitarian
situation, particularly in the rural area of Bujumbura.
Once again, it appeals to all the warring factions to
respect the civilian population in the name of
international humanitarian law and calls on all parties
to respect human rights.

The Union condemns the logic of war that the
armed groups still seem to be following. The Union
calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities and
appeals to the various factions of the armed groups to
continue with the talks currently in progress with the
firm intention of bringing them to a successful
conclusion. At the same time, the Union calls on the
Burundian Government to put forward a transparent
and coherent policy for reintegrating armed groups into
the Burundian army. It encourages the ongoing efforts
to negotiate a definitive and permanent ceasefire -
efforts that are continuing under Gabonese and South
African facilitation, with the support of Tanzania. The
Union is ready to support this process.

The European Union notes the beginning of the
operation for the voluntary repatriation of Burundian
refugees in Tanzania, in accordance with the tripartite
agreement between the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Burundian
and Tanzanian Governments. It recalls that, in
accordance with the provisions of the Arusha
Agreement, the return of refugees must be voluntary
and must take place in dignity with guaranteed security,
taking into account the particular vulnerability of
women and children. The Union urges the armed
groups to do everything possible to guarantee the
security of refugees returning to Burundi. Reception
mechanisms must be put in place before their return.

The Union also encourages the Government and
all the transitional institutions to consolidate the reform
process that has already begun by implementing the
transition programme in accordance with the planned
timetable, so that a Burundian society can be
constructed that is in harmony with the Agreement and
is inclusive of all Burundians.

In conclusion, we concur with the Security
Council mission about the need for the transitional
Government to implement the reforms called for in the
Arusha Agreement. For its part, the Union expresses its
willingness to continue to support the peace process in
Burundi.

