Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): In a few minutes the
Security Council is going to adopt a landmark draft
resolution. We are happy that the Council will be able to
authorize the second phase of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC) today. The United Nations Mission is
expanded both in size and in mandate. We have
succeeded in the exercise within a reasonable period of
time - less than one month following the reiteration of
commitment by the heads of State involved in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement in this very Council Chamber.

By today's action, the Security Council will have
play its role in assuming its primary responsibility in the
maintenance of peace and security. With this timely
decision, the United Nations will be establishing its
authority and keeping its commitment to support the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

 

The adoption of the draft resolution is timely also
because it follows the much awaited Lusaka summit, which
concluded yesterday, where the leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to the Ceasefire Agreement and approved the
revised, updated calendar for implementation.

The next challenges will be on the ground. The whole
world will now be looking at the region, at the theatre of
operations, at the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
other actors. The onus will be on the parties: they will have
to demonstrate their commitment by action. We appeal to
the parties to exercise the utmost restraint, to ensure respect
for Ceasefire provisions, to facilitate the deployment of
MONUC and its effective operations - in short, to extend
full cooperation for the timely implementation of this draft
resolution. We encourage the Congolese people in their
national dialogue towards a national reconciliation. We urge
them to extend full support and cooperation to Sir Ketumile
Masire, the facilitator. His task is of paramount importance
for all of us.

While exhorting the Lusaka parties to engage
themselves in the implementation of peace, we do not
forget our own responsibility. For us, the United Nations,
it will be critically important to ensure a rapid deployment
of the expanded MONUC and mobilization of necessary
resources. We must not fail in these challenges ahead of us.
The United Nations cannot afford to fail in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Further expansion of the United Nations engagement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as the Secretary-
General stated in his report, will depend on the cooperation
of the parties, on the situation on the ground. For this we
count on the wisdom of the leaders of Africa, particularly
of the parties involved in the region.

Finally, let me convey our rich tribute to Ambassador
Holbrooke for the leadership role he played in this matter,
for his commitment and for his tireless efforts. We also
commend the drive and tenacity of Ambassador Soderberg
in having the draft resolution so quickly finalized for action
by the Council.

To you, Mr. President, we owe a great deal for
successfully leading our discussion under very trying
conditions.

