Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting on children and armed
conflict and for the United States' able leadership of
the Council this month. I would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, and her
Office for their tireless efforts towards mitigating the
devastating impact of war on children, and the other
speakers for their statements.

Afghanistan aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf
of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

Children around the world suffer enormously
as a result of war, violence and armed conflict. This
devastating reality is even more widespread today due
to the upsurge of bloody conflict and brutal extremism
in Iraq, Gaza and South Sudan and around the world. In
Afghanistan, children have suffered immeasurably as
a result of over 30 years of war. Their childhoods have
been compromised and characterized by persistent
violence, killing and loss. Today, resurgent conflict
and pernicious extremism continue to cause children
tremendous suffering. They are caught in the crossfire
of military operations, explosions of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) and deadly suicide attacks.
They are exploited by terrorists who force them to
serve as combatants, suicide attackers, manufacturers
and planters of IEDs, and even sex slaves.

The enemies ofAfghanistan, in flagrant violation of
international law, deny Afghan children - particularly
girls - their fundamental right to education. The
Taliban threaten girls and their teachers with acid
attacks, killings, injury and abduction to prevent them
from attending school. Terrorist groups attack schools,
plant IEDs inside school premises, and detonate IEDs
and suicide bombs close by. In 2013, schools were
attacked in at least 73 such incidents, resulting in the
deaths and injuries of dozens of children. In parts of
the country, the fragile security situation has forced
the closure of hundreds of schools, affecting 115,000
children in 2013 alone.

The Government of Afghanistan deplores the use
of children in war and affirms that child recruitment
is unacceptable in all cases. It is tragic that Afghan
children attempt to join the national and local police
and army, and that they are compelled to lie about
their age in order to serve and earn money for their
families. Noting this terrible reality, my Government
has established a series of policies and practices aimed
at mitigating child recruitment.

In 2010, Afghanistan launched an inter-ministerial
steering committee on children and armed conflict. In
2011, the committee developed a national action plan
to end and prevent the recruitment of children into the
Afghan National Security Forces. Since then, among
other reforms, my Government has established child
protection units within the Afghan National Police
and Afghan local police recruitment centres; those in
the western region rejected 132 boys from voluntary
enlistment in 2013. High-level focal points have been
assigned to promote the protection of children within
the Afghan National Police, the Afghan local police,
and the Afghan National Army. In addition, the
Government has pioneered age-verification procedures
in Heart, in the western part of the country, and aims to
extend this good practice throughout the country and to
share similar good practices with developing countries
elsewhere in the world.

On 1 August, Afghanistan reaffirmedits commitment
to ending child recruitment into the Afghan security
forces by endorsing a road map towards compliance,
with the support of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and UNICEF. My Government
looks forward to continuing its efforts to implement the
national action plan and uphold the commitments laid
out in the road map.

Afghanistan faces profound challenges in its fight
to find peace, but we are committed to doing our utmost
to end child recruitment and enhance child protection
in the country. We cannot do this alone; we call on
our international partners to maintain their support
in order to help us achieve our goals. As Afghanistan
looks towards a bright new future with the conclusion
of the elections process, we hope to strive towards
an Afghanistan in which all children are able to live
in freedom and in peace, and the horrors of war and
violence are but distant facts of history.

