Mr. Bourgel (Israel) (spoke in French): I have
asked for the floor to comment on various statements
made earlier today, specifically by the representatives
of Syria, Iran and Lebanon. I will try to do that in the
four minutes I have, as I know it has been a long day
for everyone.

If the goal of this open debate were truly to discuss
the situation in the Middle East and not just about putting
one side on trial, we should be considering broadening
the discussion and establishing the underlying causes
of the destabilization in our region, which are the
destructive activities of Iran and those who do its
bidding. In that regard, I would like to remind the
Council once again that the Islamic Republic of Iran is
one of the world's main sponsors of terrorism. It spends
approximately $7 billion a year to finance its networks,
and needless to say at the expense of its own citizens
and needs. It uses the arms that it manufactures and
sells to fuel and encourage terrorism all over the world,
especially in Syria, Lebanon and Yemen.

Furthermore, as it did in Lebanon, it is trying to
turn Syria into a launchpad for the ballistic missiles
that it produces, in flagrant violation of resolution
2231 (2015). It exports its missiles, foments terrorism
and spews out its destructive ideology, in violation of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1701 (2006) and 2216 (2015).
Where Israel is concerned, there can be no denying
that its main goal is my country's destruction, sooner
or later. The Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic
of Iran has said that Israel will be wiped out in 25
years at the most. I would also like to point out that
the Syrian regime has offered its territory as a platform
for Iranian terrorism. On 20 January, for example, in
complicity, the Iranian Quds Force launched a medium-
range ground-to-air missile from Damascus towards
the Israeli Golan Heights.

With regard to Lebanon, Hizbullah, which is
internationally recognized as a terrorist organization,
is part of the Lebanese Government, in which it
plays an open, active and important role, while it has
stockpiled more than 130,000 missiles that can be
fired at my country at any time, not to mention the six
attack tunnels recently discovered across our borders.
Hizbullah's fanatical position clearly poses a serious
threat to the stability of the entire Middle East as well
as my country's security.

The international community has a moral obligation
to take firm measures against those who continue to
fuel violence and promote terrorism and whose only
goal is undermining global peace and stability.

