Mr. Lykketoft: It is an honour for me, as President
of the General Assembly, to brief the Security Council
during this annual debate on working methods. I do so
in full appreciation of the privilege that this opportunity
affords me as only the seventh Assembly President, I
understand, to address the Council; the last time that
took place was eight years ago. I thank the Spanish
presidency and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
each of the Council members for this opportunity.

We meet today as our Organization celebrates its
seventieth anniversary. Indeed, on Friday we will mark
the entry into force of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also meet today, three weeks after the adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) by world leaders, which
is focused on addressing poverty and inequalities,
combating climate change and environmental
degradation, and strengthening institutions of justice
and peace, and which responds to the ever-clearer
interlinkages between the Organization's three pillars
of development, peace and security, and human rights,
as expressed in the Charter.

In that context, the annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council is extremely timely.
Guided by the principles of transparency, inclusivity,
accountability and efficiency, such a discussion is of
great interest to the larger United Nations membership.
It can also be to the benefit of the institutional
relationship and interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly, particularly this
year as together we bring forward the process to select
and appoint the next Secretary-General.

The relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council is, or at least can be, both
mutually reinforcing and complementary. The full
United Nations membership, through the Charter
of the United Nations, has conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security and agreed that the
Council acts on their behalf in carrying out its duties.

In addition, there are a number of areas where
the actions of both the Council and the Assembly
are closely linked, and indeed interdependent. That
includes certain peace and security issues, the review
of the Charter of the United Nations, the appointment
of the Secretary-General, the election of judges to
international tribunals, certain recommendations from
the Assembly to the Council, the Security Council's
annual and special reports, as well as the relations
between the Security Council and certain subsidiary
organs established by the Assembly. Only last week,
we saw an example of this when the General Assembly
elected the five new non-permanent members of the
Security Council for the period 2016-2017.

During the rest of my term in office, I will continue
to promote effective cooperation, coordination and the
exchange of information among the Presidents of the
principal organs of the United Nations and the Secretary-
General. I especially intend to uphold the tradition of
holding meetings with the monthly Presidents of the
Security Council and of staying in close contact with
them on issues of common interest and joint activity.

Given the Security Council's significant
responsibilities and this mutually reinforcing
relationship, it is not surprising that the working
methods ofthe Council are of great interest and concern
to the wider United Nations membership. That interest
is even greater during years when the next Secretary-
General is to be appointed. We must never lose sight
of the fact that, at any given moment, 178 Members of
the United Nations are not members of the Security
Council, and that some 35 per cent of the membership
has never even served as Council members.

For years, there have been widespread calls for
increased transparency, inclusivity and a more rigorous
process in selecting the next chief of the Organization.
Through General Assembly resolution 69/321, on the
revitalization of the General Assembly, the United
Nations membership has unanimously provided clear
guidance for the way forward. Specifically, they have
requested that the General Assembly President and the
President of the Security Council begin the process
of soliciting candidates for the position of Secretary-
General. I have already commenced the discussion on
this matter with the current Security Council presidency.
I will continue to interact with the presidency with
a view to jointly circulating a letter to the whole
membership inviting candidates to be presented in
a timely manner and describing the entire process. It
is also envisaged that the Presidents of the General
Assembly and Security Council would jointly circulate
to all Member States, on an ongoing basis, the names of
individuals who have been submitted for consideration
as candidates, together with accompanying documents,
including curricula vitae. In addition, Member States
have requested that the General Assembly, without
prejudice to the role ofthe principal organs as enshrined
in Article 97 of the Charter, conduct informal dialogues
or meetings with candidates, thus contributing to the
transparency and inclusivity of the process.

General Assembly resolution 69/321 also underlines
that whoever assumes the position of Secretary-General
should be the best possible candidate - a person
who embodies the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity and demonstrates a firm
commitment to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations. Such a person should also be a candidate with
proven leadership and managerial abilities, extensive
experience in international relations and strong
diplomatic, communication and multilingual skills.

I am absolutely confident that there are a number
of potential female candidates who possess those
credentials and more. Bearing in mind that in 70 years
the United Nations has never had a female Secretary-
General, the inclusion and consideration of women
candidates should be an important focus for all of us as

we ensure that the Organization continues to advance
gender equality on all levels.

Lastly, from the very start of this discussion, we
have heard calls for the selection process to be finalized
as early as possible, preferably three months prior to
the assumption of office by the next Secretary-General.
Speaking from my own experience in September,
providing adequate time for preparation prior to
assuming office in the Organization is fundamental
to ensuring the effective discharge of responsibilities
during the transition period.

Given the critical role that the Secretary-General
plays in ensuring that the Organization is run as
efficiently and as effectively as possible, and given
that the outside world increasingly expects the highest
possible standards from the Organization, the process
of selecting the next person at the helm must be as open
and as thorough as possible. I look forward to working
with all Member States to that end.
There are three further relevant issues regarding
the interaction between the Council and the General
Assembly that I wish to touch on briefly.

First, the General Assembly receives and considers
the annual and special reports of the Security Council,
which, according to the Charter, shall include an
account of the measures that the Security Council has
decided upon or taken to maintain international peace
and security. This exercise represents an important
aspect of the transparency and accountability that
the wider membership expects vis-a-vis the Security
Council. While there have been improvements in the
report in recent years, there have also been calls from
Member States to further improve its analytical quality.
This year, on 12 November, the General Assembly will
consider the Security Council report that the Council
adopted this morning, and I encourage all Member
States to participate and share their views.

Secondly, with regard to the election of the ten
non-permanent members of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, in its resolution 68/307, on
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
decided that the elections of the non-permanent members
of the Council should be conducted six months before the
elected members assume their responsibilities. During
this seventieth session, the Assembly will therefore
hold two elections of non-permanent members e one
of which, as mentioned earlier, was held just last week,
and the second is scheduled for June next year. This is
a welcome development that will allow newly elected
members to better prepare for their two-year term in
this Council.

Finally, it would be remiss of me to conclude
without addressing the issue of Security Council
reform - arguably one of the most discussed and
sensitive issues within the United Nations and beyond
over many decades. As was underlined by a large
number of world leaders during this session's general
debate, this topic is of central importance to a large
majority ofthe membership. The General Assembly has
decided to immediately continue the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform in the
seventieth session, and I intend to move this process
forward, as much as possible, in the coming period.

One of my first decisions as President of the
General Assembly was to set the theme of the
seventieth session. I chose to focus on the idea that this
historic, and perhaps defining, session for the future of
the United Nations could capture a new commitment
to action on the part of the 193 Member States. The
Council's invitation to me to brief the Council today is
an example of such action and, I hope, the beginning
of a year of excellent cooperation between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Let me therefore
thank the Council once again for this opportunity. I
look forward to hearing Member States' statements and
input to this very timely debate.

