Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, like others, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their
briefings, which provided insight. We also express
our gratitude to the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism and related entities for the report
(S/2019/612) we have before us.

I have read some of the report. Like others, we take
note of many of the various salient points, including
that, despite its territorial defeat, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to aspire to
global relevance, in particular through its affiliates and
inspired-attacks. We also note the ongoing humanitarian
and security challenges posed by foreign terrorist
fighters (FTFs) and their family members. With that in
mind, my statement will focus on three issues.

First, with regard to the threat posed by ISIL,
the heinous ISIL-linked or ISIL-inspired attacks that
have recently been witnessed in Sri Lanka, Syria,
Iraq, several places in West Africa and other parts of
the world, even during a wedding ceremony recently
in Afghanistan, again demonstrate that ISIL remains
a serious threat. That is also the case in our region,
where Indonesian authorities successfully foiled a plot
by an ISIL-linked terror group in May. The fall of the
last ISIL-held territory in Syria and a decrease in its
resources were significant, but evidently this does not
mean the end of ISIL. Therefore, we feel it is only wise
not to go overboard and declare victory over terrorism
just yet.

The evolution of ISIL from a territorial entity to a
covert network, the activities of its regional affiliates,
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and the
logistical, jurisdictional and human rights complexities
of addressing ISIL-related detainees in Syria and
Iraq remain huge challenges. We shall continue to be
vigilant in that regard.

That leads to my second point, relating to the
importance of international and regional cooperation,
which we have referred to here several times. All
recent challenges reflect the need for the effective
implementation of relevant international instruments,
United Nations resolutions and, more important,
cooperation at all levels among States and non-State
entities. The response of the United Nations, Member
States and other stakeholders to the evolving threats
in the areas of preventing and countering terrorist
financing, securing international judicial cooperation,
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration and
community engagement are becoming increasingly
important. I think we have achieved a lot, but the
problem is that there is still much to be done.

My third and final point concerns the way forward.
For sustainable, long-term success in the fight against
terrorism, it is crucial to adopt a holistic approach.
While continuing with hard measures, we should also
invest in soft measures to counter terrorist narratives
and steer people away from extremism. We need to
promote dialogue and tolerance and give voice to
moderation as the best approach to confront hatred
and prevent incitement. We also need to eliminate
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. We
must be mindful of the importance of prisons and
detention facilities, while implementing policies to
prevent recidivism.

Although ISIL has dwindled, it remains a scourge of
humankind. We need to have a clear strategy to address
the root causes of the emergence of ISIL to ensure that
this tragic cycle of Violence will not repeat itself. No
justification is good enough and, once again, Indonesia
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter its origins or motivations. After hearing
everything that has been said in this Chamber, I believe
this is a particular issue on which the Council is united.
We stand together in our condemnation of terrorism. As
we also heard, we recently commemorated the second
annual International Day of Remembrance and Tribute
to the Victims of Terrorism. It is incumbent upon all of
us to do more to fight terrorism; we owe it to its victims.

