Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset, Madam, to welcome your
presence here in New York to preside over this debate.
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for Water
Resources of the Republic of Iraq, for their briefings,
and Ms. Ibrahim, representative of civil society in
Chad, for her statement.

Climate change affects human survival and
development. It is a daunting global challenge. In recent
years, the concerted efforts of countries to protect the
global environment and address climate change have
yielded remarkable results. However, responding to
climate change and achieving sustainable development
remains an urgent long-term task for the international
community. Given the current circumstances, we must
work together to address climate change.

First, it is important for the international
community to foster a communal vision of a shared
future for humankind and actively rise to global
challenges. Countries must strengthen exchanges and
cooperation to respond to climate change and provide
assistance to developing countries through technology
transfer and capacity-building. The United Nations and
the relevant international and regional organizations
should enhance their coordination and play a positive
role in addressing climate change.

Secondly, the international community must uphold
equality and justice and ensure that international rules
are effectively respected and implemented. Countries
should fully respect the international agreements
concluded in the area of climate change, reject a zero-
sum mentality, enhance benefit- and responsibility-
sharing and endeavour to achieve mutual benefits and a
win-win outcome.

Thirdly, the international community must
implement the Paris Agreement in earnest. It is
important to take into account countries' national
circumstances; respect their differences, in particular
those of developing countries; adhere to the principle
of common but differentiated responsibility; and help
developing countries, especially the African countries
and small island developing States, to strengthen
their capacity for adaptation, mitigation, management
and financing.

Fourthly, the international community must build a
new concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security to properly tackle climate-related
security risks. At present, security threats of all kinds
continue to emerge. All countries must take integrated
measures, strengthen international cooperation and
embark on the path to sustainable development, with a
view to addressing climate-related security risks such
as land and water resource depletion, food insecurity,
humanitarian crises and mass migration flows through
the achievement of common development.

China believes that all Member States should, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations and their
obligations under the relevant documents, and based on
the functions and divisions of labour of United Nations
organs, promptly address and properly respond to
climate-change issues.

Upholding the right approach to justice and
interests, China has been participating in international
cooperation on climate change. We stand ready to
continue to implement our commitment to South-
South cooperation on climate change and support other
developing countries in responding to climate-change
challenges. We are committed to working with the rest
of the international community in a concerted effort
to safeguard our common homeland, on which our
survival depends.

