Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): We
have taken note of the briefings made to us today by
the Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), Assistant Secretary-General
Menkerios and the representative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, as well as of the additional
information provided by the representatives of the
African Union and the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia. I should like comment on four
issues.

First, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
like previous delegations, Belgium is of course
extremely concerned about the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation and its tragic impact on a
population that is already extremely vulnerable. In that
regard, we would like to pay tribute to the courage of
the staff of United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, who continue to work under very
difficult and dangerous circumstances. In that context,
attacks on humanitarian workers are all the more
intolerable, for they clearly illustrate the disdain of
perpetrators for the very survival of the people they

08-6107]

purport to defend. We would like to associate ourselves
with the Secretary-General's appeal to all parties to
fully abide by their commitments and respect the most
basic obligations.

Secondly, with regard to the political situation,
my delegation welcomes the progress achieved by the
Transitional Federal Government and the Alliance for
the Re-liberation of Somalia in implementing the
Djibouti agreement. As fragile as it may be, that
progress certainly deserves support. Belgium therefore
welcomes the support provided by the States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
International Contact Group. We also call upon all
regional and international actors to commit themselves
to support that process and to encourage all parties to
join it.

However, those positive developments should not
lead us to forget a far more gloomy reality. First of all,
we must acknowledge that the institutions of the
Transitional Federal Government continue to be
undermined by internal disagreement. Belgium calls
upon the signatories to the agreements to demonstrate
political will and genuine leadership, commensurate
with the seriousness of the country's problems, so as to
implement the agreements reached within the specified
time frames.

We also note that the political progress has not
had the expected impact on the security situation; to
the contrary, the security situation has deteriorated and
brought the country to the very edge of the abyss. At
this stage, only a more inclusive political process holds
out the hope for lasting stabilization in the country. The
opening up of the Djibouti process to all Somali
political parties is an important political development.
We call upon all actors to join that process, thereby
demonstrating their ability to place the greater public
good above their own interests.

Thirdly, with regard to the security situation, we
thank the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for
the operational details it has provided, which could still
be more detailed. However, we ultimately agree with
the analysis of the Secretary-General that the current
situation does not meet the requirements for the
imminent deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

Moreover, the international stabilization force
envisaged in the report (S/2008/709) of the Secretary-
General is basically an expansion of the current
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), albeit
clearly strengthened. While we await more clarity as to
the readiness of certain States to assume leadership of
such a force, the urgency of the situation should result
in increased support for AMISOM. Following months
of efforts to find additional resources for AMISOM, it
is evident that any positive response is intrinsically
linked to the demonstrated ability of the parties to the
Djibouti agreement to assume their own
responsibilities and to implement on the ground the
commitments they have made. That is especially the
case as regards the establishment of joint police and
security forces that can take on greater responsibility
for security. At the same time, the international
community should continue its capacity-building
efforts and work in a pragmatic way to ensure the
successful delivery and effectiveness of humanitarian
assistance.

Fourthly, with regard to combating piracy - as
other delegations have also mentioned - yet again this
week, acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia have
reached proportions that clearly point to the need for
urgent action by the international community. The
European Union's Operation Atalanta, to which the
representative of the French delegation referred during
his statement and which will be deployed next month,
will spearhead efforts to combat piracy. Beyond
deploying additional means of combating piracy, one
of the major objectives of Operation Atalanta will be to
bolster cooperation among existing initiatives. In the
context of its European and international
responsibilities, Belgium is considering the possibility
of providing a vessel to Operation Atalanta in 2009. In
that regard, Belgium reaffirms its readiness to
cooperate to extend the measures put in place by
resolution 1816 (2008) so as to provide the necessary
framework for European and international efforts.

With regard to jurisdiction issues arising from the
detention of perpetrators of acts of piracy, we urge a
pragmatic approach that takes into consideration
bilateral agreements and the views expressed in the
relevant multilateral forums, in particular at the
International Maritime Organization.
Finally, with regard to the adoption of resolution
1844 (2008) and its regime of individual sanctions, we
welcome the fact that the international community now
has at its disposal an additional tool to strengthen
stabilization and assistance efforts on behalf of
Somalia by isolating those who aim to impede the

peace process and deprive the most vulnerable
members of the population of the most basic
humanitarian assistance.

