Mr. Toungui (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate the United States of
America for its initiative in organizing this debate on
the situation in Iraq. Your presence among us,
Mr. Vice-President, is proof of the importance that the
American authorities attach to the future of Iraq at a
time when that country is involved in a process of
national reconciliation and transfer of responsibilities
in the security and economic fields.

I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General among us here today and thank him for his
informative briefing. I would also like to congratulate
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar
Zebari, for his valuable statement.

The situation in Iraq has been marked in recent
years by notable progress, with which my country is
pleased, especially regarding the strengthening of the
political and institutional process, the definitive
transfer of responsibilities in the economic and security
fields, and cooperation with other States in the region.

Regarding the first point, I would like to welcome
the efforts deployed by the Government and people of
Iraq to promote the political and institutional
reconstruction of their country, despite the recurrent
violence that has affected it in recent years. Those
efforts have been particularly perceptible in the field of
democracy and national reconciliation.

Regarding the evolution of democracy in Iraq, we
are pleased to see that the recent elections were marked
by a significant turnout of Iraqis, especially women,
who have shown by their massive involvement their
firm will to contribute to the future of Iraq.
Regarding national reconciliation, my country
welcomes the agreement completed by the political
parties on power-sharing, which has led to consensus
on Mr. Nuri al-Maliki continuing as Prime Minister.
We are convinced that current consultations will soon
lead to the formation of a new Government.

The legitimate ambition expressed by the Iraqi
authorities to see their country once again play a role
within the community of nations will only be effective
if Iraq assumes its full responsibilities as a sovereign
State. It is in that perspective that we welcomed the
decision to draw down United States troops from Iraq
on 31 August 2010. This decision has allowed for the
transfer of responsibility for security in Iraq to the
Iraqi armed forces.

With regard to Iraq's finances, my country is
pleased to see the Council's adoption today of a
resolution that extends the mandate of the United
Nations with regard to the Development Fund for Iraq.
We hope that that specific arrangement will enable Iraq
to take responsibility for the management of those
funds on the basis of the plan of action that it presented
to the Council last April.

Concerning the termination of the oil-for-food
programme, my country encourages the Iraqi
Government to fulfil its commitments with regard to
settling the letters of credit.

The future of a stable and prosperous Iraq also
means strengthening its cooperation with countries in
the region. We therefore support the efforts of the Iraqi
Government to normalize its relations with its
neighbours, including Kuwait.

I could not conclude without paying homage to
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq for the
central role it has played in the country. The gains
achieved in the evolution of the situation of Iraq should
be maintained. My country exhorts the international
community to continue its efforts at solidarity with
regard to the Government and the people of Iraq.
Accordingly, I am pleased that the newly adopted
Presidential Statement (PRST/2010/27) takes those
serious concerns into account.

