Major General Paul Cruz: I am General Paul
Cruz, Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
precious opportunity to present the Security Council

with a view of MINUSTAH and its military
component, with a focus on humanitarian assistance,
which is an important part of the Mission's daily
operations.

Since its inception on 1 June 2004, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti has reached a
number of milestones. In the midst of ongoing violence
in the country, legislative and executive elections were
planned that, after having been postponed several
times, were held in February 2006. MINUSTAH played
a significant role in ensuring that the presidential
elections were organized, monitored and carried out in
a free and fair manner.

In 2006 and 2007, the military component of
MINUSTAH assisted in the restoration and
maintenance of the rule of law and public safety and
order in Haiti, including in the central areas of Port-au-
Prince. The years of 2008 and 2009 were rife with riots
and the destruction that the hurricanes wrought upon
the nation.

On 12 January 2010, an earthquake levelled
entire neighbourhoods in the capital city, delivered a
severe blow to a still-weak Haitian economy and
infrastructure, and impeded nation-building efforts in
the country. The catastrophe also led to a climate of
political uncertainty, interrupting a period of relatively
smooth progress towards elections that previously been
scheduled for February 2010.

In his semi-annual report on the situation in Haiti
dated 22 February 2010 (S/2010/200), the Secretary-
General provided recommendations on the future role
of the United Nations Mission in Haiti. After entering a
period of consolidation, MINUSTAH needed a surge
effort in order to help the Government preserve the
gains of stabilization to date and enable a transition to
long-term reconstruction.

Since the earthquake, humanitarian assistance, in
conjunction with relief and recovery operations, has
represented the primary focus of MINUSTAH and the
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
alongside international organizations and non-
governmental organizations, with, of course, the full
cooperation of all countries represented in this Council
and many others.

The Mission as a whole is actively engaged in
carrying out stage 2 of this concept of humanitarian
relief operations. It must be said that food, water, some
form of shelter and emergency medical assistance have
been delivered in a stable environment. There have
been no major epidemic outbreaks. A strategic plan
detailing stage 3, the normalization phase, is currently
being developed by MINUSTAH.

Notwithstanding the new mandate bestowed upon
the military component of MINUSTAH following the
earthquake, humanitarian assistance has always been a
key area of focus, along with programmes of violence
reduction. Better communication and approaches to
dealing with the Haitian people became necessary after
incidents that occurred at the beginning of the Mission.
Accordingly, coordination of action between civilians
and military personnel, and thus of humanitarian
assistance, became a priority for the success of the
military component's mission in MINUSTAH.

Our activities are not intended to be a vehicle for
the Government's development efforts or to replace
civilian organizations that have a greater capacity for
undertaking development projects. Rather, the
humanitarian activities carried out are to support the
Mission's goals.

The military component has been providing quick
response assistance in the aftermath of such events as
hurricanes, floods, building collapses, accidents and
security breaches. Besides providing security, the
military component's distribution of the necessities of
life, such as water, food, shelter and medical
assistance, comprises its ongoing activities in support
of United Nations agencies and programmes and non-
United Nations organizations.

Naturally, since the earthquake, our focus on
these activities has increased exponentially. Through
its joint operations and tasking centre, it has been
possible for MINUSTAH to coordinate assistance
provided by diverse actors. A long list of countries
provided immediate assistance that was delivered as
fast as possible.

United Nations military had control of security,
which allowed the United States Joint Task Force Haiti
and troops from Canada, Spain, France and Italy,
among others, to carry out their main humanitarian
assistance tasks. The military component now has the
added responsibility of participating in the security of
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs). We
focus on the safety and security of those women and
children who are most at risk.

Our engineers are working diligently every day to
improve the quality of life for communities across
Haiti on projects such as removing rubble, clearing
roads, rebuilding bridges, cleaning canals, preparing
sites for IDP camps, clearing areas to rebuild schools
and orphanages, digging wells, and so on.

Since the inception of the Mission, the military
component of MINUSTAH has been involved in
humanitarian assistance. It has acquired great deal of
expertise in these areas, especially following the
hurricanes of 2004 and 2008. After the earthquake, it
used this expertise to work with the civilian branches
of MINUSTAH, the United Nations country team and
non-United Nations organizations in completing their
tasks. The military force will continue to pursue these
activities in order to contribute to the fulfilment of
MINUSTAH's mandate to create a secure and stable
environment in Haiti.

