Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate your country, Sir, on
its presidency of the Security Council during the month
of March and to thank you for inviting me to participate
in today's open debate on children and armed conflict.
I also acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Minister
of Lithuania and the other Permanent Representatives.

Allow me first to mention something of which
we are proud. Next Tuesday, in the fraternal Republic
of Chile, the democratic President, Sebastian Pifiera
Echefiique, will hand over the presidency to another
democratically elected president. That is now a tradition
in Latin America that fills us with pride and satisfaction.
I therefore wish to acknowledge that publicly, before
the Council and the entire Chilean people.

I also wish to express our absolute solidarity with
the Government and people of the People's Republic of
China, who recently suffered a dreadful attack.

I welcome Luxembourg's initiative to convene this
debate on an issue on which the delegation of Argentina
appreciates Luxembourg's leadership in the Council
through Ambassador Sylvie Lucas. We also welcome
the statements of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose dreadful history and
moving words serve to challenge us to act urgently and
with genuine conviction.

My country, Argentina, is firmly committed to the
protection of children in armed conflict. That can be
seen by the fact that we were one of the first States to
ratify, in 2002, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the participation of
children in armed conflict.

Similarly, we are committed to defending and
ensuring respect for the rights of children and
adolescents in every area, as is demonstrated in our
Government's initiative, unanimously approved by
Argentina's Congress, enacting a law stipulating a
minimum age of 18 for recruitment into our armed
forces, thereby observing the highest standards on
children's rights.

In August we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), the first on
the issue of children and armed conflict, supported
by Argentina as a member of the Security Countil
at the time. In 2005, resolution 1612 (2005), also
firmly supported by my country, as a non-permanent
Council member, represented substantive progress in
recognizing, guaranteeing and protecting the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict. That resolution
clearly defines acts that constitute serious violations
of children's rights and establishes a monitoring and
reporting mechanism that, in conjuntion with child
protection advisers, is a fundamental tool for ensuring
the protection of children in armed conflict.

Besides such advances in formulating standards,
it is important to emphasize the goals that have been
achieved in preventing attacks on and protecting
children's rights, through coordinated action by the
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the monitoring and reporting mechanism and
the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, working together with UNICEF and other
United Nations bodies. We certainly all believe that
lessons well learned and good practices established not
only apply to legal standards and effective mechanisms
but also to the decision to implement action plans in
a coordinated way that can have a positive impact on
children's living conditions and their future in specific
situations.

Such steps on the part of the international
community to protect children from serious crimes and
prevent such crimes being committed go hand in hand
with the importance of ensuring that impunity does not
prevail and that the perpetrators of serious Violations of
rights are held accountable for their actions. Fighting
impunity for serious violations, war crimes and crimes
against humanity is unquestionably the responsibility
of individual States. It should be recalled, however, that
the international system has provided supplementary
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for cases where States are unable or unwilling
to exercise their primary jurisdiction. The ICC is an
essential body for ensuring that accountability is the
standard and ethic for an international community that
respects the rule of law.

Recognizing the progress that has been made
does not imply in any way that we ignore or minimize
the horrifying realities that daily attest to the fact
that children and women are the primary victims
of many types of violence and abuse in situations of
armed conflict. From a human rights perspective, the
protection of children must remain our priority, and must
therefore be taken into consideration when defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and Security Council peacebuilding efforts,
which should include the integration of experts into its
various missions. It is equally important for States and
the Organization that training and capacity-building on
children and armed conflict not be limited exclusively
to staffwith direct responsibility for protecting children
in the field.

It is also essential that we incorporate into training
programmes for military, police and civilians destined
for United Nations missions a human rights perspective
and a thorough acquaintance with the rights of
children and young people, as well as knowledge
and understanding of strategies and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes for them
in situations of armed conflict. Careful analysis of the
various tactics for recruiting child soldiers and how to
prevent their joining armed groups and conflicts, as
well as the capacity to act to change violent cultural
practices and traditions that perpetuate discrimination
against children, is imperative. We must discard models
of tutelage and recognize children as possessors of
rights. In the area of potential specific measures we
should also emphasize the importance of preventive
measures that every State can adopt, including the
implementation of a legal framework that ensures that
children cannot be recruited as soldiers; in that instance,
a proper registry of births is extremely valuable.

It is equally important to ensure recognition,
within the framework of reintegration and reparation
programmes for children who have been victims in
situations of armed conflict, oftheir status as possessors
of rights and of the fact that they are entitled to be actors
and participants in decision-making processes - not
only as regards their personal plans for their lives but
also within their families, communities and societies.
It is also essential that we overcome interventions
and processes that solidify or reproduce patterns of
victimization.

Argentina believes that the Convention on the
Rights of the Child must inspire and guide our decisions
both in peacetime and in situations of armed conflict.
In peacetime, our primary responsibility is to promote,
protect and ensure children's rights through public
policies and legal guarantees. In situations of armed
conflict, we must strengthen protection mechanisms,
generate effective tools for prevention and ensure that
specific action is taken to provide comprehensive care
for children who are victims of armed conflict.

In that regard, and in conclusion, I would like
to pay special tribute to the human rights movement
in my country, and in particular to the Asociacion
Madres e Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo, who, through
their unwavering commitment to human rights, were
the principal movers of the Argentine proposal that
formed the basis for the inclusion of articles 7, 8 and
11 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. With
the requirement that children should be registered
immediately after birth and the commitment of States
parties to the Convention to respect the right ofa child to
preserve his or her identity - measures that States must
take to avoid children's illegal transfers abroad - the
substance of those articles enshrines the rights of and
for children that those women with their white scarves
have sorrowfully and courageously handed down as a
historical mandate and ethical commitment to political
consistency and a legal obligation for humankind as a
whole.

Lastly, I would like to assure the Council of my
country's support for today's resolution 2143 (2014), of
which Argentina is a sponsor.

