Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal fully supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), until 30 January 1998. It
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
postpone the withdrawal of the United Nations military
component until the end of November, taking into account
the situation on the ground.

The peace process in Angola has reached a mature
phase, but it is clearly not yet irreversible. Indeed, we are
in a process, but we have not yet achieved the peace. The
draft resolution before us has been designed to work
towards that goal, and we urge its full implementation.

We deeply regret that significant progress has not been
made in the remaining key tasks of the peace process. The
very slow pace of the demilitarization of UNITA and the
slow-down of the extension of State administration into
the areas controlled by UNITA following the adoption of
resolution 1130 (1997), as reported by the Secretary-
General, are of particular concern to Portugal.

The Security Council gave UNITA two grace
periods - 60 days - in which it had the time and the
opportunity to move positively and decisively towards
fulfilling its obligations and the terms of the "Acordos de
Paz", the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant resolutions of
the Council.

In adopting resolution 1127 (1997), the Council sent
a clear and unambiguous message to UNITA: take
concrete and irreversible steps towards a successful
conclusion of the peace process. Unfortunately, UNITA,
despite some positive actions and promises, has not taken
those concrete and irreversible steps, and the international
community, through the Security Council, has to act
accordingly.

We hope that UNITA will understand the message
that is being sent by the Council. The measures that will
go into force tomorrow are not an end in themselves.
They are aimed at achieving the objectives shared by all
those who wish to see peace take root in Angola; and, let
me stress once more, these objectives were freely
accepted by the signatories of the "Acordos de Paz" and
the Lusaka Protocol.
The Council is clearly ready to review these
measures in the light of meaningful and irreversible
progress on the ground, but it is equally ready to consider
additional measures, if needed.

We urge the Government of Angola and UNITA to
reaffirm in practical and positive steps their commitment
to national reconciliation and peace. The future of the
Angolan people is at stake.

