Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for
his briefing. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his participation by video
teleconference. The use of video teleconferencing is
one of several recent useful innovations that, in our
View, improve the efficiency of the Security Council
and of United Nations operations in the field, and I
welcome the fact that Special Representative Zarif is
amongst the many Special Representatives now using
it.

I am also pleased to welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk
J eremie, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.

The United Kingdom endorses a central theme of
the report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/72), which is that the Government of Kosovo
continues to make progress towards normalization both
within Kosovo and within the region. I am sure that all
Council members will agree that that is firmly in the
interests of long-term peace and stability in the
Balkans.

We wholeheartedly agree with the Secretary-
General's observation that the European Union-
facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
shows that it is possible for the parties to reach
practical agreements in order to improve the daily lives
of the people of Kosovo, and where those agreements
have been reached, I congratulate the negotiators on
both sides for their efforts. I welcome the assurances
we have heard today from both Foreign Ministers of
their continued commitment to the dialogue. The
United Kingdom urges both sides to remain continually
and constructively engaged in the process, and indeed
to agree quickly on dates for further meetings.

The positive steps taken since the Council last
discussed Kosovo (see S/PV.6670) demonstrate how
Europe, with valuable support from the wider
international community, is able to tackle and achieve
progress on complex and sensitive issues that arise
within its borders. It is for that reason that we welcome
the recent appointment of Mr. Samuel Zbogar as the
Special Representative of the European Union (EU) to
Kosovo. We look forward to working with EU Special
Representative Zbogar and his team as they help to
guide Kosovo along the path to towards eventual EU
accession.

Kosovo continues to make particular progress in
judicial reform and migration. The launch in January of
a formal dialogue with the European Commission on
visa liberalization was a result of much hard work on
the issue by the Government of Kosovo. Nevertheless,
the United Kingdom recognizes that, in other areas,
significant challenges remain. We are concerned about
the decline in the level of voluntary returns of
displaced people and communities. The Government of
Kosovo should continue to make every effort to
facilitate the return of its nationals in the hope that
long-term resettlement and reintegration can take
place. The United Kingdom is making its own
contribution to that process, notably in the historic
centre of Prizren.

Further efforts are also needed towards the
strengthening of the rule of law and minority rights.
There is no doubt that the government of Kosovo is
committed to securing concrete progress on those
issues, not least in the context of its commitment to
prepare for eventual EU accession. We welcome the
government's determination to engage more directly
with Kosovo Serb citizens in the north.

For that reason, it is important for both Kosovo

and Serbia to remain engaged in the EU-facilitated
dialogue. As we have underlined on many occasions
before, the dialogue remains crucial for building
practical cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade,
for improving the lives of their citizens, and for
ensuring that both Kosovo and Serbia progress in a
more stable fashion towards eventual EU membership.

It remains the responsibility of all who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work to actively deter
violence and reduce tensions. That includes withholding
support for any moves or initiatives that risk inflaming
the situation, and it includes giving consistent and
unequivocal backing to both the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) in the
exercise of their legitimate mandates - mandates that
they have at all times been fully respected - to
guarantee security and freedom of movement
throughout Kosovo.

The situation still merits close attention, as
Assistant Secretary-General Mulet has emphasized.
The tentative trend established in the past few months
towards a more stable situation in northern Kosovo is
clearly one that needs to be sustained and built on.

We have heard today references to the allegations
of organ trafficking in Senator Dick Marty's report to
the Council of Europe. The United Kingdom takes
those allegations seriously and continues to offer its
full support to Ambassador Williamson and his Task
Force, who are undertaking a thorough and
comprehensive investigation into those sensitive
issues.

We welcome the public commitments undertaken
by the Governments of Serbia, Albania and Kosovo to
cooperate with Ambassador Williamson's investigations.
I note the welcome assurances given today by both
Ministers for Foreign Affairs that their authorities will
provide full assistance to the investigation. We are
equally encouraged by the letter from His Excellency
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Albania, Mr. Edmond Haxhinasto, which was
circulated to Council members on 6 February and
pledged to take all legislative steps necessary to
institutionalize the Albanian Government's cooperation
with EULEX. Those developments reinforce our
confidence in the work of the EULEX Task Force and in
its capacity, authority and jurisdiction to carry out a

detailed and exhaustive investigation. I deeply regret the
aspersions cast against the impartiality of that
investigation by one Council member in an earlier
intervention.

Overall, 2011 was a good year for Kosovo, in
which it further consolidated its independence, with, I
understand, 85 countries now confirmed as
recognizers. Furthermore, the European Union's
General Affairs Council conclusions of 27 January
represented a significant step forward in Kosovo's
relationship with the EU. Nevertheless, as the report of
the Secretary-General makes clear, it is crucial that
Kosovo maintain its focus on reform.

The United Kingdom shares the hope expressed
by Assistant Secretary-General Mulet that 2012 can be
a year in which opportunities are seized. In our View,
that will mean a particular, sustained and full
commitment by both sides to the EU-facilitated
dialogue.

The United Kingdom continues to believe that
Kosovo's future belongs in the European Union, along
with all other countries in the western Balkans. We will
work assiduously to help the government of Kosovo
achieve that goal, and we remain committed to the
work of the United Nations and the EU in Kosovo in
support of that aspiration.

