Mr. Mahmoud: As you know, Madam President,
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) will lower its sails
at the end of the month and start liquidation on
1 January 2011. The Secretary-General's report before
the Council (8/2010/611) is therefore his last on
MINURCAT as a mission. My task today is to
highlight the main points and to make one or two
observations.

On the security and humanitarian situation, as the
report describes, the situation in Chad remains
relatively calm, as does the situation in refugee camps
and sites for internally displaced persons. Fears that
widespread criminal activities would resume after the
rainy season have so far proved to be unfounded. This
2

is largely attributed to the vigilance of Chadian central
and local authorities and increased effectiveness on the
part of the Detachement integre de securite (DIS) and
the joint Sudan-Chad border patrols. However, the
humanitarian situation remains a concern and the need
for assistance continues to be immense. Chad still hosts
more than 250,000 refugees, and the country is still
coping with the consequences of this year's heavy rains
in the east and elsewhere.

With regard to the DIS, since the Secretary-
General 's previous report (S/2010/529), all
administrative, management and operational
responsibilities have been transferred to the DIS under
the supervision of United Nations police. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) will assist the Government of
Chad to sustain the DIS through the creation of a
basket fund managed by UNDP and operational
assistance provided by UNHCR. The DIS will require
continued assistance from the international community
during the post-MINURCAT period.

Pursuant to resolution 1923 (2010), five
humanitarian forums aimed at promoting a shared
understanding of the protection of civilians were held
in various locations in eastern Chad. The last forum
will be held on 15 December in N'Djamena to wrap up
discussions held in the previous ones. The last High-
level Working Group meeting, also mandated by the
resolution, will be held on 21 December.

In line with the Government of Chad's early
recovery programme in the eastern part of the country,
MINURCAT's substantive sections have spared no
effort to consolidate their achievements in the areas of
rule of law, human rights, gender, HIV/AIDS and
intercommunity dialogue, as well as to transfer these
activities, when feasible, to the Government of Chad,
other United Nations agencies or other national or
international partners. My deputy, Ms. Rima Salah,
will meet with the United Nations country team and the
Government of Chad on 21 December to mark the end
of MINURCAT activities and to officially hand over
MINURCAT civilian programmes.

Pursuant to resolution 1923 (2010), all
MINURCAT uniformed personnel will have left Chad
and the Central African Republic by 31 December.
MINURCAT withdrew from the Central African
Republic on 15 November. On 18 December, the Force
10-69165
Commander will be the last military person to leave
Chad. The last United Nations police officer will leave
on 29 December. Only those civilian staff required for
the liquidation of the Mission will remain in Chad after
31 December.

I should like to seize this opportunity to thank the
Governments of the Central African Republic and Chad
for facilitating the withdrawal of MINURCAT. I
encourage the Government of Chad to continue to do
so throughout the liquidation period and until the last
MINURCAT personnel and assets have left the country.

Permit me to say a few words on the Central
African Republic. The situation in the north-eastern
part of that country remains of concern. Barely 10 days
after MINURCAT's withdrawal from the region, on
24 November to be exact, a rebel group attacked the
town of Birao and occupied the camps. The Central
African authorities have since regained control of those
two camps. In the light of regional instability, sustained
attention to the eastern part of the Central African
Republic is required.

Pursuant to paragraph 27 of resolution 1923
(2010), MINURCAT commissioned a lessons learned
exercise. Key findings from the MINURCAT
experience were outlined in paragraphs 49 to 63 of the
Secretary-General's report. Of particular relevance
were securing and sustaining the consent of host
nations and the creation of a nationally owned and
internationally supported security entity for the
protection of civilians. It is the Secretary General's
earnest hope that these lessons will be of assistance to
the Council as it considers the evolution of
peacekeeping as a whole and contemplates future
operations that are solely devoted to the protection of
civilians.

(spoke in French)

Despite its murky beginnings and the challenges
it has had to face throughout its short existence,
MINURCAT has had some notable achievements. In
that connection, the eastern part of Chad will never be
the same. MINURCAT not only helped to ensure the
physical protection of civilians, refugees, internally
displaced persons, host communities and humanitarian
workers working under Chadian officials, it also
provided them with legal and social protection. That
was appreciated by the Government and by the host
population. I thank them for that.
10-69165
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for having entrusted this challenge
to me. I would also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for the trust they have shown in me
throughout the last months of the Mission.

