Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The delegation
of Senegal would like to thank the Japanese presidency
of the Council for having organized this open debate,
which gives us the opportunity to examine the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
following the publication of the Quartet report. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his important briefing.

The situation in Palestine remains tragic,
characterized by the seizure of lands, the demolition
of homes and rampant settlement expansion. These
actions fuel hatred and extremism within both Israel
and Palestine and, as a result, have fostered the
escalation of violence and insecurity. The unacceptable
blockade of Gaza and the arbitrary detention of many
Palestinians, not to mention the strategies for the
geographic, demographic and cultural modification
of Jerusalem, only exacerbate the conflict, which has
lasted for decades.

Unfortunately, to further tarnish this scenario, since
October, over 200 Palestinian victims, including many
children, and 30 Israelis, have been recorded owing to
the violence. Such a situation should further push the
Security Council to act so that, with the support of the
Quartet, it can fulfil its obligations to the Palestinian
people, who, like the Israeli people, have the right to
an independent State with secure and internationally
recognized and guaranteed borders. In that spirit we
commend the efforts of the Quartet members, which
have led to the recent publication of the report. It is a
consensus-based document with the goal ofestablishing
bridges between Palestinians and Israelis by seeking, at
this stage, to avoid outstanding difficult issues, as it
happens, the political, legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. We also endorsed the recommendations in the
report that aim to achieve a two-State solution.

However, we regret what seems to be a trend of
lumping Israelis and Palestinians together. because
we think that Israel's occupation of the territories
designated for the creation of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State remains the main reason for
the prolongation of the conflict. Nonetheless, we think
that this document can contribute to the peace process
on the condition that the strong recommendations are
effectively and quickly implemented and because it
calls for an in-depth correction of the current trends
that seriously threaten a lasting peace, in particular an
end to the settlement and related activities in the West
Bank, including Jerusalem.

According to the report, since the 1994 Oslo
Accords, more than 570,000 Israelis have settled in
Area C, which was supposed to be a main part of the
future independent and sovereign Palestinian State.
From 2009 to 2014, more than 80,000 settlers moved to
the West Bank, a situation that utterly calls into question
Israel's commitment to a two-State solution. Evidence
of this is the Israeli authorities' recent announcement,
two days before the publication of the Quartet report,
of the building of settlements in the West Bank.
Administrative restrictions on construction permits
that affect Palestinians in Area C have also been issued,
which clearly demonstrates the fait accompli policy
pursued by the Israeli Government.

Under these conditions, the destruction of
Palestinian homes and structures, including those
belonging to Bedouins, as well as many physical and
administrative restrictions, have killed the Palestinian
economy and only exacerbate tensions. We urge Israel,
as the occupying Power, in accordance with its reiterated
commitments to a two-State solution, to put an end to
the settlements and related activities in order to begin
genuine negotiations for a lasting peace that meets the
security needs of Israel and the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people for a sovereign State, based
on the pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

Furthermore, my delegation echoes the Quartet's
appeal to the Israeli Government to implement the
previous agreements to transfer authority to the
Palestinian Authority, in particular in Area C, in order
to promote the awaited progress in the areas of housing,
access to water, energy, communications, agriculture
and natural resources.

While we reiterate our condemnation of hatred,
violence and terrorism, regardless of who the
perpetrators or what their motivations are, we recall the
words of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who said
that it is people's nature to confront occupation. Indeed,
we believe that the lack of a political horizon favours
the emergence of extremists on both sides - extremists
whose acts of violence have targeted both Israeli and
Palestinian civilians. Administrative detentions,
collective punishment, the disproportionate use of
force by the Israeli army and extrajudiciary killings,
in addition to being violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights, exacerbate
Palestinians' feelings of humiliation about the past
50 years of occupation and stoke hatred and violence
between the two populations.

The catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Gaza - a small enclave of 36 square kilometres that
has been besieged for nine years and where more
than 2 million people live, 70 per cent of whom
require assistance - should call to our collective
conscience. The prevailing extreme poverty, the high
rate of unemployment and the lack of any prospect for
development, in particular the collapse of businesses
and Israeli restrictions on fisheries, are scourges likely
to bring about the resurgence of serious conflict, which
the report warns us about.

On this occasion, we repeat our encouragement
for the ongoing discussions between the Palestinian
political actors, namely, Fatah and Hamas, to achieve
the formation of a Government of national unity, in
the dynamic of the Cairo agreement. Furthermore, we
reaffirm the central role of the countries of the region,
and we renew our support for the Paris communique as
a contribution to a definitive solution to the conflict,
based on the previous processes such as the Madrid
conference, the Oslo Accords, the Quartet road map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which, it should be recalled,
recommends, beyond Palestine, a normalization in the
relations between Israel and the States of the region.

In that regard, the idea of an expanded Quartet is
certainly something that deserves serious consideration.
As for the Security Council, we believe that it should play
the role of guarantor of international peace and security
by being more engaged in achieving a definitive solution
to this decades-long conflict, which has generated only
terrorism, extremism, and threats to the wider world
beyond the region. Lastly, my delegation believes that
it is up to the two parties and, in particular, up to Israel
to comply with all previous commitments, including
putting an end to the occupation and the construction
of settlements, in order to promote the peace process.

