The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of August 2013,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to Her Excellency Ambassador
Rosemary DiCarlo, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States, for her service as President of the
Security Council for the month of July 2013. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Council in expressing our
deep appreciation to Ambassador DiCarlo and her team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

I should also like to extend, on behalf of the Council,
a warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative
of the United States to the United Nations, Her
Excellency Ms. Samantha Power.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security

Letter dated 1 August 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Argentina
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/446)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers, and other
representatives participating in today's meeting. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.

Under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Georgia, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Peru, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla,
Permanent Observer ofthe League ofArab States to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Jose Miguel
Insulza, Secretary General of the Organization of
America States, to participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ZOl3/446, which contains a letter dated 1 August 2013
from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
containing a concept paper on the item to be considered.

The last time the Security Council held a debate
from a broad perspective on the relationship between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations was on 13 January 2010 on the initiative
of the People's Republic of China (S/PV.6257). As a
result of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/ZOIO/l), which, while emphasizing
the Security Council's primacy in maintaining
international peace and security, stressed the
importance of developing effective partnerships. The
Security Council also expressed its intention to consider
further steps to promote closer and more operational
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the fields of early
warning and prevention of conflicts, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and to ensure the
coherence, synergy and collective effectiveness of their
efforts.

The primary objective of today's open debate
is to consider the role of regional and subregional
organizations, exploring options to strengthen the
bilateral relationships between the United Nations and
the spectrum of regional and subregional organizations
and arrangements.

It is worth mentioning that in recent years,
new subregional arrangements and organizations
have played a fundamental role, both in conflict
prevention and in the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. Other arrangements
and organizations have developed new capabilities for
action in the maintenance of international peace and
security as evidenced in a number of peacekeeping
operations.

Members of the Council have before them a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject of today's meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement. In
accordance with the understanding reached among the
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the statement, which
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/PRST/20l3/12.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


