Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for arranging today's debate and we
commend the Moroccan delegation for ably facilitating
negotiations on the draft presidential statement, which
we support. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Peacebuilding Commission Chairperson, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, for their insightful briefings.
We join others in paying tribute to the outgoing elected
members of the Council - Columbia, India, Portugal,
Germany and South Africa. Working with them has
been a truly enriching experience.

The Secretary-General's progress report (S/2012/746)
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict is a
substantive addition to the series of reports on the subject.
In his earlier reports, the Secretary-General outlined an
agenda for coherent, efficient and predictable responses
to the peacebuilding needs of countries emerging from
conflict. The present report notes the progress achieved
in the implementation of the peacebuilding agenda and
gives priority directions for future work.

In the context of the progress update, we welcome
the enhanced effectiveness of the field presence, which
stresses stronger communication and coordination.
An emphasis on assessment and planning helps forge
consensus among stakeholders on priorities and
resources. In that regard, it is a matter of satisfaction
that an integrated strategic framework has been
completed in nearly all missions. The current review
of the integrated mission planning process should
further streamline planning requirements. In terms
of future directions, the report rightly underscores
the importance of inclusivity, institution-building and
sustained international support for peacebuilding. We
support closer interaction between the United Nations
and Governments to reinforce national ownership.

We feel that it would have been useful for the report
to have focused also on tasks aimed at preventing
the relapse of conflict as well as long-term recovery
plans and on the role of external actors. In addition,
references to peacebuilding activities in the security
and defence sectors, justice and corrections systems,
basic Government functions and support to political
processes would have been helpful. In that regard,
the commendable achievements of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Haiti
and Timor-Leste are worthy of mention, as are those
in Somalia and Darfur, where the United Nations and
the African Union have jointly undertaken important
peacebuilding-related tasks through peacekeeping.
Our future work on peacebuilding must be
guided by four key concepts. First is the imperative of
national ownership. Secondly, there needs to be strict
prioritization of targeted areas of peacebuilding based
on specific needs and articulated with the consent of
national authorities. Thirdly, there needs to be a sharper
emphasis on the development aspect of peacebuilding.
Finally, the nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding needs to be refined.

The Peacebuilding Commission is the appropriate
forum for discussing and implementing those concepts.

The Commission has made important strides in the
first seven years of its existence. The PBC's work will
improve with a refinement of the global discourse on
peacebuilding and an augmentation of resources for
peacebuilding. The buttressing of the PBC's advocacy
and resource-mobilization roles is important.

The risk of relapse into conflict is a perennial
challenge to peacebuilding. Peacekeepers acting as
early peacebuilders can help to mitigate this risk.
We attach high importance to factoring the gender
perspective into peacebuilding endeavours. We believe
that lasting peace will remain elusive unless the
condition of women and other vulnerable groups is
improved. For long-term economic recovery and social
cohesion, women's access to health care, education and
entrepreneurial opportunities are essential. Women's
participation in mediation and policy formulation will
promote the efficacy of peacebuilding efforts.

The success of United Nations peacebuilding
hinges on adequate financial resources. In this context,
the Peacebuilding Fund has catalytic role to play in
attracting other sources of funding. We therefore
value the ongoing work on resource mobilization
carried out by the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Commission's Working Group on
Lessons Learned. International financial institutions
and development actors also have a role to play in
providing resources for peacebuilding.

Besides finances, peacebuilding initiatives require
adequate human resources. The Secretary-General's
civilian capacity initiative is important in identifying
expertise to be tailored to specific post-conflict needs.
The process should stand up to intergovernmental
scrutiny, avoid duplication of roles, and be compliant
with United Nations rules and procedures.

In conclusion, we reiterate our strong commitment
and support to United Nations peacebuilding
endeavours. We share the hope that our collective
peacebuilding efforts will benefit all conflict-affected
peoples of the world.

