Mr. Hill (Australia): Australia welcomes this
opportunity to discuss resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006) on the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). Apart from saying a few words on
behalf of my country, I also want to associate myself
with the statement that will be delivered shortly by the
representative of New Zealand on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum. Australia strongly supports Security
Council efforts to prevent the proliferation of WMD.
We encourage the Council to be as active as possible in
that regard.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) was a historic achievement. It was the first
international instrument to place obligations on all
States to take comprehensive action to prevent the
proliferation of WMD, their means of delivery and
related materials in an integrated and comprehensive
manner. The resolution specifically focused on the risk
to all States posed by non-State actors obtaining
weapons of mass destruction. It makes strong national
controls on WMD-related material and technologies
and the enforcement of such controls a requirement for
all States.
3

Those measures are no longer merely an option

for States to consider. Resolution 1540 (2004) required

all Member States of the United Nations to submit a

report on the steps they have taken, or intend to take, to

implement the resolution. It is a matter of regret that

some States have still not been able to submit their

reports to the Committee established pursuant to

resolution 1540 (2004). We encourage them to do so as
soon as possible.

In that regard, Australia recognizes that some
States might require assistance in implementing the
provisions of the resolution. In fact, that is recognized
in the resolution itself. Australia has already provided
such assistance bilaterally and in conjunction with our
regional neighbours, including through the Pacific
Islands Forum. We are, of course, willing to continue
to provide such assistance to ensure that States have
the legal and regulatory infrastructure, capacity and
experience to fulfil the provisions of the resolution.

In addition to domestic action by States there is
also a range of international regimes that address the
issues covered by resolution 1540 (2004). Not all of
those international regimes are suitable or appropriate
for all States to join, but they demonstrate the ways in
which the resolution operates interactively with a range
of other international non-proliferation and safeguards
regimes. I would like to mention just two.

First, I would recall that resolution 1540 (2004)
requires States to adopt controls on brokering
activities. For most States that is a relatively new field,
but it has become increasingly clear, in the current
security environment, that controls on brokering
activities involving conventional, military and
WMD-related goods have an important role to play in
preventing proliferation. The Australia Group has
commenced discussions on brokering activities, as
have other non-proliferation and safeguards regimes.

The Republic of Korea has now taken the
initiative to host an international seminar on brokering
controls, to be held in Seoul at the end of March, to
which members of non-proliferation and safeguards
regimes will be invited, as well as other regional
participants. Australia is proud to be co-chairing that
important seminar with our Korean colleagues.

I also want to mention one other important, and
indeed essential, international tool that reinforces the
goals of the resolution. Australia is a participant in the
Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI), which, I would
like to remind members, aims at preventing trafficking
in WMD, their delivery systems and related material to
and from States and to non-State actors of proliferation
concern. In the light of the statement by the
Ambassador of Cuba, I should remind the Council that
PSI activities are to be consistent with national legal
authorities and international frameworks. Over
80 states have endorsed the PSI. We would, of course,
regard it as more effective if it ultimately achieved
global coverage. We would therefore like to take this
opportunity to invite other States to consider joining
the Proliferation Security Initiative, in order that it may
ultimately have that global adherence.

