Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Welcome to New
York and to the Security Council, Mr. Foreign Minister.
Your presence here, and that of the Deputy Secretary-
General, who briefed us earlier this morning, are ample
testimony to Afghanistan's importance for the United
Nations. I hope your presence and your conduct of this
meeting will help get that message out. We in the
British Mission are hearing it with particular
immediacy, as a member of our staff is currently
serving on temporary duty at the British Embassy in
Kabul.

I will be as brief as I can, not least because, as
Ambassador Tafrov has said, the representative of
Spain will be speaking later in the debate on behalf of
the European Union; I associate myself entirely with
that statement.

At the outset, I should like to associate myself
with all those who have expressed condolences to the
Interim Administration of Afghanistan and to the
Afghan people at the earthquake which has occurred in
the north of the country. As the Deputy Secretary-
General said, the Commander of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was asked by the
Interim Administration to assist and was authorized
earlier today to deploy a team to the disaster area. The
team includes representatives of ISAF and of the
United Nations Children's Fund, as well as
representatives of the United Kingdom Department for
International Development. They deployed by
helicopter and are currently expected to report back to
donors and agencies at another meeting in Kabul this
evening. A follow-up donors' coordination meeting
will take place tomorrow morning. Meanwhile, ISAF is
assisting the United Nations Development Programme
in establishing an operations room in Kabul.

We very much welcome the Secretary-General's
report on Afghanistan (S/2002/278). It is very clear to
us that the Special Representative and his colleagues
have achieved a very great deal in a short space of
time. We will certainly work with the French
delegation to ensure that the draft resolution that they
are preparing is adopted quickly and expeditiously.

The formal establishment of a United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will be a
crucial element of support for the Bonn process, and
we very much welcome the unified, integrated structure
that is envisaged. It is important that the political and
reconstruction efforts of the United Nations be closely
coordinated, for, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out, good reconstruction helps political stability.

UNAMA should also aim to increase Afghan
capacity and should pursue a human-rights-oriented
and gender-sensitive approach. It is also important, as
others have said, that we not lose sight of the fact that
there is still a major humanitarian problem in
Afghanistan. Much will still depend on the efforts of
local Afghan staff, and we very much agree with the
Secretary-General that what they have done in
distributing aid thus far has been heroic. Fast and
effective delivery of aid is essential in giving the
Interim Administration the support it needs.

We also welcome the profile that the Secretary-
General has given to the problem of landmines and
unexploded ordnance. For some time, the United
Kingdom has been a strong supporter of the mine
action effort in Afghanistan, both in terms of finance
and otherwise. Mine action is sometimes overlooked in
dealing with the various crises on the Council's
agenda, as our intervention in the 15 March debate on
the protection of civilians made clear. We anticipate
seeing forward planning to deal with the landmines
problem taking place within the wider framework of
reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan. Appropriate
sequencing and prioritization of mine clearance
activities will be important points in that respect.

We also hope that the Council's deliberations on
the protection of civilians are very much borne in mind
as UNAMA is established. Here, I would like to point
to the importance, relevance and usefulness of the aide-
memoire and presidential statement adopted by the
Council on that occasion as we plan future work on
Afghanistan. It is very important that the protection of
civilians be mainstreamed into the activities of the
Secretariat and of the Council.

We would also be interested to hear whether the
Secretary-General foresees a role in Afghanistan for
the internally displaced persons unit of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
since there is very obviously a major problem with
regard to internally displaced persons. It would be very
helpful if Assistant Secretary-General Tiirk were able
to give us some indication of the Secretariat's thinking
on that issue as he wraps up the debate.

It is also clear that the role of donor groups, such
as the Afghan Support Group, will remain very
important as the Council takes forward its work on
Afghanistan. We need to ensure that the work of the
Afghan Support Group can inform and strengthen the
emerging coordination and integration of structures in
UNAMA.

On the political side, it is essential that the
Emergency Loya Jirga be successful, with agreement
on a more representative Transitional Administration as
part of the Bonn process. We very much welcome the
support that the United Nations has given to the
Special Independent Commission for the Convening of
the Emergency Loya Jirga. That effort deserves wider
international support and recognition.

Security has, quite rightly, been a major issue in
the discussion thus far. ISAF has helped to maintain
security in and around Kabul. I am sure it is the sense
of all Council members that its mandate should be
extended beyond June, and I would like to send that
clear political message now. We also accept the
importance of spreading the ISAF effect outside Kabul,
although, as Ambassador Levitte and others have made
clear, expansion of the Force's area of operation looks
difficult. It is clear that the future stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan, and the return of
refugees, will depend on adequate security, so we will
need to give careful consideration to how the ISAF
effect might be encouraged to take root throughout the
country.

Training of the Afghan police and army will be
an essential element of this, and we need to help the
Afghan authorities with the development of their own
structures. The focus needs to be on security sector
reform, and we very much welcome the meeting of
interested donors next month, to which Ambassador
Cunningham and others have referred.

Finally, I should like to mention the problem of
narcotics, as Ambassador Wehbe and Ambassador
Aguilar Zinser have done before me. There is an urgent
need to tackle this problem. Recent announcements by
the Interim Administration have been a very positive
start. But the opium harvest begins next month. The
international community should provide financial and
political support to ensure that the poppy crop is
destroyed and that the product does not find its way
onto the international drugs market. This is a vital issue
for all of us, and I make no apology for leaving the
Council with that final thought.

